Mr. Madeira (African Union): We are gathering
at a moment of hope and optimism for the Great Lakes
region. We in the African Union and the United
Nations have reasons to rejoice at the developments
taking place in this region because, having known
where the whole drama started and seen all the things
that have taken place in the region, we are in a position
to gauge the real meaning of what is happening there at
the present moment.

This region has, until very recently, witnessed
some of the cruelest acts a human being can inflict on
another human being. The peoples of this region have,
for far too long, endured some of the most brutal civil
strife and absurd forms of invasion and occupation of
one independent country by another. We have
witnessed the most despicable acts of genocide in
Rwanda, which claimed the lives of hundreds of
thousands of innocent civilians. For far too long, the
Congolese people have been denied their sovereignty,
independence and dignity. They have been despised,
vilified and martyred. They have fled Congo in the
thousands to live as refugees in neighbouring countries.

Despite the complexity of the whole situation,
important strides have been made in the region. The
sun seems to be rising on the horizon and the peoples
of the Great Lakes region are defying their pessimism
and beginning to follow the path of peace and stability
again. They are taking steps to reaffirm their threatened
sovereignty and identity. They are rediscovering the
virtues and advantages of life in harmony and good-
neighbourliness and they are creating conditions for the
economic and social development of their region.

Indeed, what is happening in the Great Lakes
region today is the blossoming of what the peoples of
this great region have always wanted and what both the
African Union and the United Nations have always
advocated, stood for, invested in and tried to help them
achieve.

In an environment of increased mutual suspicion
and growing scepticism, the Congolese stakeholders
signed the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement of July 1999
with our support, persuasion and encouragement. In
encouraging the Congolese to enter into such an
agreement, we were motivated by the desire to help
remove the main obstacles to our all-inclusive process
of national reconciliation through the drafting of a new
deal among the Congolese people. This deal would set
the country on the course of lasting peace and
sustained development.

The cessation of hostilities between the
Congolese parties, the disengagement of foreign troops
from the conflict and the negotiation of their
withdrawal by addressing the neighbouring countries'
legitimate security concerns through an effective
neutralization of the negative forces operating from the
Congo, all these were important steps in the creation of
an environment conducive to genuine dialogue among
the Congolese themselves.

The Lusaka Agreement was not perfect and did
not satisfy everyone, but it reflected what was possible
at the moment. It contained important prerequisites that
would keep the parties from losing sight of what
needed to be addressed in the complex Congolese
reality. It proved decisive in bringing the process to
where it is today.

But no matter how perfect the Lusaka Agreement
could have been, it would have led nowhere if the
Congolese parties themselves had not shown the
commitment to move forward and work for a radical
change of the status quo in their country. It took time
for all the stakeholders to realize and come to grips
with the fact that a deal, a genuine deal where no
Congolese would be a loser but every Congolese would
win something, was the only option left and the only
way out of a crisis that has been haunting Congo since
independence. In the end, reason prevailed and Sun
City was the result of a common desire by Congo's
leadership to come face to face with their own situation
and rebuild their country on a new foundation.

The construction of the new Congo on a new
basis has started, and we, in the African Union, are
happy to see that the implementation of the Sun City
agreement, although still fraught with many challenges,
is on a good course and every Congolese wants it to
succeed. Indeed, the institutions of transition, as
provided for in the Sun City agreement, though still
fragile, are in place and are striving to produce results.

Despite the magnitude of the Congolese crisis and
despite the fact that the country has, for quite some
time, been divided by the force of arms into zones of
exclusive influence and jurisdiction of different armed
organizations, the idea that the country should preserve
its territorial integrity and remain united, with only one
army, has prevailed and is being upheld by everyone.
All parties have agreed that democracy, good
governance and the rule of law are values that must, as
a mark of necessity, guide all State behaviour.

These are important strides. With them, Congo
rediscovers itself and vows to re-embrace the lofty
ideals of the abandoned National Sovereign
Conference, which was viewed by the majority of the
Congolese population as a solid foundation for the
democratic process in the country.

This is an extremely good beginning, and we in
the African Union, the United Nations and the wider
international community must continue to lend our
support, advice and encouragement. In doing so, we
must not lose sight of the fact that it is not yet all roses
in the Congo. The process is still delicate and afflicted
with weaknesses that, if not properly tended to at this
early stage, may seriously compromise the ultimate
objectives the Congolese have set for themselves.

We cannot emphasize enough that, whatever good
is being done today in the Congo, the situation will
remain precarious unless and until it is identified with
and owned by the Congolese peoples themselves.
History tells us that before Sun City, all the Congolese
leaders who came to power after Patrice Lumumba's
demise were maintained in power or came to that
position through the support of foreign entities. Given
the nature of that support, the result was the alienation
of the Congolese people, the disintegration of Congo's
State institutions and a total destruction of the
economic, social and political environment of the
country. Therefore, despite our closeness to the
Congolese people and the immense trust they put in us,
we should at all times avoid the temptation to profit
from the weaknesses of that country.

Congo is almost starting from scratch. The task
before the newly appointed transitional authorities -
and that of the Government that will come after it - is
simply of mammoth proportions. Since the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the gravitational centre of the
Great Lakes region, any positive or negative
development that takes place there will impinge,
positively or negatively, not only on the Congo herself,
but also on the rest of the countries of the region.

The wars that affected the Congo from 1996 until
recently and brought so much suffering to its people
were, to a large extent, motivated and fuelled by the
exportation of conflicts begun in the neighbouring
countries. The massive movement of populations -
from the Congo to its neighbours and vice versa -
caused by those wars put much strain on the
inhabitants, resources and infrastructure not only of the
Congo itself, but of all the neighbouring countries,
making the crisis a common denominator for the entire
region.

We in the African Union are happy that the
Congo today is free of foreign occupation and
domination. What is important now is that decisive
steps be taken to ensure that the practice of occupying
other peoples' countries - for whatever reason -
does not occur again, for that practice not only reminds
us of our own sad past, but sets a very dangerous and
explosive precedent with great potential to perpetuate
crisis and instability in the region.

That does not mean that we should ignore the
security concerns of Congo's neighbours. Those
concerns are real and legitimate, and we should
together continue to strive to ensure that the solutions
envisaged so far are quickly, effectively and verifiably
implemented, thus easing the intense mutual suspicion
that mars the relations among neighbours who are
condemned to continue to live together for the rest of
their lives.

But the region's interest in the Congo is not
limited only to security guarantees. Congo is a big
country; Congo is a big market; Congo is endowed
with many resources, a huge population and immense
business opportunities. Congo is attractive to all of us.
We all want to interact with Congo, and it is good that
we do so. What is needed is that such interaction be
carried out on the basis of healthy principles. We
should endeavour to help Congo regain its statehood
and strengthen its institutions, while striving to
establish correct and appropriate bilateral and
multilateral business and other relations with that
important neighbour. I know this may sound naive, but
I see no other sound way to interact with Congo in a
peaceful, sustainable and harmonious way.

We cannot but rejoice at the fact that Rwanda,
which has been particularly affected by the generalized
crisis gripping the Great Lakes region, has just
emerged from presidential and parliamentary elections.
That event - happening, as it did, less than 10 years
after the genocide of 1994 - is a crucial step forward
and an important contribution to the overall effort to
restore peace, stability and reconciliation to the region.
Efforts must continue to be made so as to ensure that
every Rwandan can return home and freely go about
his life.

The agreement signed last Sunday between the
Burundi transitional Government and the armed
movement, the Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratic-Front pour la defense de la democratie
(CNDD-FDD) is another milestone in the right
direction. It makes us feel that the Great Lakes region
is coming together again and acquiring the status of a
region where, very soon, peace and stability will be
common currency - a region that will become a
melting pot where all peoples of our continent and of
the world at large can freely and easily have access to
and meet to trade and exchange ideas. The Parti pour la
liberation du peuple hutu/Forces nationales pour la
liberation (PALIPEHUTU/FNL) must be denied the
possibility of preventing that from coming true. That
organization must be persuaded to join in and make its
contribution to the peace revolution taking place in the
Great Lakes region.

It is high time that we stop the wars on our
continent. There can be no sustainable development in
the Great Lakes region without an environment of
lasting peace and security. In that connection, the
African Union would like to appeal very strongly to the
Security Council to discharge its responsibilities
through a more positive attitude towards supporting the
African Mission in Burundi.

Armed conflicts and the threat thereof have, to a
large extent, been responsible for the exasperating
economic and social backwardness of a significant
number of our countries as we move to divert
considerable resources from socio-economic objectives
to buying military hardware to wage war or defend
ourselves against armed aggressions - real, potential
or imaginary. We have come a long way so far in our
quest to rid the continent and the region of armed
strife, and we have scored considerable successes in
that endeavour. The New Partnership for Africa's
Development is the African Union vision and the road
map to extricate the African continent from poverty,
backwardness and underdevelopment. The
implementation of that political, economic and social
action programme will continue to be seriously
compromised if instability and wars are allowed to
continue to haunt Africa.

One of my country's priorities as Chair of the
African Union is to work hand in hand, in earnest, with
the Commission of the African Union to ensure that the
protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union is signed,
ratified and quickly acceded to by the largest possible
number of member States so that it can enter into force.
That is because we strongly believe that the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union can be a
valuable tool in helping to avert, ease and solve the
conflict situations, insecurity and crises on our
continent.

President Chissano, in his capacity as
Chairperson of our continental organization, has
committed himself to devoting particular attention to
the remaining pockets of instability in the Great Lakes
region and elsewhere on our continent and to
mobilizing the best skills our continent possesses to
help find a speedy and lasting solution to them. Given
the particular nature of those conflicts, he has -
together with His Excellency Mr. Alpha Omar Konare,
Chairperson of the Commission of the African
Union -discussed the possibility of requesting a
number of serving heads of State to get personally
involved and to lend their skills in the search for
appropriate solutions to these conflicts.

We view with satisfaction the fact that the United
Nations and all its partners have adopted a global
approach to the situation in the Great Lakes region and
are developing strategies that will address the reality of
the Great Lakes in all its perspectives and view them as

a problem affecting not just one or another country, but
the commonality of the countries and populations of
the region.

The forthcoming conference on peace, security
and sustainable development in the Great Lakes region
represents a great challenge - a unique opportunity
for all of us to come up with ideas and strategies that
will truly contribute to shaping a future of stability,
hope and reconciliation in the afflicted Great Lakes
region.

