Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Every now and then,
we get the opportunity to assemble in the Security
Council to revisit the long story of the suffering of
the Palestinian people. That suffering is the result of
a regime of oppression and systematic violations of
human rights that are without precedent anywhere
on Earth. The homes of ordinary Palestinians have
been bulldozed, their land confiscated, trees and
farms destroyed, settlements evicted, roads and
neighbourhoods blocked and fragmented, and borders
walled. That systematic policy of oppression has
reduced the lives of Palestinians under occupation to
subsistence level. Unfortunately, all of it is happening
before the eyes of the international community, in the
absence of any resolute action on its part.

The peaceful resolution of the question of
Palestine has now been on the Security Council's
agenda for more than six decades. During those long
66 years, even when its own resolutions were blatantly
flouted, the Council often vacillated when it came to
taking concrete action that could make a meaningful
contribution to a fair solution to the issue. Due to the
Council's inability to fulfil its responsibilities vis-a-vis
the conflict, as mandated in the Charter of the United
Nations, the long quest for a final agreement on the
creation of an independent State of Palestine - on pre-
1967 ceasefire lines in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and East Jerusalem, living peacefully side by side with
the State of Israel - remains ever elusive.

It is now time for a bold new strategy for addressing
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The international
community should set out a plan for a fair and long-
term settlement of the Palestinian problem on the
basis of the parameters outlined in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. The United
Nations cannot be a silent witness to the collective
punishment imposed on the Palestinians by Israel,
the occupying Power, and should play its due role in
resolving this protracted crisis. The Security Council
in particular must not evade its role, particularly since
its own resolutions on the matter, adopted over time,
remain unimplemented.

The role of the Security Council as the honest
broker in a deal between Israel and Palestine is all the
more important as the recent efforts to get the parties
to negotiate a settlement themselves seem to be going
nowhere. Nine months of peace talks between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, facilitated by the United
States, have just failed. This week, the Israeli security
cabinet voted to end negotiations, citing Fatah's
reconciliation with Hamas. But even before that, there
were challenges. Israel baulked at the release of the
final instalment of Palestinian prisoners, which was
one of the Palestinians' basic demands for the talks
.Despite American pleas, Israel also announced plans
to expand settlements in the occupied territories and
suspended the reimbursement of Palestinian tax money
to the Authority.

Although the international community routinely
restates its commitment to the concept of a two-State
solution, the construction of Israel's barrier in and
around the West Bank and the expansion of settlements
on occupied land make that solution less feasible.
Meanwhile, Israeli settlement activities, the blockade
of the Gaza Strip, Israeli military raids into Palestinian
territories, and constant provocations to violence by
extremist Israeli settlers continue to exacerbate tension
and reinforce doubts about Israel's commitment to a
two-State solution. The illegal settlement activities
especially present an existential threat to the viability
of a future Palestinian State. Even during the latest
round of negotiations, 14,000 new settlement units
were announced. If peace in the Middle East is to be
achieved, the international community must prevail on
Israel to cease further settlements, which are illegal
under international law, and to dismantle the existing
ones, in line with its obligations under article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. It should also tear down the
walls.

Israelis have suffered in the past and they know
better than anyone that the aspirations of a nation
cannot be denied forever. Even the mighty pharaohs
could not prevent that, and neither could apartheid
Rhodesia and South Africa. The creation of the State
of Israel is proof of it. We therefore expect the Israeli
leadership to reflect on its own history and facilitate a
two-State solution. We are hopeful, because we have
seen positive outcomes in recent times in places such
as South Sudan and Timor-Leste. Those countries have
achieved their sovereignty and independence with the
aim of living in peace and harmony as equal members
of the global community. Can Israel and Palestine
follow the same path?

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has long been a
major catalyst of instability and turmoil in the Middle
East, farming and fuelling violence and extremism in
that region as well as the wider world. The Security
Council has the responsibility under the Charter to
secure peace and stability by addressing the root
causes of this prolonged conflict and negotiating a just
solution to it. We must invest the necessary political
capital and resources in order to realize the inalienable
and legitimate aspiration of the Palestinian people for
an independent, viable, contiguous State of Palestine
based on the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace
and harmony. Achieving that goal would amend the
historical injustice visited on the Palestinians and
greatly contribute to lasting peace and stability in the
Middle-East and around the world.

