Mr. Stock: It is an honour to brief the Security
Council once again, and on an issue of central
importance to our collective security.

I would like to thank Ukraine for convening this
meeting and for its continued efforts to mobilize
international cooperation on this crucial subject.

Critical infrastructure acts as the life-support
system of our everyday existence. Our societies are
sustained by a highly complex and sophisticated
network of infrastructure systems. Our citizens expect
and rely upon functioning institutions and services
for their health, safety, security and economic well-
being. This life-support system has become more
efficient and productive due to technological advances,
the interchanges of globalization and the demands
of an increasingly urban population. The advent of
life 3.0 - the overlapping of the digital and physical
worlds * allowed us to monitor and even control
infrastructure from anywhere in the world.

However, with heavy reliance and real-time
connectivity comes vulnerability to threats. The
interdependence of our infrastructure through sectors
and industries, between the cyber and physical
areas, and across national boundaries means that the
consequences of an attack could be far-reaching.
One attack on a single point of failure could lead
to the disruption or destruction of multiple vital
systems in the country directly affected, and a ripple
effect worldwide. This creates an appealing target
to those intending to harm us, and as our cities and
infrastructure evolve, so do their weapons. Conflict
zone tactics - such as simultaneous active shooter
events, armoured vehicle-borne improvised explosive
devices, homemade explosive vests, hacking attacks
or portable unmanned aerial systems with explosive
payloads - could be honed for use in our city streets
and against key facilities.

So how can we protect the vital organs of our
life-support system against this ever-adapting threat?
The short answer is that we can do so by getting all
relevant actors able to prepare, prevent and respond to
such attacks. These imperatives are at the core of the
efforts of INTERPOL and our partners in the Working
Group on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure
including Internet, Vulnerable Targets and Tourism
Security of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to promote intelligence-sharing, capacity-
building and resilience in some crucial areas.

First, we focus on strengthening critical site
security with emergency-preparedness standards and
procedures. For instance, INTERPOL's Vulnerable
Targets Team has been working with our member
countries in West Africa to enhance the physical
security of laboratories hosting dangerous pathogens
and to protect them from terrorist attacks. Generously
funded by the Canadian Government, this project
seeks to build biosecurity action plans through joint
inter-agency action.
Secondly, we continue to urge countries to protect
their borders and counter terrorist mobility. As
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report on the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(S/2017/97), discussed here last week (see S/PV.7877),
between October 2016 and January 2017 INTERPOL
observed a 63 per cent increase in the number of
profiles of foreign terrorist fighters accessible in real
time through its criminal information system, and a
750 per cent increase in the sharing of information by
member countries through its channels. This is simply
unprecedented in such a sensitive area; the call issued
by the Security Council created a watershed.

Thirdly, it is essential to remain vigilant and
increase efforts to interdict materials and tools
before they become the next weapon. In this context,
INTERPOL works closely with the International Atomic
Energy Agency on mitigating the illicit trafficking of
radiological and nuclear materials through training in
monitoring and detection, and cross-border operations.

Lastly and above all, INTERPOL encourages
inter-agency and international collaboration as a
force multiplier. The exchange of information, urgent
threats detected and best practices in identifying
vulnerabilities, methodologies and lessons learned
is crucial.

In law enforcement, we are keenly aware of the
tragic paradox that a terrorist incident is often an
opportunity for learning and improving. Sharing these
lessons across borders means reaping the benefits
without paying that cost. It is a win-win scenario.
Together we can build a global infrastructure security
toolkit and incident-response mechanisms that are
based on real-life operational experience. In parallel,
we can test ourselves with plausible scenarios we may
have to face in future.

To that end, INTERPOL organizes events for
experts from all involved stakeholders. Our joint
symposium, hosted by the United States Federal
Bureau of Investigation, is a case in point. Our recent
digital security challenge, together with private-sector
specialists, is another example of how we are working
with member countries and donors to prepare, prevent
and respond to threats, be they physical, digital or both.

In an interconnected world, we will not succeed in
protecting national infrastructures in isolation. That is
why initiatives such as this meeting and the steps that
will be taken as a result by the international community
are essential.
