The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the

Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration

of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf. I quote:

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern regarding the grave security and political
situation in Burundi against the backdrop of the
forthcoming, communal, presidential and senatorial
elections and for the impact of the crisis in the
region. The Security Council strongly condemns
all acts of violence and human rights violations and
abuses and recalls that those responsible for such
violence should be held accountable and brought to
justice.

"The Security Council welcomes the regional
and subregional efforts aimed at addressing the
crisis, and in this regard takes note of the East
African Community (EAC) summits, held on
13 May and on 31 May 2015 in Dar es-Salaam,
of the communique issued by the African Union
Peace and Security Council after its Summit, held
on 13 June 2015 in Johannesburg, South Africa, and
of the letters sent by the Government of Burundi to
the Security Council.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
relentless efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Said
Djinnit, and recalls that Burundian stakeholders
had made some progress in a difficult dialogue,
thanks to Special Envoy Djinnit's able facilitation.

"The Security Council takes note of the
African Union's (AU) statement that the political
dialogue has not produced expected results and that
the current situation could jeopardize the important
gains recorded following the signing of the Arusha
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Burundi

and the Global Ceasefire agreement of 2003, and
affect the stability of the region.
"The Security Council welcomes the resumption
of the dialogue between all the Burundian parties,
under the facilitation of the AU, the United
Nations, the EAC and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region. In this regard, the
Security Council welcomes the appointment of
Professor Ibrahima Fall by the AU, as the new
Special Representative of the chairperson of the
Commission for the Great Lakes region and Head of
the AU Liaison office in Bujumbura. The Security
Council also welcomes the arrival in Bujumbura
of the United Nations Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily, which allows for the
international mediation to immediately assist all
Burundian parties to expedite the search for a
consensual political solution to the crisis.

"While acknowledging that further steps
must continue to be taken by parties to adhere to
the decisions taken by the EAC and the AU Peace
and Security Council, the Council calls on the
Burundian parties to urgently participate in an
inclusive dialogue which should focus, in the spirit
of the Arusha Agreements and the Constitution,
on the measures to be taken to create conditions
conducive to the organization of free, fair,
transparent and credible elections.

"The Council takes note of the statement in
the AU Peace and Security Council communique
of 13 June that the date of the election should be
set by consensus between the Burundian parties,
in the spirit of the EAC's communique of 31 May
2015 requesting a postponement of the elections,
and on the basis of a technical assessment to be
undertaken by the United Nations.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
dialogue should address all matters on which the
parties disagree. The Security Council further
emphasizes that this dialogue should address
concerns related to the reinstatement of private
media; the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in particular freedoms of
expression and of peaceful assembly, including for
members of the political opposition to campaign
freely, as guaranteed by the Constitution of

Burundi; the release of those arbitrarily detained
following demonstrations; the respect for the rule
of the law; and the urgent disarmament of all
armed youth groups allied with political parties, as
reflected in the conditions of the EAC communique
of 31 May 2015, conditions to be met prior to the
holding of elections.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment of the AU and the Chairperson of the
AU Commission to fully assume the responsibilities
stemming from its role as Guarantor of the Arusha
Agreement, as well as that of the region not to stand
by in case the situation deteriorates.

"In this regard, the Security Council welcomes
the decision ofthe AU to immediately deploy human
rights observers and other civilian personnel; to
deploy AU military experts to verify the process
of disarming of all armed youth groups allied
with political parties, which will submit regular
reports on the implementation of the disarmament
process, and to deploy an AU election observer
mission if conditions for the organization of free,
fair, transparent and credible elections are met. The
Council urges the Government of Burundi and other
relevant actors to extend their full cooperation to
these processes.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
AU Peace and Security Council's decision to
send, by the first week of July, a ministerial
delegation including the Commission, to assess
the implementation of the conditions required by
EAC, the AU and the Council for the holding of the
elections.

"The Council calls on the Electoral Mission of
the United Nations in Burundi to fully and actively
pursue the implementation of its mandate in
accordance with resolution 2137 (2014), including
to swiftly report to the Security Council before,
during and after the elections

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the difficult situation of the Burundian
refugees who fled their country into the
neighbouring States, commends the host countries
(the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania), as well
as humanitarian agencies, for their support to
the affected populations, and calls upon the
international community to provide the necessary
humanitarian assistance. The Council urges the
Government of Burundi to create the conditions
conducive to their early return.

"The Security Council calls on all actors in
the region to preserve the safety and security of
populations in the region."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/13.

I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

