Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir,
and the Azerbaijani presidency for your initiative to
convene this high-level meeting of the Security
Council on the very urgent theme of strengthening
international cooperation in combating the global
threat of terrorism.

Terrorism knows no borders. On the eve of this
meeting, we have received reports of terrorist acts in
the Russian Federation and Nigeria, as a result of
which once again dozens of innocent people have
suffered. We offer our condolences to the victims and
their family members, and our solidarity with them.

Terrorism has no justification, no matter how you
seek to embellish it. It is a universal plague that should
be condemned and recognized everywhere as a
criminally punishable act, while those who participate
in terrorist acts must be recognized as criminals and
receive their just punishment. That unshirkable
responsibility is a fundamental principle of international
cooperation in effectively combating terrorism,
enshrined in the basic United Nations counter-terrorism
conventions.

The Russian Federation views today's meeting as
yet another development in the strengthening the
central coordinated role of the United Nations in our
systemic counter-terrorism work. Over the past few
years, we have established under United Nations
leadership a broad infrastructure of global cooperation
in this area that incorporates dozens of international
organizations and regional associations. We have
significantly strengthened the international legal basis
for combating terrorism, and active work continues
towards the establishment and promotion of norms and
standards in this field. The new level cooperation
among law enforcement agencies has allowed us
significantly to damage terrorist infrastructure and to
shut down many of its financing channels.

Unfortunately, not only has the terrorist threat not
abated, but it has recently acquired a new dimension
and gravity. Against the backdrop of highly
inconsistent and incomplete processes in North Africa,
the Middle East and the Horn of Africa, we have seen a
notable escalation of terrorist threats and a more
regional focus on the part of Al-Qaida and related
groups. Terrorist partnerships with criminal groups
have grown stronger, with aim of establishing cross-
border criminal channels for the drug trade, illegal
migration, human trafficking and weapons smuggling.
It has become clear that this will lead not only to a
substantial strengthening of terrorist cells, but also to a
dangerously broad transmission of a new ideology that
intensifies violence and extremism and exacerbates
interreligious and interethnic conflict. There is also
still real potential for growth in the terrorist threat in
the Afghanistan/Pakistan region, thanks to the stimulus
provided by the illegal trade in opiates.

In such conditions, we are increasingly dependent
on the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy adopted by the General Assembly, which has
flexibly combined traditional methods of law
enforcement and prevention and has attacked the socio-
economic roots of terrorism, and in so doing has
strengthened the legal framework and observance of
human rights.

The Security Council now faces the challenge of
responding in a timely and appropriate manner to the
shifting challenges of terrorism. Our response must be
strengthened by effective and comprehensive steps to
ensure the implementation by Member States of the
Council's decisions, develop a dialogue among them,
and provide them with the necessary assistance. We
believe that serious attention should be focused on the
following areas.

First, we must do out utmost to strengthen the
legal basis of counter-terrorism, broaden the circle of
participants in counter-terrorist conventions, and ensure
the strict implementation of all their undertakings and
their nationalization through legislation. One urgent
priorities is the conclusion under United Nations
auspices of a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism.

Secondly, we must undertake counter-terrorist
cooperation on a pre-emptive basis, focusing on the
prevention of terrorism. In the context of the theme of
today's meeting, the greatest threat posed to
international peace and security is that posed by
terrorism based on mass destruction. Steps to prevent
nuclear terrorism are extremely critical in that regard.
It is necessary to ensure the greater participation of
States in the core conventions of the United Nations
and the International Atomic Energy Agency in a
global initiative to combat acts of nuclear terrorism and
compliance with the decisions of the Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit. In meeting those challenges, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) must play an important role.

To deprive terrorists of social support, we must
make additional efforts that include an economic factor,
through law enforcement bodies. Such contributions to
job creation could be carried out not only by States, but
by United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), together with organizations that are
specialized in economic assistance, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the Economic
Commission for Europe; and regional associations such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.

Such synergy would turn a new page in the
efforts of the international donor community, through
combining development assistance with efforts to
counter-terrorism and fight criminals. No less
important are the continued efforts to halt the financial
flows that fuel terrorism, including those resulting
from the participation by heads of narco businesses and
other types of organized crime in such activities.

A remaining issue of great urgency found in
resolution 1624 (2005), is the challenge to counter the
ideology of terrorism and establish an atmosphere
within the international community conducive to its
total rejection. The struggle for the hearts and minds of
people must be carried out through strengthened
intercultural dialogue and mutual understanding among
civilizations and religions and by firmly curbing
incitement to terrorism in all its aspects.

We must establish effective cooperation with civil
society in order to neutralize at the earliest stages any
manifestation of violent extremism or terrorism. The
prohibition of any form of assistance to terrorists,
including military, technical and financial is an
international imperative. States that ignore that
obligation will see their actions backfire in the end, at
the cost of lives of their own civilians.

Effectively countering terrorism is impossible
without strengthening the potential of the forces to
fight it. The continued assistance of international
agencies to interested States is important in developing
and improving counter-terrorism legislation and
10

training staff. Crucial support to counter-terrorism
efforts results from skilled analyses of the phenomenon,
including its strengthening ties with organized crime,
narco-trafficking and piracy, as well as newly
developing trends such as individualized terrorism or
self-radicalization.

We need to strengthen the scientific analytical
capability of the relevant United Nations agencies by
providing them with a more practical orientation. A
successful such example is the UNODC's survey on
terrorism.

Thirdly, it is extremely important to develop a
consolidated response to new terrorist challenges,
including in cyberspace. Practical actions to implement
the Security Council requirement on closing down
terrorism propaganda websites, for example the
Caucasus Centre website of the terrorist organization
known as the Caucasus Emirate, must be supplemented
by developing a global treaty to counter the use of
cyberspace for terrorism and other criminal purposes.

Adopting reliable international criteria is crucial
in defending tourists from terrorists and other criminal
assaults. Motivation for that has been provided by the
recently concluded Vienna session of the United
Nations Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice. We look forward to the involvement
of many States and leading agencies of the United
Nations, regional organizations and the business
community.

As part of the public-private partnership, another
project is being drawn up by the UNODC and the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute to cut off the flows of precious
metals into the hands of terrorists and other criminals.

A partnership with business is useful also for
developing effective measures to ensure the rights of
the victims of terrorism, including compensatory
payments based on transnational systems for insurance
and reinsurance relating to mega-terrorist acts.

Fourthly, we must not overlook improving the
work and the working methods of the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies. We must continue to
strengthen the capability of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), which
monitors implementation by Member States of the
12-32940
basic text on counter-terrorism activities, namely,
resolution 1373 (2001).

The Russian Federation supports the work of the
CTC in improving assessment mechanisms, preparing a
global review on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and resolution 1624 (2005), broadening
the international counter-terrorism agenda by
countering the incitement of terrorist acts and
strengthening dialogue among civilizations.

The continuing practice of country visits by the
CTC remains one of the key instruments of monitoring
the achievements and prospective work of States to
strengthen national anti-terrorism capabilities and to
analyse best practices. The Russian Federation is
planning to host a visit of the CTED in October.

We need further steps in order to improve the
effectiveness and capacities of the Council's sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. As a result of
the reform in June 2011, we have been able to ensure
greater transparency and adopt procedures with greater
flexibility with respect to de-listing, which should not
weaken the capabilities of the counter-terrorism regime,
which could in turn cause some States to depart from
compliance with their sanctions obligations.

Given the increased activity by regional terrorist
groups of Al-Qaida, especially in North Africa, and
their broadening ties with other criminal organizations,
measures are necessary to spread the counter-terrorism
sanctions regime to new individuals and entities.

The urgent challenges include the full
implementation of resolution 2017 (2011), adopted on
the initiative of the Russian Federation to counter the
uncontrolled spread of Libyan weapons. The Russian
delegation has, on many occasions, drawn the
Council's attention to that significant threat, possibly
including man-portable air defence systems and other
dangerous weapons falling into the hands of terrorists.
The paths of those weapons have turned from veins
into arteries joining terrorist groups with criminal
organizations and separatist movements and thus
strengthening their destructive capacities.

The most vigorous measures are necessary in
order to implement resolution 2017 (2011) with the
support of the Sahel Saharan States and further work in
various international forums, including the Rome-Lyon
Group of Eight and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum.
Fifthly, the United Nations deserves great credit
for the increased level of cooperation at the regional
level through the establishment of feedback
mechanisms in cooperation with operational counter-
terrorist agencies. We highly appreciate the efforts in
the fight against terrorism of the Council of Europe,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the NATO-Russia Council, the Organization of
American States, the Latin American Reserve Fund, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and others.
Together we will work with partners to increase our
contribution to counter-terrorism efforts under the
aegis of the CSTO, SCO and the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

We welcome the presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of today's meeting. It is aimed at
developing counter-terrorism cooperation under the
auspices of the United Nations. The Russian Federation
vigorously condemns terrorism in all its aspects and
will continue to contribute to that work through
strengthening international cooperation based on trust
and strict adherence to the principles of international
law.

