Mrs. Hrda (Czech Republic) (spoke in Spanish):
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU). I
should like also to touch on a few points in our national
capacity.

(spoke in English)

The Czech Republic is strongly committed to the
idea of international criminal justice, in particular with
respect to the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
history of our country - where serious crimes under
international law and serious human rights abuses
were perpetrated during the Second World War and,
after that, during the Communist era - constitutes an
argument for the Court's existence. Such crimes must
not happen again, and the ICC is one of the means to
achieve that goal. Consequently, we believe that its role
in the fight against impunity is irreplaceable, and we
stand ready to support it wherever possible. For that
reason, last month here in New York, the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Czech Republic joined the informal
ministerial network on matters related to the ICC that
was established by Lichtenstein.

Until the universality of the Rome Statute is
achieved, the ICC will not be able to deal with crimes
without a link to its States parties, either the commission
of such crimes on their territory, or by their nationals.
During this period, the Security Council has, in our
view, a special responsibility to close this impunity gap
by making referrals to the ICC. We were encouraged
by resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), although
we regret that the ICC has not yet received the Security
Council support that it needs to fulfil its mission.
Specifically, this principal United Nations organ has
the power to enforce its own resolutions and ensure
that States cooperate with the ICC. In that context, we
hope that today's open debate will be taken as a call by
the United Nations membership to act on this matter.
Impunity is not a solution.

We commend the Security Council for having
adopted the aforementioned resolutions referring
certain situations to the ICC. In that respect, we believe
that two referrals during the Court's 10-year existence
cannot be qualified as an overuse of this tool. During
the past decade, there have been some situations, mostly
internal armed conflicts around the world, that involved
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole, as set out in the preamble to
the Rome Statute. In our opinion, those cases could
have been referred by the Security Council to the ICC,
including some situations where these crimes continue
even today.

There is a need for consistency in the Security
Council's practice, which would also have a preventive
effect. We would like to recommend that the costs of
future referrals be covered by the United Nations, as
is done for United Nations ad hoc tribunals. In a world
based on the rule of law, there should be no authority
without responsibility, and vice versa.

