Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for your steady and very efficient stewardship
of the Council this month. The Rwandan coffee that you
shared with us at the beginning of July has held us in
good stead.
To the delegation of the United Kingdom, we wish
a successful month of August and look forward to
working with it. It has our full support.

Today I would like to address areas where the
Security Council has been productive during this very
eventful month of July. I would also like to look ahead
and touch on a few issues the Council will need to
continue to track closely in August and beyond.

First, I thank the delegation of Rwanda for
organizing an open debate two days ago, Monday,
28 July, on peacekeeping and partnership with regional
and subregional organizations (see S/PV.7228).
The Council's adoption of the Rwandan-sponsored
resolution 2167 (2014) helped remind us of the essential
role that regional organizations play in peacekeeping,
not only in Africa but elsewhere. These groupings
are often the first responders for severe crises that do
not happen in a vacuum and that have repercussions
across borders. Monday's meeting was timely, as the
United Nations and many Member States are rightly
taking a fresh look at how to strengthen United Nations
peacekeeping to better meet contemporary challenges.
In that regard, we look forward to the comprehensive
review of United Nations peacekeeping which the
Secretary-General announced in the Council in the past
month and touched on again on Monday.

As I said, July has been an eventful and at times
very tragic month. The Council united on 21 July
to adopt resolution 2166 (2014) on the downing of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-l7 in Ukraine (see S/PV.7221). That was an important step in our efforts
to determine who was responsible for that horrific
incident and to bring them to justice. The Netherlands
has proposed to lead an international investigation,
and the Netherlands and Australia have offered police
to help secure the crash site. Malaysia is also working
closely with other affected countries to send security
and other personnel. The Dutch-led investigation will
enable expert analysis of the evidence and, we hope,
provide the answers to the questions that citizens and
Governments, and of course, families, are asking about
flight MH-l7. To that end, the United States has offered
assistance. Representatives from our Federal Bureau
of Investigations and our National Transportation and
Safety Board are already in Ukraine, ready to work
with investigators.

Further on Ukraine, the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on Ukraine notes
that a total breakdown of law and order and a reign of
fear and terror have been inflicted by armed groups on
the population of eastern Ukraine. The United States
is committed to a diplomatic solution to the situation,
and we remain concerned about Russia's support of the
pro-Russian separatists, including the flow of heavy
weapons and rocket and artillery fire from Russia into
Ukraine.

Turning to Syria, the Council came together
to support a new resolution to address the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Resolution 2165 (2014) opened
four crossings on the Syrian border that will allow
United Nations humanitarian agencies and their
implementing partners to enter the country without
needing a green light from the regime. If implemented
fully, the resolution will allow critical aid to reach over
2 million Syrians who have been suffering without
essential assistance over the past year. We were pleased
to see the first of such convoys cross into Syria from
Turkey last week.

Proof of the dire situation in Syria was on prime
display last Friday when the United Kingdom hosted
an Arria formula meeting with the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. As the Commission's report makes clear,
we need to maintain our focus on Syria as the regime
continues to imprison tens of thousands of Syrians,
including women, children, doctors, humanitarian aid
workers and journalists, subjecting them to torture,
sexual violence and inhumane treatment.

Although the Al-Assad regime is the most egregious
perpetrator of violations and abuses of international
humanitarian and human rights law in Syria, the rapid
gains of violent extremist groups in Syria, particularly
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), are
alarming. In that context, we welcomed the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/l4 on 28 July
on the terrorist oil trade in Syria and Iraq. In the
coming weeks and months, Syria must remain front
and centre. The Council must continue to press for a
political solution to the conflict and for accountability
for violations and abuses of human rights, and to hold
Syria to its commitment to completely eliminating its
chemical weapons programme, including materials and
facilities.

Also, the ISIL threat merits our full attention. The
Council and regional and international partners must
remain focused on supporting the Government of Iraq
as it combats ISIL and other violent extremist groups.
That means working together to support a sound counter-
terrorism strategy against those groups. It also means
supporting the efforts of Iraq's elected representatives
to form a new Government that reflects a broad national
consensus. In that regard, we were pleased to adopt just
this morning the one-year extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, whose
work remains absolutely essential to all ofthose efforts.

Elsewhere in the Middle East, the situation related
to Gaza will require our focus. In his meetings in the
region aimed at securing a ceasefire, Secretary Kerry
expressed support for Israel's right to defend itself and
called for the end of Hamas rocket fire. Yet he also
expressed our deep concern for civilians on both sides,
especially women and children, affected by hostilities.
We continue to call on the parties to comply with
international humanitarian law, including on respect
for and protection of civilians, as well as civilian and
humanitarian facilities. We condemn Hamas' use of
civilian facilities for military purposes, and we reiterate
the inviolability of United Nations facilities.

The United States has been clear. President Obama

and Secretary Kerry have both called for an immediate
and unconditional humanitarian ceasefire. A prolonged
humanitarian ceasefire would significantly de-escalate
the situation, allow for the distribution of urgently
needed humanitarian assistance, including medicine
and food, and allow for serious negotiations to restore a
permanent cessation ofhostilities. Any process aimed at
achieving a lasting and meaning resolution to the crisis
related to Gaza must also result in the disarmament of
Hamas and other terrorist groups. We will work closely
with the international community in support of that
goal.

Finally, we look forward to the Security Council
trip that is coming up next month. The swiftly unfolding
crises we face today do not allow us many moments to
reflect, but taking some time to consider events leading
to and the horrors of the First World War should give
us new impetus as we strive to help end these conflicts.
The second part of the trip to Somalia and South Sudan
will offer us an important chance to push for peace in
places where conflict has persisted far too long.

