Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
We congratulate Poland on its assumption of the
Security Council presidency for August and for holding
today's annual open debate as the first signature event of
its presidency. Your presence here today, Mr. President,
underscores the urgent need to collectively address the
issue of children and armed conflict around the world.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Peru for its presidency in facilitating a productive
month of July.

We, too, would like to welcome Ambassador Zhang
Jun to the Council.

We also thank Special Representative Gamba and
UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their
briefings today. I would like to join other colleagues in
thanking Mariatu Kamara and Majok Peter Awan for
their incredible determination and moving testimonies
today, which, as others have said, take us beyond the
discussions and compel us to act in a meaningful way.
I thank them very much for being here and sharing
their stories. Their advocacy has helped focus the
world's attention to children in armed conflict and
reminds us of our responsibility as Member States to
protect civilians from harm, especially children. We
are proud of the work of our partners to better protect
children affected by armed conflict all over the world.
The United States strongly supports UNICEF in its
mandate to protect and assist children all over the
world, including specialized support for the survivors
of violence and assured access for children to a range
of life-saving assistance, including nutrition, health,
water and sanitation.

Majok Peter Awan's testimony, as a former child
soldier and now a United Nations child protection
officer, is particularly inspiring for all of us here today.
As the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509) this
year starkly makes clear, the number of children killed,
kidnapped, maimed and used and abused is even more
staggering today than it was when the Council began to
collectively address children and armed conflict more
than a decade ago. The United States remains fully
committed to the critical work of the United Nations and
the Office of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict in ending the impact of conflict
on children wherever possible to prevent their future
involvement in war and to assist affected children in
recovering from violent conflict. Our actions taken
today to protect children from armed conflict will
matter in the years ahead for future generations, as
Ms. Kamara so eloquently said. Protecting children
today means staving off future conflict and the radical
radicalization to violence of scores of young people.
We appreciate the particular focus on the needs of the
disabled, making sure that they, too, are reintegrated.

The United States remains deeply concerned about
continuing violations and abuse against children,
particularly in Burma, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia and
Syria. The United States welcomes the great progress
achieved by the Council's Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in recent days to adopt conclusions
on Burma and Syria with the consensus of all 15
Council members. We commend Belgium's leadership
as Chair ofthe Working Group and for facilitating these
important discussions.

Moreover, the United States endorses the Working
Group's conclusions reiterating that the regimes in both
Damascus and Naypyitaw must immediately address
the Council's calls to take steps to halt the recruitment
and use of children. While we acknowledge that the
Working Group has achieved progress with the adoption
of its recent Burma and Syria conclusions, much more
remains to be done.

The United States is committed to better integrating
the children and armed conflict agenda when we discuss
conflict situations in the Security Council. The United
States will continue to address ways to strengthen
the protection of children across all of the Security
Council mandates.

We further welcome the signing by the Syrian
Democratic Forces of an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children in Syria. We also
commend the efforts made by the Government of
Yemen and the coalition to strengthen child-protection
issues. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
efforts by United Nations child-protection specialists
to work with the Government resulted in 14 armed-
group commanders renouncing the recruitment of child
soldiers, releasing all child soldiers from their ranks and
allowing the United Nations to verify that commitment.

In the Central African Republic, the engagement
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
with armed groups on action plans to protect children
appear to offer the same inroads for education and
change. In both of these cases, the immediate goal is
to protect children from violations and abuses in the
context of armed conflict. By engaging with armed
groups, building trust and offering alternatives to
violence, United Nations actors on the ground are able
to open up new possibilities for sustainable peace.

For our part, the United States continues to prioritize
child-protection programming that is life-saving and
essential for survival as well as longer-term recovery,
resilience and healing. We will continue to invest in
preventive and responsive programming to protect
children from Violence. We know that the resumption
of familiar, safe and nurturing routines, particularly
within a family, helps children heal, build resilience and
better cope with stress. The United States calls on all
countries to join our efforts and increase contributions,
so as to do their part to help children in need of safety,
food and other life-saving interventions.

