Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing on the reporting period. We also thank
His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their updates. Today I wish to
speak on five points.

First, there are still a number of sensitive issues
left to be resolved, such as the lack of inter-community
trust and a large number of persons still missing. An
issue of some concern is the incident that took place on
26 March concerning Mr. Marko Durie, Director of the
Office for Kosovo and Metohija of the Government of
Serbia. We also note with regret that no progress has
been made in the investigation of the January murder
of Serbian activist Oliver Ivanovie. Of equal critical
importance is the protection of vulnerable groups,
including Roma and Ashkali, and of cultural heritage
and diversity in Kosovo.

Secondly, we commend steps taken by the parties
under the auspices of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, to discuss the implementation
of the agreements by way of holding a series of
technical and high-level meetings in Brussels in
February and March. We fully support her call for
action to urgently establish the association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities.

Thirdly, we would like to refer to women and youth.
In that vein, the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, remains a
matter of high importance. Special attention must
be paid to the role of women as actors for peace and
security. They need to be actively involved in political
life and the decision-making process. There is also a
need to implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security, and to provide full support and
access to youth of all ethnicities to education and skills
development to fulfil their potential. Young people
have great power to prevent conflicts and to promote
trust and peace.

Fourthly, we welcome the activity of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
during the reporting period, including the arranging
of nearly 40 confidence-building measures to promote
inter-community cooperation and trust, with the
engagement of representatives of the Government, the
opposition, civil society, women and youth, media and
religious organizations in different parts of Kosovo.

Fifthly, we support the whole-of-pillar approach
in Kosovo, since neither peace and security nor
development can be achieved without good governance,
the rule of law, criminal justice, institutional and
human rights-related reforms, including the fight
against corruption and organized crime. Above all, we
highlight the importance of the nexus between security
and development, the potential for which should be
created through utilizing an innovative revamped
regional approach and a more efficient, transparent and
accountable modus operandi of the United Nations,
delivering as One United Nations at Headquarters and
on the ground.

Lastly, we believe that peace and stability in Kosovo
could be achieved if the parties follow agreements,
focusing on promoting inter-community dialogue and
trust, mutual respect and understanding.

