The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister of Foreign Affairs for New
Zealand.

At the outset, I welcome the Colombian Permanent
Representative to the Council today. The historic peace
agreement concluded between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) rebels on 24 August represents a
significant milestone that offers the promise of a future
of security and prosperity for all Colombians in the
years to come. New Zealand congratulates President
Santos on the courage and determination that he and
his country have demonstrated in order to conclude this
historic agreement.

We also commend FARC for its commitment to
peace through the long period of negotiations. We
congratulate and thank Cuba and Norway, as well as
Chile and Venezuela, for their vital roles in steering
the peace process to its successful conclusion. The
United Nations will play a crucial role in supporting
the effective implementation of Colombia's peace
agreement.

By adopting resolution 23 07 (2016) today, endorsing
the Secretary-General's recommendations in his
most recent report (S/2016/729) for a special political
mission to assist with monitoring and verifying the
agreed ceasefire and laying down of arms, the Security
Council is ensuring it plays its part in helping to secure
a better future for Colombia. It is only appropriate that
the Council should play its part in these efforts. We
hope that the activities of the special political mission
can help give confidence to all sides that key elements
of the agreement are being faithfully and effectively
implemented by both sides.

The Security Council's response to Colombia's
requests for assistance also represents an unusual and
positive model for how the Council can and should
interact with conflict-affected States. It is rare for a
country to voluntarily approach the Security Council
seeking its help. Colombia's actions in doing so, and
the Council's swift responsiveness to its requests,
with due respect to the specific needs of the situation,
have provided an example of how constructive the
relationship can be between the Council and the
countries it seeks to assist. New Zealand was pleased
to sponsor the resolution today, and welcomes its
unanimous adoption. We recognize that challenges
remain, and that there is a long road ahead to secure
the peace that has been made, but with the continued
commitment of all parties, we are confident these can
be overcome.

The Colombian people will have an opportunity
to express their views on the peace agreement through
the referendum on 2 October. We hope they will choose
the path of peace. New Zealand is also committed to
supporting Colombia's efforts to find lasting stability
and reconciliation, and to ensuring that Colombia
experiences an early peace dividend. That is why we
have pledged to assist Colombia in achieving its goal
to become a landmine-free country by 2021. Colombia
will not face the road ahead alone. New Zealand, the
Council, and the international community stand ready
to help.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

