Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Germany for organizing
this open debate. We acknowledge its leadership as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and on resolution 2068 (2012), which we have
adopted today. We appreciate the presence of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and her briefing to us, and we take this
opportunity to welcome her appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also appreciate the
statements by Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Lake and Mr. Tolbert.

We note that 32 out of 52 parties listed in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/261)
are persistent perpetrators. The majority belong to
non-State armed groups. This raises the question of
discussing ways and means to increase pressure on
groups that, by definition, we have difficulty reaching.
Such parties to conflict have not been affected by
being on the naming and shaming list, they are not
accountable for their acts and they do not comply with
recognized international rules, human rights law or
humanitarian law. They are considered as illegal or
criminal within their own countries. In addition, they do
not seem to care about their reputation or international
image. Many of those non-State armed groups oscillate
between acting on political motives and fulfilling
criminal objectives. Those doing the latter are even less
responsive to incentives and deterrents to change their
modus operandi in areas under their control.

We therefore believe that the Council must reaffirm
its leadership role and its willingness to act against
persistent perpetrators, emphasizing the responsibility
of those States on whose territory parties to a conflict
persistently commit such crimes against children, in
order to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for violations and abuses against children.
We must ensure that those States have specific laws
that criminalize war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, as well as strengthen the capacity
of national institutions to prosecute individuals
responsible for committing such crimes, especially
persistent perpetrators, or referring those cases to
international tribunals. For their part, international
tribunals have demonstrated their capacity to deal with
crimes committed against children. The judgements
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo and Charles Taylor give
us hope that we can take action against the impunity of
persistent perpetrators.

Another issue that has been thoroughly discussed
is the more frequent use of sanctions. Although we are
aware of the difficult issues this raises, we support the
idea of monitoring the implementation of the sanctions
regime, starting with the four sanctions committees
that now have criteria defining serious violations
against children, namely, those for Cote d'Ivoire,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and
the Sudan. Further work is necessary to ensure that
sanctions are imposed against individuals or entities
who commit grave violations against children. We hope
that other sanctions regimes, such as those against Al-
Qaida and the Taliban, adopt criteria defining serious
violations against children. The imposition of sanctions
sends a signal to parties who commit such crimes and
contributes to greater compliance with the Council's
agenda on children and armed conflict.

We hope that the recently appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will continue
to further strengthen cooperation with the sanctions
committees to take action against persistent perpetrators,
include the four serious violations in the mandate of all
relevant sanctions committee and continue to inform the
Security Council and the Working Group on emerging
situations that involve children in armed conflict. We
should spare no effort to end the unlawful recruitment
and use of children by armed forces and non-State armed
groups.

With regard to the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, we believe that the issue of persistent
perpetrators should be an item in its agenda. The
Committee should issue recommendations to ensure
that grave violators are accountable for their crimes.
However, we do not believe that the Working Group
should function as a sanctions committee, since that
would fundamentally alter its nature. We would like
to encourage the Group to achieve its goal of adopting
conclusions within two months, in order to keep the cycle
of situations on its work plan within an 18-month period.

In conclusion, Guatemala will continue to be
committed to the protection of children in armed conflict
and the fight against impunity. Addressing the problem
ofpersistent perpetrators is a challenge. It is ofthe utmost
importance that the protection framework that has been
established preserve its credibility by putting an end to
unacceptable practices.

