Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of Spain, I would like to take advantage of
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Colombia for convening this open debate
on the situation in Haiti. The decision to hold this
meeting at such a high level is the best indication of
the importance that the international community
attaches to development in that country. We wish to
welcome in particular the participation of President
Santos Calderon, President Pre'val of Haiti, former
ll-29077
President Clinton of the United States and United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and our
Organization's Secretary-General.

All of us gathered here are aware of the crucial
stage that will soon begin following the announcement
of the final results of the presidential and
parliamentary elections that have just been held in
Haiti. In recent decades, the Latin American and the
Caribbean region has successfully strengthened
democratic regimes, based on the rule of law, while
achieving new levels of prosperity and social progress.

Haiti cannot continue to be the exception. The
traditional fatal outcomes in that country cannot serve
as a justification for a reversal of the process of
consolidating democracy and reconstruction. For this
reason, the international community has forged a
decisive compromise with Haiti, represented by the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
(OAS) and the Group of Friends, to mention but a few.
The mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the organization of
last year's conference were the results of that
commitment to strongly supporting the rebuilding of
the country following the devastating earthquake of
January 2010.

I would like to express my appreciation for the
ideas and suggestions contained in the concept paper
distributed by Colombia for this debate (S/ZOll/218).
Spain believes that only a legitimate Government
resulting from elections can assume the responsibility
to lead Haiti in the framework of a difficult process to
rebuild the country. It is also very important for the
international community to continue to support the new
Haitian authorities. Sustainable solutions for the people
must be developed in all areas: political, social and
development. It is essential to help the country build its
own capacities and thereby avoid indefinite
dependence on external partners in a process that the
Haitian authorities and citizens should maintain.

Spain is committed to this endeavour at both the
multilateral and the bilateral levels, from humanitarian
emergency assistance to collaboration in the
reconstruction process, assistance to the electoral
process, and efforts to establish the rule of law. In
order to ensure smooth progress in the Haitian electoral
process, Spain deployed 10 observers in the
OAS/Caribbean Community electoral observation
mission during the first electoral round. Furthermore,

I 1-29077
my country supported the work of the verification
mission and sent 20 election observers to the second
round.

The post-electoral scenario will continue to call
for our presence among the Haitian people. In this
sense, Spain has contributed to MINUSTAH since its
establishment in 2004 and is resolutely determined to
continue supporting the Mission as long as necessary.
For this reason, we co-sponsored last year's resolution
1944 (2010) extending MINUSTAH's mandate, and we
are determined to continue to provide a Spanish police
contingent to the Mission.

MINUSTAH began with a mandate focused on
peacekeeping, security issues and stabilization. Its
unique role became evident after last year's tragic
earthquake. The presence of MINUSTAH was revealed
to be decisive given the magnitude of the catastrophe
and the failure of Haitian institutional mechanisms,
which were decimated by the disaster. Consequently,
MINUSTAH should continue its essential work and
take an integrated approach, together with other United
Nations bodies in the field, by reinforcing its support
to institutional consolidation and economic and social
development. Its presence in the field and the promise
of stability are crucial to facing the challenge of
rebuilding the country and ensuring ongoing
international cooperation.

The Mission has also proved its usefulness in the
preparation and holding of elections. Furthermore, the
Mission's work is key to meeting such outstanding
challenges as the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and the establishment of the rule of law,
including the armed forces, the judicial and
penitentiary systems, the strengthening of judicial
security and the protection of human rights.

Spain's presence was already significant before
the earthquake as the third-largest bilateral donor in
Haiti. Spain has the greatest interest in contributing to
the coordination of the international community's
efforts in the rebuilding and strengthening of the
Haitian authorities' capacity to lead the process, in
close coordination with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission led by the Prime Minister and United
Nations Special Envoy Clinton.

At the conference that took place in New York on
March 2010, Spain promised to contribute €346
million to the rebuilding process from 2010 to 2013.
This amount is being channelled, inter alia, through
contributions to the multilateral Haiti Reconstruction
Fund, cooperation with Inter-American Development
Bank and direct cooperation with the Haitian
authorities.

We must be aware that the success of
MINUSTAH and the United Nations as a whole will
also depend on a positive perception of its work on the
part of the Haitian population. We must all therefore
redouble our efforts to broadcast the positive results
that the Mission has achieved for the country. The
Spanish Government reiterates its support and
appreciation for the work performed by MINUSTAH,
and welcomes the Mission's ongoing activities and
renewed momentum. I also wish in particular to
express Spain's gratitude for the extraordinary work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of MINUSTAH, Mr. Edmond Mulet.

In spite of all the difficulties, the establishment of
a new Government in Haiti is an opportunity to begin
anew, as stated by the Secretary-General in his recent
semi-annual report on MINUSTAH (S/2011/183*). The
people and Government of Haiti can rest assured that
Spain will do whatever it takes to make it a reality.

