Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is a
great pleasure, Sir, to see you in the Chair this month.
Thank you for convening this important meeting.

This discussion of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building is a valuable
opportunity to improve the way we respond to our duty
to promote human security, which the Secretary-General,
in his report on Africa, called "the cardinal mission of the
United Nations". (S/1998/318, para. 2)

 

A task of this magnitude goes well beyond the specific
Charter responsibilities of the Security Council. The
Council's role in conflict resolution can only be effective if
it is part of a wider effort by the United Nations system.
We lack, and must try to develop, more coordinated means
of identifying and responding to crises so that the work of
the Council is complemented by and integrated with the
work of agencies including the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

The Security Council now regularly receives briefings
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs at our informal consultations. This is a major step
forward. The briefings of Mr. Vieira de Mello and his staff
have proved the value of the coordinating role given to him
by the Secretary-General. Mrs. Ogata's briefing during the
presidency of the United States in November was a step
which must be built on, for example by scheduling similar
encounters with the heads of other agencies, funds and
programmes. We should also devise means of cooperating
with other interested organizations. For example, the lack
of a consistent mechanism for consultation between the
Council and the Organization of African Unity on matters
affecting peace and security in Africa is an issue which
needs to be addressed sooner rather than later.

If our efforts at peace-building are to be placed on
firm foundations, we must take into account the role of the
international financial institutions and such regional
organizations as the European Union in post-conflict peace-
building. The Presidency of the European Union will be
making a statement later today with which the United
Kingdom fully agrees. It is in Washington and Brussels that
the major part of the world's financing for peace-building
is found. The Security Council needs to devise ways to
ensure that its political objectives complement the financial
recovery packages which these bodies put in place.

The United Kingdom believes that coordination must
start in the field if it is to be effective. The development of
a strategic framework for United Nations action has the
potential to produce improved results in the building of
peace. We are following with interest its application in
Afghanistan. Now is the time to consider testing the model
in other situations. We should also seek to improve, where
possible, the application of the concept. Afghanistan shows
the need for all United Nations efforts in the field -
political, humanitarian and developmental - to be placed
under the authority of a single high-profile figure. That
person should have the political weight to ensure that
coordination is transformed from a theory into an
effective, normal practice.

Peace-building does not start where peacekeeping
stops. Peacekeeping will work best if it incorporates post-
conflict peace-building. We must not, in constructing
mandates for our operations, lose sight of the need to
ensure that when a peacekeeping force withdraws the war
does not resume. This means that operations need to
ensure the development of local law and order
capabilities, the restructuring of armed forces on a
constitutional basis and the restoration of economic
activity through properly planned infrastructure
programmes. Civilian police components, demining
programmes and the demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants will often be essential elements of
future multidimensional peacekeeping operations. Beyond
this, peace-building means the strengthening of civil
society, building local democratic institutions and
ensuring that the rights of women, men and children are
protected, in particular by ending the culture of impunity
which all too often surrounds gross violations of human
rights. We also need to ensure that conditions exist to
resume the development process. Many of these activities
will continue after the peacekeeping troops have left, and
we need to think through mechanisms for assuring and
financing the transition. Peace-building is a long-term
process lasting many years after a peacekeeping operation
withdraws. That means we must be ready to support it in
the long term if peace is to be sustainable.

In fact, the wider aspects of peacekeeping operations
are already being taken up by missions which no longer
have a traditional peacekeeping element. The United
Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala, the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia are three very
different examples of this welcome evolution in the type
of operations which can be undertaken by the United
Nations. But we must look carefully at the budgetary
arrangements. These operations must be financed in a
stable and predictable manner. An appropriate provision
should be made for them in the regular budget for each
biennium.

The report this year by the Secretary-General on
Africa (S/1998/318) gave us a useful stock of ideas on
conflict prevention and peace-building. We have
addressed in the Council those aspects of the report which
fall within our exclusive purview. While the United

 

Kingdom recognizes that a number of the Secretary-
General's recommendations, especially those on post-
conflict peace-building, range widely over the
responsibilities of the Security Council and other organs of
the United Nations system, we believe that the Council
must not ignore their implications for its work. This
opportunity to discuss post-conflict peace-building as an
overarching issue is therefore welcome. But it is not
enough. Peace-building will be of no value if it is treated
solely as an academic subject. We must apply the lessons
of this discussion and the wider wisdom of the Secretary-
General's report in addressing current and potential conflict
situations around the world. And we should continue to
look for mechanisms, such as today's debate, which will
allow us to pause, assess how we are doing and see
whether we can do things better. All this will require an
effort of imagination and an effort of will for all of us on
the Council.

I would like to take this opportunity to assure you, Mr.
President, my other colleagues on the Council and the
Secretary-General of my delegation's full support in
undertaking this shared task.

