Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are honoured
that the President of the Argentine Republic has
presided over this special meeting of the Security
Council. We congratulate Argentina on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August, and we appreciate the valuable work being
done by Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval and her
team in leading the Council this month.

We commend the United States for its effective
presidency of the Council last month. We warmly
welcome to the Council Chamber the new United States
Permanent Representative, Ms. Samantha Power, and
we look forward to working with her.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on this important subject.

We listened attentively to the presentations made
on behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the African Union (AU), the Union of
South American Nations and the League ofArab States.
We also appreciate the participation of the ministers
taking part in today's debate.

It is evident from the briefings this morning that
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations are cooperating more closely than ever
before to maintain international peace and security and
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. The partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
reinforce collective security, but they also present new
problems.

The past year has been good for partnerships. Under
the leadership of the Secretary-General, the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Great Lakes
and the Region was concluded. The Framework, which
is supported by 11 countries and four guarantors - the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community - should usher in
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbourhood. Similarly, the effective
cooperation among the United Nations, the Economic
Community of West African States and Economic
Community of Central African States has contributed
to the stabilization of the situations in Mali and the
Central African Republic.

The United Nations has supported the African
Union Mission in Somalia with core deployment,
rotations and operational and budgetary support. It has
also supported the International Security Assistance
Force under the framework of a United Nations
mandate, as well as the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations requires
a dynamic strategy to address the deficits in troops,
equipment and military expertise, as well as predictable
and sustainable funding. It also demands close oversight
by the Security Council and the harmonization of the
approaches of regional organizations and the United
Nations.

Regional organizations have unique perspectives
and deeper understandings of local conflicts and
cultural norms. That knowledge often gives them a
comparative advantage in preventing and resolving
conflicts. In many cases, they have enormous influence
over the parties to a dispute, which tend to place greater
trust in regional organizations.

A lot more can be done to consolidate partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Every regional organization has a unique historical
background, distinct objectives and diverse membership.
In formulating strategies for cooperation, the specific
characteristics and capacities of each organization
should be taken into account. Regional organizations
help the Council to avert impending crises by sharing
information on a real-time basis. The United Nations
should therefore support the early-warning capacity-
building of the relevant regional organizations.

Regional organizations should use their full
potential to dissuade parties from relying on arms
to settle their disputes, and encourage them to use
peaceful means.

We call on the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Gulf
Cooperation Council to use their extensive links and
clout to persuade all sides in Syria to attend the "Geneva
II" conference.

As we all know, African issues constitute the bulk
of the agenda of the Security Council. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
an important pivot for the maintenance of international
peace and security on the African continent. The
United Nations and its partners should continue to
address funding and capacity gaps to strengthen the
African Union's ability to prevent conflicts under the
umbrella of the 10-year capacity-building programme
for the African Union.

We applaud the European Union for supporting
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities in Africa
by providing substantial funding for United Nations-
mandated African Union peace-support operations. We
encourage other regional organizations that have the
capacity to do so to follow the example of the European
Union.
Regional organizations should step up their
endeavours to fight transnational crimes such as
terrorism, drug trafficking, the proliferation of weapons
and piracy. The success of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel depends upon interregional
cooperation to combat those threats.

The United Nations has launched robust
peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Intervention Brigade must succeed despite the
challenges of the terrain, the presence of multiple rebel
groups and doctrinal issues, as its performance will
have an impact on similar missions and situations and
on the conceptual evolution of modern peacekeeping.

The latent issues between the Security Council
and regional organizations should be addressed by
promoting complementarity. The widely recognized
principles of consultation, the primacy of the United
Nations, the effective division of labour and consistency
of approach should be fully respected. Those are indeed
the broad parameters for the evolving interpretations of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, for sustainable peace, the humanitarian
role and competencies of regional organizations should
be strengthened.

We fully endorse the comprehensive presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/l2) finalized under your
presidency, Madam President. We also commend your
Mission for preparing a very well-structured concept
note (S/2013/446, annex).

