Mr. Grant (Canada): Before beginning my
statement, allow me to offer condolences from the
Government and the people of Canada to those from
many nations affected by the recent terrorist acts in
France, Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and Turkey.

I am sure we can all agree on the broad principles
of security and development and the root causes of
conflict: first, that peace is a fundamental precondition
for development, as well as a development outcome in its
own right, and, secondly, that sustainable development
over the long term means addressing drivers of conflict,
exclusion and violence - and that includes support for
advancing democracy, good governance and human
rights.
Acting on those principles starts with prevention.
We have seen the results of responding only when a
crisis comes to a head: an international system stretched
to its limits and failing to respond adequately or in a
timely way. Investing in prevention means addressing
drivers of conflict at all levels and building the concept
of sustaining peace into all phases of our engagements.

Canada believes there is no need for new mandates
or institutions to do that, rather it requires using the
tools we already have; it requires leadership from the
Council, the Secretary-General and the relevant organs
of the United Nations; and it requires ongoing support
from Member States.

As a simple first measure, it would be ofconsiderable
value to Council deliberations were relevant bodies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
the Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council, to give regular briefings on country situations.
Such briefings should be integrated and grounded in
joint United Nations analysis. We also need to build
strong relationships between all actors, making the
sharing of information, ideas and resources a natural
part of our activities.

As we know from the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, solutions that are country-led and
inclusive are more likely to be perceived as legitimate
and to match the unique characteristics of specific
conflicts. Additionally, as has been proved, involving
civil society and investing in women's participation at
all levels and at all stages builds a culture of dialogue
and makes peace more likely to be sustainable.

(spoke in French)

Too often, we have seen a relapse into violent
conflict once a peace agreement has been signed. Even
an inclusive and comprehensive peace agreement needs
to be sustained and supported against unexpected
shocks and the sometimes predictable setbacks.

First and foremost, sustainable peace requires
not only resources, it takes time and determination.
Moreover, the way in which the international community
supports a process can evolve. As we saw in Sierra
Leone, providing support in a sequenced way, whereby
the Peacebuilding Commission pursues its commitment
to peace when the issue is no longer before the Security
Council, should be part of the normal course of affairs.

We also welcome the recommendations of the
Advisory Group of Experts aimed at stepping up the
conflict prevention and peacebuilding roles of United
Nations country teams and Resident Coordinators. We
encourage the strengthening of the joint programme of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Political Affairs on building national
capacities for conflict prevention.

Whatever our commitment, the United Nations
cannot be truly effective without adequate resources.
The report of the Advisory Group of Experts
(see S/2015/490) calls for predictable funding for
peacebuilding. How that is achieved is open for
discussion, but it is undeniably a prerequisite for
success.

(spoke in English)

The topic ofthis debate is a vast one. We do, though,
have the very useful recent high-level reviews of peace
operations and of the peacebuilding architecture and
the global review of resolution 1325 (2000), to which we
can refer. A great deal of good work has been done; it is
now up to all of us to work on effective implementation.

