Mr. Hug: At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Sir, for the opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the situation in Ukraine. On 27 February (see S/PV.7395), Ambassador Apakan gave the Council the
most recent update on behalf of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in the aftermath of the
signing of the Minsk package of measures.

Today, I am reporting a significant deterioration
of the security situation in Ukraine. The violence
witnessed in and around the town of Marinka, close
to the line of contact, constitutes a new worrying
development in the conflict in eastern Ukraine. After
the signature of the Minsk package of measures, large
parts of the conflict region had initially remained
quiet for months. This was particularly true for the
Luhansk region. However, throughout all this period,
fighting has continued in some hot spots, such as in
the surroundings of the destroyed airport of the city of
Donetsk, and in the area of the city of Mariupol around
the village of Shyrokyne.

The OSCE Mission, during that period,
continuously observed a pattern of heavy fighting
in these two locations, with occasional flare-ups in
other places. In the beginning of May, the security
situation started to deteriorate further. Towns in the
Donetsk region that had been quiet for months, such
as Horlivka and Hranitne, saw increased violence, and
again there were civilian casualties, mostly due to the
indiscriminate use ofheavy weapons. Significantly, the
violence has also spread to the Luhansk region, with
villages immediately north of Luhansk city - namely,
Shchastia and Stanytsia Luhanska - and others further
north-west along the contact line now witnessing
regular shelling and small-arms fire engagements.

The level ofviolence seen at Marinka in this context
does not necessarily represent a further intensification
of violence. The Mission has, after all, witnessed
hundreds of shells fall in and around Donetsk airport,
fired by both sides for many days. Marinka instead
seems to represent a possible new development - a
refocusing of weaponry and personnel. Before, violence
was concentrated north and north-west of Donetsk city,
with the economically and strategically important town
of Avdiivka to the north the apparent focus. Marinka
does not necessarily mean that this objective has
changed, but perhaps the means have.

Immediately following the signing of the Minsk
package, the Mission witnessed the withdrawal of some
heavy weapons from the contact line. It visited so-called
heavy weapons holding areas where all sides stored
such weapons. Over time, however, the Mission has
increasingly noted irregularities. Weapons previously
recorded are now often missing. In the meantime, the
Mission has noted the movement and presence of heavy
weapons - not to mention the obvious use of such
weapons - in areas where they are prohibited by the
Minsk arrangements.

In many cases, the Mission has also been prevented
from accessing heavy weapons holding areas. It
has also been denied entry to specific areas, notably
along the Russian-Ukrainian international border. The
Mission's unmanned aerial vehicles have beenjammed
on a regular basis, causing interference in the control of
those vehicles and their video feed. Our monitors have
also faced threats and intimidation and have even been
fired upon, all of which constitutes efforts to prevent
the Mission from monitoring adherence to the Minsk
package, in particular the provision relating to the
withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line.

Despite these obstacles - and mostly because of
the bravery of dedicated and professional monitors on
the ground - the Mission has been able to effectively
monitor the situation on the ground. On the basis of
extensive first-hand evidence of violations gathered
by our 375 monitors on the ground in Donbas and our
unarmed aerial vehicles in the sky, I can report with
confidence on the situation there.

Our assessment from the ground is that tension
levels have increased and that ceasefire violations
are becoming more frequent and more severe. In
particular, the reintroduction of Grad rockets and other
multiple-launch rocket systems is cause for added
concern. Although negotiations are always necessary,
these developments - and in particular the events in
Marinka - serve as a stark reminder for all sides of the
need to resolve their difference at the negotiation table.

The Minsk agreements form an integrated whole
and prescribe a ceasefire and a political process
towards the normalization of the situation. They remain
the only available framework for peace. In that context,
the process of implementation of these agreements
falls within the remit of the Trilateral Contact Group,
chaired by Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini, with whom
we cooperate very closely. The Mission coordinates
the working group on security of the Trilateral Contact
Group, one of the working groups established under
measure 13 of the Minsk package. That working group
has, to date, held three meetings, the most recent of
which was held on 2 June, just before the events around
Marinka. The working group has the task of increasing
security in the conflict zone. This now includes a plan
to withdraw tanks and certain weapons with a calibre
smaller than 100 millimetres and a plan to de-escalate
the situation around one of the main hotspots, in the
village of Shyrokyne, to the east of Mariupol.

Initially, issues of format had a negative impact
on the meetings of the working group. However, the
most recent meeting, held on 2 June, proved to be
constructive, and a material discussion on issues was
achieved between the sides. Despite the fact that some
issues remain open, that process of discussion and
of mutual engagement regarding the situation on the
ground must continue.

A role in the peace process is also played by the
joint centre for control and coordination. This structure
consists of military representatives from Ukraine
and the Russian Federation and operates inside the
conflict zone. The Mission closely monitors the work
of this structure and must report that the joint centre
still does not operate jointly. The sides also maintain
separate ceasefire violation logs, one by the Ukrainian
armed forces and one by the Russian Federation armed
forces representation to the joint centre, suggesting
a persisting structural split in their work. If the sides
would resolve to work jointly, the joint centre could
play an important role in avoiding or stopping ceasefire
violations towards a full implementation of the Minsk
documents.

The humanitarian situation in the conflict zone
continues to be a matter of much concern. As reported
by the Government of Ukraine, there are now at least
1.3 million internally displaced persons in Ukraine,
which is symptomatic of how the conflict is affecting
the civilian population in Donbas. The majority of
those are elderly people, women and children, who are
particularly exposed to the consequences ofthe conflict.
Civilians continue to pay an unacceptable price. They
are killed and wounded, as both sides continue to place
military positions in and around civilian infrastructure.
Their property and livelihoods have been destroyed.
The Mission has also noted the temporary closure of
Ukraine's biggest coke and chemical plant in Avdiivka
due to targeted and sustained shelling.

There is also a significant amount of landmines and
unexploded ordnance in conflict-affected areas, which
poses a major threat to the lives of civilians and to
recovery efforts. Ongoing hostilities have had an impact
on residential areas and basic services infrastructure,
including gas pipelines and the water supply, which
has severely limited access to safe drinking water for
civilians. The latter is of particular concern with the
summer months approaching.

Compounding the difficult situation facing civilians
is a permit system in operation all along the contact line.
The delivery of humanitarian aid and medical supplies
and normal commerce have been severely affected,
resulting in a worsening of the living conditions of
people living in the conflict zone. With access across
the contact line, particularly in the Luhansk region,
almost at a standstill, people-to-people contact has been
hugely disrupted, resulting in divided communities and
even families.

The Mission will not lose sight of these aspects of
the conflict and is working, as mandated, on related
tasks throughout Ukraine. We continue to facilitate
humanitarian assistance where possible and within the
remit of our mandate. In doing so, we closely cooperate
with the United Nations and its agencies. We seek to be
helpful to the population through our broad and robust
presence on the ground. We work on the facilitation
of localized ceasefires and infrastructure repairs
across the contact line. Such efforts, combined with
our engagement on human rights issues, gender and
dialogue facilitation, will help to consolidate the basis
on which the implementation of the political part of the
Minsk agreements is built.

Allow me to reiterate that developments around
Marinka are worrying, suggesting that the military
track has not been abandoned in favour of the political
one. Those events underline the need to break the cycle
of violence now before further escalation takes place.

We urgently call on all sides to return to the
negotiating table and make use of the negotiation
framework set up in the context of the Trilateral Contact
Group. The Mission will continue to implement its
mandate with impartiality and in close cooperation
with all sides, in the context of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine. We stand ready to assist
in the implementation of the Minsk agreements and
thereby contribute to the restoration of peace.

