Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express the thanks of the French delegation to
the representative of Viet Nam and his delegation for
the excellent work accomplished during Viet Nam's
presidency last month. I should also like to thank
Mr. Pascoe and Ambassador Wolff for their briefings.

France has noted with satisfaction the continued
progress made in Iraq over the past several months in
the area of security. In that regard, we welcome the
increased transfer of responsibilities to the Iraqi forces
and the efforts of the Iraqi Government. Disarmament
of the militias is an important objective aimed at full
restoration of State authority with regard to the security
and maintenance of order. That initial progress, which
has been made in particular as a result of the efforts of
the Iraqi authorities, must now be supported by
responses to the persistent challenges facing the people
and the Government of Iraq. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has an important
role to play in that respect.

The first challenge is the essential process of
national reconciliation and constitutional review, which
are objectives crucial to the consolidation of the Iraqi
State. That process must be inclusive and must make it
possible to isolate the forces that want Iraq to fail. It
requires cooperation by all Iraqi political leaders, who
must agree on an equitable sharing of power and
resources on a consensual basis. It is now urgent that
their stated intentions be translated into action. France
hopes that UNAMI will continue its work of advising
and supporting the Iraqi Government in carrying out
political reforms and holding elections, which are
essential for the consolidation of democratic
institutions, the promotion of national dialogue and the
reintegration of illegal armed groups.

The second challenge is related to the
humanitarian and human rights situations. The
humanitarian situation remains particularly worrisome.
The French delegation welcomes the work done by
UNAMI and all the United Nations entities concerned,
particularly the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as the efforts of
neighbouring States. It is now important that the Iraqi
Government honour its commitments - particularly its
financial commitment - with a view to the sustainable
and safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

Strengthening the rule of law and promoting
human rights are also important commitments
undertaken by the Iraqi Government at the Compact
with Iraq Annual Review Conference, held in
Stockholm on 29 May - commitments that we
encourage. UNAMI's reports on the human rights
situation in Iraq arouse great concern on the part of the
French delegation, particularly with regard to
observance of the rights of the many detainees held in
Iraq. France fully supports UNAMI's work in that area
and calls on all actors concerned to intensify their
efforts. France and the European Union will continue
to help to strengthen the rule of law in Iraq.

The third challenge concerns the economy. The
French delegation welcomes the consolidation of Iraq's
budgetary resources. That should make it possible for
the Iraqi Government to continue to rebuild the country
and to improve its people's access to basic services, in
keeping with the aforementioned commitments
undertaken at the first ministerial-level International
Compact with Iraq Annual Review Conference. My
delegation supports the work carried out by UNAMI in
coordination with the Iraqi Government. However, the
results will depend in particular on progress in the
areas of financial transparency and economic
governance.

Finally, the fourth challenge concerns the
regional process. The support of countries in the region
that have expressed a willingness to contribute to the
stability and reconstruction of Iraq remains crucial. We
welcome in particular the involvement of neighbouring
States in the process begun at Sharm el-Sheikh in May
2007, on which there has been progress, as we were
able to note at the expanded Ministerial Conference of
Neighbours held in Kuwait on 22 April 2008. Here
again, the role of UNAMI, in cooperation with the
Iraqi Government, is important, as shown by the
establishment of an ad hoc follow-up mechanism
within the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

I should like to conclude my statement by
welcoming the initial results obtained on the ground by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, thanks
in particular to the personal commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. My delegation reaffirms its full support for
the efforts made by UNAMI under its mandate, which
was strengthened by resolution 1770 (2007). We hope
that the mandate will be renewed for one year, as
provided for by the draft resolution circulated by the
United States delegation.

In accordance with resolution 1770 (2007), those
efforts should be carried out in a safe environment.
Since in a few days' time we will be commemorating
the fifth anniversary of the attack on the United
Nations in Baghdad, which claimed the lives of
22 people, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, I should
like to stress that - particularly given the possibility
that the mandate of the Multinational Force might not
be renewed at the end of the year - all the actors
concerned should plan and take the measures necessary
to maintain an appropriate level of security to ensure
the smooth functioning of the Mission.

France, which currently holds the presidency of
the European Union, is committed to the unity,
sovereignty and integrity of a democratic Iraq. We wish
to stress the Union's willingness to assist the Iraqis, in
support of United Nations efforts, in restoring the
peace and security to which they are entitled within a
united and richly diverse State.

