The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in the course of its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Security Council Mission to East Timor
and Indonesia (5/2000/1105) of 21 November
2000, and endorses the recommendations that it
contains. It notes in particular the view of the
Mission that a strong international presence will
be required in East Timor after independence,
inter alia for the provision of financial, technical
and security assistance, and agrees that planning
for such a presence should begin as soon as
possible. It requests the Secretary-General to
report on this matter in his next regular report to
the Security Council.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). It
welcomes in particular the creation of the
National Council in East Timor, and stresses the
importance of further work on the transition to
independence, including a timetable and
mechanisms for a constitution and elections. It
stresses that urgent consideration should be given
to expediting the training of the Timor Lorosae
Police Service and to attracting sufficient
resources to develop the judicial system. It notes
the Views of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the need to use assessed
funding more flexibly.
"The Security Council emphasizes that
urgent action is necessary to resolve the problem
of the East Timorese refugees in West Timor.
While acknowledging the efforts of the
Government of Indonesia so far, the Council
expresses its belief that a number of further steps
must be taken, including:

"(i) decisive action to disarm and disband
the militia and put an end to their activities,
including by the separation of militia leaders
from the refugees in West Timor and the
expeditious prosecution of those responsible for
criminal acts. The Council welcomes the steps
already taken by the Government of Indonesia
and urges it to make further progress on
eradicating intimidation in the camps;

"(ii) action to allow the international relief
agencies to return to West Timor, which will in
turn require that the security of their staff be
guaranteed. The Council looks forward in this
context to discussions between the Government
of Indonesia and the United Nations on
arrangements to facilitate an expert assessment of
the security situation in West Timor. This should
be in accordance with the usual modalities
employed by the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator;

"(iii) action to improve the flow of
information to the refugees. The Council urges
the Government of Indonesia, UNTAET and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to work together to develop an information
strategy that will allow the refugees to make an
informed decision about their future;

"(iv) a credible, apolitical and
internationally observed registration of the
refugees, carried out in close cooperation with
United Nations agencies and other relevant
actors.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for measures to address shortcomings in the
implementation of justice in East Timor. The
Council welcomes the adoption of Indonesian
legislation for the establishment of ad hoc human
rights tribunals. It also underlines the need to
bring to justice those responsible for violent
attacks in East and West Timor, including attacks
on United Nations personnel and in particular the

S/PVAZ/M

 

murder of three humanitarian workers and two
United Nations peacekeepers. It regrets that those
the

responsible for the murder of the peacekeepers
have not been arrested, and calls for action in this
regard and for an early start to the trials of those
accused of killing the humanitarian workers.

"The Security Council highlights the
importance of the bilateral relationship between
UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia. The
Council underlines the need to resolve the
outstanding issues of payment of pensions to
former civil servants and the proposed transit
arrangements between the Oecussi enclave and
the remainder of East Timor. It encourages in this
regard further progress in the dialogue between
the Government of Indonesia and UNTAET.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.
