The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Guatemala, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Martini
Herrera (Guatemala) took a. seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior conSultations. ' -

FolloWing consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the successful
conclusion of the military observer mission attached
to the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala (MINUGUA), in accordance with
resolution 1094 (1997) of 20 January 1997, to verify
the agreement on the definitive ceasefire between the
Government of Guatemala and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
signed at Oslo and December 1996 (S/ 1996/1045*,  annex). The Council commends the Secretary-
Genera], his Special Representative, the Chief
Military Observer and other dedicated personnel of
the United Nations who have contributed to this
undertaking. The Council further welcomes the full
compliance of the Government of Guatemala and the
URNG with the terms of the definitive ceasefire.

"The Security Council commends both parties
for the progress made in the implementation of the
Peace Accords to date, in particular for the
establishment of the Follow-Up Commission, which
will oversee the implementation of the agreements,
and for steps taken towards the establishment of the
Historical Clarification Commission. The Council
reiterates its call for both parties to continue to
implement fully their commitments under the
agreements signed in Guatemala City on 29
December 1996 as well as the commitments under
the other agreements in the overall package of Peace
Accords signed in Madrid, Mexico City, Oslo and
Stockholm. '

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the peace process in Guatemala. The Council.
expresses its confidence that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
MINUGUA, and the international community will
continue their support for the peace process in
Guatemala and, in particular, for the implementation
of the peace accords."

"This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

, The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.

