Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like once again to congratulate you,
Madame, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Your country is an
African friend of the Sudan and has contributed
significantly to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, particularly on our mother
continent, Africa, and in my country, the Sudan. The
Darfur peace negotiations were launched in Abuja, the
capital of your country.

Through you, I should like once again to extend
our sincere condolences to the Government and people
of Ethiopia for the death of four Ethiopian soldiers in a
landmine explosion on 2 August in the Mabok region,
east ofAbyei.

I also reiterate my congratulations to Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, on his well-deserved appointment. I wish
him every success in his new endeavours and stress our
commitment to cooperating with him in that regard,
just as we enjoyed close cooperation with his
predecessor, Mr. Le Roy.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2011/603) states, in paragraph 2,
that the security situation in the Abyei region remained
calm during the reporting period. In paragraph 6, the
report also mentions that progress has been made
towards implementing the 20 June Agreement between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement, which, inter alia, provided for
the important need to negotiate so as to achieve a
political settlement on the implementation of the
outstanding elements of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. All of these are indicators of our
Government's resolve to settle all pending matters
through political dialogue.

With regard to the deployment of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I
would like to assure the Council that the Government
of the Sudan is keen to expedite the deployment and
facilitation of the work of the Force. A case in point is
that the first phase of deployment was completed in
September. A total of 1,798 personnel of the mandated
troop strength of 4,200 were deployed. The
Government of the Sudan has stated its commitment to
facilitate the second phase of deployment through its
participation in a meeting of the mission's quadripartite
consultative mechanism, held in New York on
26 September. All aspects related to the deployment of
the Force were discussed, including special measures
to secure land for the construction of its premises, as
well as supply lines, necessary logistics and the
civilian support component of the Force. These details
indicate that the two parties are firmly resolved to
press ahead with the completion of the deployment of
the Force.

The recommendation to amend the mandate of
UNIFSA to provide force protection for the border
monitoring mechanism is in itself a positive
development. It shows the Council that the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan are indeed
cooperating, having agreed to establish a border
monitoring mechanism to ensure that their accessible
borders allow for the movement of citizens and trade
between the two brotherly countries. Again, this is a
positive development that demonstrates the
constructive steps taken by both parties to contain
outstanding issues and to push ahead with efforts to
substantially increase cooperation.

Therefore, as Council members discuss the
expansion of the mission's mandate, we trust that it
will take decisions in accordance with the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. I would like to recall here the recommendation
that border monitoring personnel consist of some 300
personnel, within the mission's current authorized
troop strength of 4,200, in compliance with Security
Council resolution 1990 (2011).

The report before the Council recommends, in
paragraph 25, that UNIFSA be reconfigured in order to
establish a dedicated capacity for the border
mechanism, including 297 force protection personnel,
90 military observers and 146 enabling elements. We
trust that the Council will adhere to the
recommendations contained in paragraph 24 of the
report, which establishes that the troops are mandated
under Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, and
which indicates, as I mentioned, that the purpose is to
make the borders accessible and facilitate the
movement of citizens and trade between the two
countries.

Concerning the withdrawal of the forces of the
two parties to outside the Abyei Area, in my previous
statements to the Council I indicated that the Sudanese
Armed Forces did not enter Abyei so as to remain
there. Today I reiterate that they will not stay in Abyei
ad infinitum; they will be pulled out. However, the
withdrawal that we meant should be organized in
concurrence with the completion of the deployment of
the Ethiopian forces, so as to avoid a security vacuum.
This is a genuine concern of the Council. In that
connection, I would like to share with the Council that,
owing to the heavy rainfall typical of the fall season in
the region and the lack of paved roads, as Mr. Ladsous
said moments ago, this may be an obstacle to the
movement of vehicles and cars transporting UNIF SA
personnel. We hope that this will be taken into account
when the Council discusses the withdrawal of forces.
These are obstacles beyond our control that are
imposed by weather conditions in the Area. They are
ad hoc conditions.
5

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our gratitude
to the sisterly State of Ethiopia, as well as to Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, head of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, and Mr. Haile Menkerios, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. Once again,
we would like to reiterate our commitment to facilitate
the deployment of these forces and to extend the
necessary support to them.

Finally, I have three brief observations. First,
with regard to visas, I wish to say to the Council that a
commitment has been made to grant visas to all
UNISFA personnel. To date, we at our Mission have
issued visas to all who have requested them, including
a number of diplomatic missions concerned with the
deployment of UNISFA.

My second point has to do with the visit to
Khartoum this Saturday by President Salva Kiir of
South Sudan to meet with President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir. We look forward to that meeting and hope
that it will take place in an atmosphere of good faith to
contain and resolve all remaining problems. I hope that
such an environment is taken into consideration as we
discuss here all the matters pending before us.

Lastly, with regard to internally displaced
persons, it is our hope that, given that a force of more
than 1,700 has now been deployed, those people will
begin to return to their areas. That would send a
positive message with regard to the success of the
mission.

