Mr. Christian (Ghana): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, which is of particularly
serious concern to us in Africa. We also thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of UNICEF; and the representatives
of the United Nations Development Programme and
the World Bank for their updates on this subject.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) provided
a new focus and ushered in a period of greater action
by the Security Council. Through the resolution, the
Council emphasized the legal and physical protection
needs of children and its commitment to addressing
impunity by introducing effective sanctions against the
perpetrators of serious crimes against children and
mainstreaming child protection into the transition and
post-transition priorities of Governments.

My delegation notes with appreciation the
important role played by child-protection advisers in
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the UNICEF child-
protection programme staff, and other United Nations
entities, including the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
United Nations Population Fund, and their close
engagement with civil society in building strong
partnerships on the implementation and functioning of
resolution 1612 (2005).

We also welcome the commendable progress
achieved by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as outlined in the report by its Chair;
the appointment of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict; and the ongoing
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in the field. Despite the progress, it is
crystal clear that much more remains to be done
because the situation is still grim. Recent reports
indicate that children not only bear the devastating
effects of armed conflict, but are often deliberately
targeted by parties to a conflict, non-State actors and
Government military forces alike. The high incidence
of the recruitment and use of child soldiers in armed
forces and groups, as well as the killing, maiming and
abduction of children and the widespread sexual
violence against and abuse of girls, and attacks on
schools and hospitals, continue to a large extent.

Children still form a high proportion of armed
groups and have as yet not benefited from or
participated in reintegration programmes. Obstruction
of humanitarian assistance is still ongoing and remains
a key concern. Even more disturbing is the fact that the
serious violations committed against children are
generally not investigated, or go unpunished. My
delegation is of the firm belief that this is the time to
isolate and apply sanctions against the recalcitrant
perpetrators of such abuses. Compilation of
information on violations against children will remain
of little relevance if it does not serve as a trigger for
action to hasten compliance with resolution 1612
(2005).
The lack of political will to fully respect
applicable international rules remains a key
impediment to protecting children in times of armed
conflict. We note that the prime responsibility for
providing protection falls upon State authorities and

other non-State actors. Therefore, we reiterate the call
on those parties to strictly comply with the relevant
rules and principles of international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian instruments and take
necessary action towards the complete and
unconditional release of all children in armed forces
and armed groups.

My delegation further wishes to emphasize that
the international community must strengthen its
resolve and fight those who act with impunity and are
involved in the de facto recruitment and use of child
soldiers. The prosecution and conviction of those
persons for such egregious crimes will serve as a long-
term deterrent. In that regard, the work of the United
Nations must be geared towards developing national
institutions and promoting recourse to international
justice.

In cases where the national legal system fails, the
international community has the duty to apply the full
range of available judicial mechanisms. In that respect,
we consider the investigations already underway at the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as positive
developments. At the national level, there is also the
need to build the capacity of security personnel and
other legal actors, including through an increase in the
human and financial resources of the concerned
authorities, to strengthen their capacity to investigate
and prosecute crimes against children.

Regarding the post-conflict care of affected
children, we would encourage initiatives to conduct
follow-ups to demobilization programmes. We wish to
stress that the demobilization of children should
include primary health care and psychosocial support
to address their special needs.

Further, we underline the importance of sustained
investment in education and skills training in order to
ensure the successful reintegration of children into
their communities and prevent re-recruitment. This
should include employment support and income-
generating projects for former combatants. Key
elements include rehabilitation and the provision of
school materials in order to support continued
schooling for children and the provision of life and
vocational skills for out-of-school students.

The effective protection of children in armed
conflict requires stronger partnerships that will
systematically identify the needs of children and
determine who is best placed to address those needs. In
that respect, regional experience and skills should be
drawn upon, as and when appropriate. Therefore, we
emphasize the need for continued close cooperation
between United Nations entities and regional
organizations, like the African Union. In particular, it is
of cardinal importance to strengthen their capacity and
preparedness to augment the efforts of the United
Nations in responding to the needs of the children.

We also commend efforts by the United Nations,
to incorporate the protection of vulnerable groups,
including children, into its peacekeeping missions. We
hope the newly created Peacebuilding Commission will
also pursue those objectives.

We look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, which will
reflect the latest developments and best practices in
providing protection for children, and will facilitate the
Security Council's deliberations and decision-making
on the issue. The Council must move to a stage of
action by ensuring that resolution 1612 (2005) is
translated firmly into action on the ground.

In conclusion, my delegation states its support for
the presidential statement on the subject.

