Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. We thank Sweden
for its work and its presidency of the Security Council
in July. China is also grateful to Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Director John Ging for their briefings.

The conflict in Yemen has been going on for
more than three years and political negotiations have
remained stalled for nearly two. The situation there has
continued to have a profound impact on regional peace
and security. The escalated conflict in Al-Hudaydah
and other areas, and the increased risks of famine
and cholera outbreaks, have aggravated the country's
humanitarian crisis. That is a situation that neither
the Yemeni people, the countries of the region nor the
international community can endure.

The fundamental way to achieve lasting peace in
Yemen is through a political settlement. The Special
Envoy has recently been closely engaging with the
Yemeni parties and countries of the region in his
shadow-diplomacy efforts and working tirelessly to
prevent the situation in Al-Hudaydah from evolving
into a bigger crisis. We support his intensified
mediation efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and push them to cease hostilities and go back
to seeking a political settlement and achieving peace,
security and stability in Yemen as soon as possible. The
Special Envoy will organize and preside over a meeting
in Geneva in early September that will be open to all
Yemeni parties and an important opportunity for peace
in Yemen. We support his efforts in that regard and
hope that all the parties in Yemen will show good will
and seize this opportunity and try seriously to address
differences through dialogue and consultation, break
the impasse without delay and genuinely relaunch
political negotiations in Yemen. The international
community and the countries of the region should help
by lending their constructive support.

Yemen is currently in the grip of a dire humanitarian
situation. The parties to the conflict should take steps
to ensure safe, swift and unimpeded humanitarian
access and create conditions conducive to easing the
humanitarian situation. China opposes any action
that targets civilians or expands or exacerbates the
conflict, and the international community should step
up its humanitarian assistance to relieve the suffering
of the Yemeni people. Not long ago, at the opening
meeting of the eighth ministerial meeting of the China-
Arab States Cooperation Forum recently, President Xi
Jinping of China announced another ¥600 million in
aid to the people of Yemen, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon,
in support of humanitarian and reconstruction work on
the ground.

China supports Yemen's sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. We urge all parties in
Yemen to work through dialogue and negotiation on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
implementation mechanism, and the outcome document
of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference so as to reach
an inclusive solution as soon as possible. China stands
ready to join the rest of the international community in
supporting the Special Envoy's work and will continue
to play a constructive role in facilitating a political
settlement of the problem of Yemen.

