Mr. Lavrov (interpretation from Russian): The
Russian Federation, which is a member of the troika of
observer States for the Angola settlement and which
contributes troops to the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA), is keenly interested in the
successful advancement of the peace process and in the
speedy restoration of lasting peace and national

 

reconciliation in Angola. The achievement of that objective
is of great importance both for Angola itself and for the
consolidation of stability throughout the region.

We note with satisfaction that recently there have been
encouraging signs regarding the Angolan settlement. The
most important of these was the approval at the 9 January
meeting of the Joint Commission of a new timetable for
implementation of the remaining key provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol. The implementation of the obligations
entered into therein - in particular, the complete transfer
of all regions controlled by the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) to the
Government of Angola, the completion of the
demilitarization of UNITA and the legalization of that
organization as a political party, and the transformation of
UNITA's radio station, Vorgan, into a neutral broadcasting
corporation - would give the peace process an irreversible
quality and take it to the final stage.

The month to come will be decisive for the peace
process as a whole. We expect that the Government of
Angola, and especially UNIT A, will take a constructive
approach and will implement accurately and on time, by 28
February, all the provisions of the settlement timetable. We
also place considerable hopes on the meeting on the
territory of Angola between President Dos Santos and the
leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi, planned for the second half
of February.

In our View, the draft resolution to be adopted today
by the Security Council correctly reflects the specific nature
of this complex but, we hope, final stage of the Angolan
settlement. The draft resolution clearly points the
Government of Angola and UNITA towards the conclusion
of the implementation of their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol and provides broad opportunities for effective
verification of the course of the peace process and for
adjustments in the actions of the Security Council,
depending on the course of events.
It is precisely in this context, and in particular
following the results of the implementation of the
settlement timetable, that the Security Council intends by
mid-March to determine its position regarding the question
of the lifting or intensifying sanctions on UNITA, and also
regarding the further presence of the United Nations in
Angola. We believe that this rational approach will
effectively promote the further advancement of the peace
process and provide adequate protection for the large
investment in peace and in an Angolan settlement made
over many years by the international community.

On the basis of the foregoing, the Russian delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

