Mr. Strammen (Norway): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative Seren Jessen-Petersen
for his very comprehensive briefing.

Norway aligns itself with the statement made just
a few moments ago by the Ambassador of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make the following
observations.

The Secretary-General's report to the Security
Council clarifies the challenges facing the Kosovars as
well as the international community in Kosovo.
Norway supports the continued efforts outlined in the
report to implement European standards in Kosovo.
The report underscores the need for setting priorities in
the standards-implementation process, as well as for a
more systematic programme of competence-building
and transfer of responsibilities to local institutions. We
fully support those recommendations.

At the same time, Norway also fully concurs with
the Secretary-General's recommendation that there be a
greater degree of accountability on the part of the
Kosovo institutions. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) must
maintain effective oversight and mechanisms for
remedial action, should that be necessary.

Stability in the western Balkans is of continued
importance for Europe as a whole. It is therefore
important that the Kosovo issue be dealt with in a way
that does not lead to renewed violence or regional
destabilization. While economic development is
important for stability, so, too, is the need for a greater
effort for inter-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation.
Norway supports greater efforts to foster local
initiatives for community-based inter-ethnic dialogue
and reconciliation.

Serb participation in the political and
administrative life of Kosovo is important if Kosovo is
to be truly multi-ethnic. The Kosovo Albanian political
leadership should take the lead in supporting local
community reconciliation. It should actively promote
public policies, such as local administration reform,
that involve, empower and benefit all communities.
Such policies will also indirectly foster an environment
of security.

It is vital that the legitimate interests of all
communities in Kosovo be taken duly into account.
First and foremost, all inhabitants must be ensured full
respect for their human and civil rights. That includes
the security of individuals and communities alike.

Norway commends the Kosovo Central Elections
Commission and its staff on the well-organized
Assembly elections that were held on 23 October. The
fact that the elections were conducted in a peaceful and
orderly manner gives rise to optimism.

However, we regret the very low turnout of Serb
voters in those elections. We believe that such non-
participation is detrimental to the best long-term
interests of the Serbian community in Kosovo. Self-
isolation will not bring any benefit, but only exacerbate
the challenges facing all those who are committed to a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo.

We trust that the new cabinet, when it has been
constituted, will work together with UNMIK, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and others to implement
European standards and resolution 1244 (1999) in
Kosovo. We take it for granted that the new
Government will be a Government for all inhabitants,
whatever their ethnic background.

Democracy and multi-ethnicity cannot be
achieved until all communities in Kosovo feel that
their rights, aspirations and concerns are fully
respected and adequately addressed by their neighbours
and Kosovo institutions. Kosovo continues to suffer
from a deficit of mutual trust and respect between
communities. That is perhaps the predominant
challenge facing Kosovo today.

Authorities and political leaders in Kosovo must
publicly demonstrate their commitment to the security
of all inhabitants of Kosovo, irrespective of nationality.
Sustainable security for all communities in Kosovo is
first and foremost the responsibility of Kosovar
political leaders. The international community can
help, but respect for the inalienable right to security
can derive only from a more widespread mentality of
respect and tolerance among the inhabitants of Kosovo.
In that regard, it is important to once again
emphasize the responsibility of all political leaders,
elected officials and civil servants at both the
municipal and Kosovo-wide levels. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must ensure that the
human and civil rights and legitimate interests of all
communities are taken seriously and addressed in a
manner compatible with European standards.

Preparations must commence for a discussion of
Kosovo's future status. As Ambassador Eide has
pointed out, there will never be an ideal time for
discussions on status. Discussions will be difficult. It
will be vital to include Belgrade in that process.
Discussions must also to the fullest extent possible
safeguard the human, minority and civil rights of all
inhabitants of Kosovo.

Norway will continue its support for the Special
Representative's agenda for development and stability
in Kosovo.

