Mr. Maurer (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to address
the Council at today's meeting in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration for Burundi. I would also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/611), which
addresses the pertinent aspects of peacebuilding in
Burundi in a comprehensive and balanced way.

Burundi has come a long way since the end of the
civil war that ravaged the country for more than a
decade. All the political actors recognize today that a
return to arms is not an option, that it must be avoided
at all costs and that it would destroy the country's
hard-won opportunities to return the country to the
path to sustainable development.

I am also pleased to note the lively political
debate and the professed willingness of all parties to
resist the temptations of petty politicking. Indeed, party
politics or individual political purposes must not be
allowed to jeopardize fundamentals such as the
elections and the integrity of the electoral process.

Burundi is entering a crucial stage of
peacebuilding. Elections will be held at all levels of
government in 2010, and they will enable us to assess
the progress achieved. If the elections are carried out in
a free, fair and peaceful manner and lead to universally
accepted results, the peace process will be made more
durable. It will then become possible to focus even
further on the underlying causes of conflict and
poverty. However, if the opposite happens, the peace
process will be jeopardized, new wounds will be
opened and the old ones will be more difficult to heal.

It is therefore imperative that an environment
conducive to free, fair and peaceful elections be
created. The prospects for this are encouraging. The
necessary legal framework is in place and the
preparatory process is almost on track. In addition, the
legitimacy of the Independent National Electoral
Commission is broadly accepted. Its independence is
indeed crucial to its ability to fulfil its role as a
guarantor of free and fair elections. Finally, a
promising start has been made on drawing up a
national strategy for the socio-economic reintegration
of vulnerable groups. However, significant challenges
remain.

First, there is still widespread fear of violence.
Many of the interlocutors I met during my most recent
stay in Burundi mentioned instances of intimidation,
limitations of civil rights, threats or even physical
attacks. Many times, groups of youths were identified
as the perpetrators of such acts. Under no
circumstances should the political debate - no matter
how lively it is - lead to violence.

Despite the success of the Government's
disarmament programme, too many small arms remain
in circulation. All the political parties should commit
themselves to participating peacefully in the election
process and avoiding provocative acts. As Chair of the
country-specific configuration on Burundi, I believe
that one of the confrguration's priorities will be to
closely monitor the security conditions in which the
elections will be held and the implementation of the
Government's zero-tolerance policy.

Secondly, there are fears concerning the
deterioration of trust between the opposition and the
ruling party. Although a formal mechanism has been
established, the ruling party is accused of being
increasingly reluctant to engage in dialogue. It is
crucial that all parties reach political consensus in their
pursuit of power. That is the only way to successfully
address the root causes of the conflict. In my opinion,
encouraging such a dialogue must be another priority
for the country-specific configuration on Burundi.

There have been substantial achievements in
peacebuilding. However, the Burundian authorities
must remain fully committed to this process. In the
same vein, it is essential that the international
community not leave the people of Burundi to face
their fate alone during this decisive phase.
International support must be maintained. That support
takes various forms. The first of these ways will be
financial support for organizing the elections. In that
regard, I regret that - as indicated by the Secretary-
General in his report - of the total $43 million
needed, only $2.7 million in funds is available as of
now for the financing of the elections.

Long-term electoral observation is a second form
of support that the international community could
provide. During my recent visit to Burundi, I noted a
preference for electoral observation by regional and
subregional entities. It is an encouraging sign that the
African Union appears willing to become involved.
Following up on that issue will be a matter of priority
for the country-specific configuration on Burundi.

A third form of assistance is investing in long-
term economic development. Donors are generally
reluctant to become involved in development
cooperation in post-conflict contexts, and international
investors tend to hold back until situations are fully
stabilized. That is understandable, but immediate
assistance and investment would contribute greatly to
further stabilizing Burundi. Another important role of
the country-specific configuration on Burundi is
therefore to encourage local entrepreneurship and
international investment.

I very much appreciate the Council's invitation to
speak today. I suggest that we continue to hold regular
exchanges of view between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the coming months.
Furthermore, it would be greatly appreciated if the
Council were willing to consider consulting
systematically with the Peacebuilding Commission in
the preparation of Council documents regarding
Burundi.
