Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset. I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for convening a
successful mini-summit on Somalia in New York on
26 September. Azerbaijan joins the participants of
the summit in congratulating the Government and the
people of Somalia on the peaceful end of the transition.
That significant achievement represents a historic
moment for the country and an important step towards
a peaceful, democratic, stable and prosperous Somalia.

We commend President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
of Somalia for his intention to ensure the formation of
inclusive, broad-based governing institutions, and we
welcome his early priorities. It is important to ensure
that international support is aligned with those priorities
and that the spirit of unity is preserved as an essential
guiding principle for all Somali and international actors
working towards peace and development in Somalia.

The United Nations plays a critical role, and we
commend the efforts of Special Representative Mahiga.
We are encouraged by the further consolidation of
the partnership between the United Nations and its
partners.

We note the role of regional bodies, in particular
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in contributing to peace in Somalia
and to bringing an end to the transition. It is obvious
that progress has become possible mostly because of
significant improvements in the security situation. We
pay tribute to the great sacrifices made by the troop-
contributing countries of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Security
Forces.

I would also like to commend the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and individual Member States for
their contributions to achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia and for providing significant
support so that the urgent needs of the peoples affected
by the humanitarian crisis can be addressed.

The international community must remain strongly
committed to the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity ofSomalia. It is crucial
that all necessary efforts continue to be undertaken to
effectively address the threats and challenges posed by
terrorists and armed opposition groups in Somalia, in
particular Al-Shabaab, including through supporting
and implementing measures against the internal and
external actors who are attempting to undermine the
peace process in the country.

As the Secretary-General noted in his recent report,
it is important that the people in areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab quickly see the difference between life
under the insurgents and under the new Government.
That can obviously be achieved through committed
efforts on the part of the national authorities in
favour of strengthened security in liberated areas, the
establishment of good governance and the rule of law,
the development of security sector capacities, the rapid
delivery of services and the continued support of the
international community.

Additional efforts are needed aimed at combating
piracy, armed robbery and hostage-taking off the coast
of Somalia. It is important to ensure that national
commitments are matched by strong support and
assistance from the international community. The full
respect of the relevant international law is a necessary
precondition for the effectiveness of the anti-piracy
response and international cooperation.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia requires
constant attention. Safe, full and unhindered
humanitarian access to people in need must be ensured
by the parties involved. We stress the importance of
sustainable assistance to Somalia in that regard, as well
as a need to redouble efforts to find long-term solutions
to challenges still being faced by the country and its
people.
