Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank Mr. Nasser
Judeh, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Jordan, for
presiding over this meeting, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I reaffirm the State of
Palestine's gratitude for the principled efforts they have
respectively and consistently exerted for peace and a
just solution to the question of Palestine.

It is with immense pride that we see Jordan assume
the presidency of the Security Council, and we convey
our congratulations and wishes for success during its
tenure. Likewise, we extend sincerest congratulations
to the other new non-permanent members - Chad,
Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria - confident in their
adherence to the Charter and abilities to fulfil the
serious responsibilities of this organ, including
vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which is the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the goal of a just,
comprehensive solution, which is a matter central to
international peace and security.

On this occasion, we also express congratulations
to the outgoing members of the Council - Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo - on the
completion of their tenure, and reaffirm our appreciation
for the principled positions they have taken regarding
Palestine during the Council's deliberations over the
past two years. I also welcome the ministers who are
among us today to participate in this deliberation.

Today, 20 January, is being observed in the United
States in commemoration of the life of the great civil
rights leader, Martin Luther King, Jr. Mr. King's
wisdom inspired and transformed a generation, changed
the course of history, and continues to inspire today.
We recall today his declaration that

"[i]njustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere. We are caught in an inescapable
network of mutuality, tied in a single garment of
destiny. Whatever affects one directly, affects all
indirectly".

This principle lies at the heart of the United
Nations aim to promote peace, security, human rights,
development and dignity for all peoples. It is a principle
acutely applicable to the injustice that continues to be
borne by the Palestinian people - an injustice that has
harmed our people, our region and global aspirations to
peace, security and friendly relations among nations.

This is why the Palestine question has remained on
the United Nations agenda for nearly seven decades. That
is why the General Assembly has repeatedly affirmed
the permanent responsibility of the United Nations
until the question is justly resolved. That is also why
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People is annually observed on 29 November. And it
is why the Assembly rightly proclaimed 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People.

The grave impact ofthis conflict- and, conversely,
the multitude of benefits that a peaceful solution would
have for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, the Middle
East and the international community as a whole e are
facts widely recognized. That was recently echoed
by United States Secretary of State John Kerry, who
continues to expend tireless efforts, along with the
Arab Ministerial Follow-up Committee, the Quartet
members - the European Union, the Russian Federation
and the United Nations - and many countries from
all over the globe in support of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations and a peaceful settlement. Secretary Kerry
has stated that

"[t]he stakes here are much bigger than just Israel
and Palestine. This is a conflict that is felt around
the world. It is a conflict that has implications with
every leader I have met anywhere in the world as
Secretary of State or a Senator.

"And President Obama is determined that the
United States of America and his Administration
will do everything in our power to exhaust the
possibilities of finding that peace."

We recognize and commend that serious engagement
by the international community, and we urge that this
support be translated into intensified efforts for the
achievement ofajust, lasting and comprehensive peace
during this year. As negotiations are ongoing between
Palestine and Israel, the international community and
the Council have clear responsibilities and cannot
remain on the sidelines. For decades, time, energy
and resources have been heavily invested towards the
realization of a two-State solution based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. Now
is the time to follow-through on that investment with
political will and courage.

The long-standing consensus on the parameters
of the solution must be reaffirmed, not set
aside - completely ending the Israeli occupation that
began in 1967; achieving the independence of the State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security based on
the pre-l967 borders; and ensuring a just solution to
the Palestine refugee problem based on the relevant
resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 194
(III).

The Security Council has a duty to ensure respect
for its resolutions, which form the backbone of a fair
and sustainable solution. The welcomed international
pledges to support and ensure the implementation of a
future peace agreement are surely based on the premise
that this will be a lasting peace, not one that does
not survive as more than ink on paper. That requires
respect for the principles of a just solution of all core
issues - refugees, Jerusalem, borders, settlements,
security, water and prisoners. It is vital that the
international community stand by those principles and
persuade Israel, the occupying Power, to respect them.
That is what will facilitate a permanent agreement and
guarantee its viability. And, in the immediate present,
that is what will foster an environment conducive to
credible negotiations, real progress and the ultimate
achievement of our collective goals.

On our part, the Palestinian Government and
people are committed to peace and justice and are
exhausting all efforts, conducting ourselves on the
basis of international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Council, the well-
known parameters of the peace process and the
agreements reached from 1993 onwards. We have
responsibly participated in all stages, rounds and
initiatives of the peace process for more than 20 years,
including the current negotiations. And we are doing so
on the basis of historic compromise and great sacrifice.

Yet the challenges we face on the ground are
formidable. Mistrust, cynicism and despair are rising
among the Palestinian people, as they continue to
witness and endure illegal Israeli practices, which, far
from bringing an end to the occupation, are further
entrenching it, deforming the two-State solution,
impeding socioeconomic development, inflicting vast
human suffering and diminishing the hopes that the
current peace process will lead to the realization of
their freedom and rights.

Since the resumption of negotiations, Israel
has announced plans to construct more than 7,600
settlement units, along with the construction under way
on thousands more units throughout the occupied State
of Palestine, including in and around East Jerusalem.
Israel is also continuing the construction of its wall,
destroying the contiguity of our land with such illegal
colonization measures. Israel is almost daily continuing
military raids in Palestinian areas, perpetuating
the violent, destructive face of the occupation.
Palestinian civilians continue to be killed and injured
by the occupying forces. Settler terrorism is rampant.
Provocations against Christian and Muslim holy sites,
including at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and Al-Aqsa Mosque,
in occupied East Jerusalem, persist, inflaming religious
sentiments and high tensions.

Moreover, despite the welcomed release of long-
term Palestinian prisoners, during 2013 alone at least
4,553 Palestinians, including children, were arrested or
detained, adding to the ranks of the more than 5,000
Palestinians currently in Israeli jails. Also, Israel
demolished at least 200 Palestinian homes in the past
year, forcibly displacing hundreds of people. And the
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip continues to deepen
the isolation, poverty and humanitarian hardships of
our people, particularly our vulnerable refugees, whose
subsistence has been almost totally reliant on the
support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

None of that engenders confidence in, or popular
backing for, the negotiations. On the contrary, the
continuation of Israel's illegal actions and provocative
declarations further destabilize the situation and poison
the atmosphere, obstructing progress and preventing
peace from taking root on the ground and in the hearts
and minds of our peoples.

Of course, making peace requires negotiations. But
making peace also requires respect for international
law and requires a change in mentality, behavior and
discourse, consistent with the goals ofthe peace process
and essential for preparing the public for new realities.
The negotiations cannot be an objective in themselves
or be used as cover to perpetuate the status quo.

There must be an immediate halt to Israel's
settlement activities and its attempts to assert control
over more territory, whether in Jerusalem, the Jordan
Valley or elsewhere, as well as a halt to the arrest of
Palestinian civilians, the demolition of homes and the
forced displacement of Palestinian families, and all
policies of collective punishment against our people,
including in Gaza. That is imperative for creating trust
and an appropriate environment for negotiating an end
to the conflict, whereby the independent, sovereign and
contiguous State of Palestine and the State of Israel can
coexist in peace and security and just solutions can be
reached on all outstanding core issues.
A lasting solution must be founded on respect for
international law and human rights. Peace and security
cannot take root in the absence of those elements, as
justice and rights are essential for peace to prevail
anywhere. Therefore, in reaffirming Palestine's
commitment to a peace based on two States, we reaffirm
also our commitment to redressing the injustice borne
by our people and fulfilling their national aspirations
and rights, including the right to return and the right to
self-determination.

The Palestinian leadership is acutely aware of
this moment's significance and, despite the Israeli
obstructions, is negotiating in good faith. If the
opportunity for peace before us is lost, it will not be
for a lack of effort by Palestine or by the international
community, including the Arab States, whose historic
Peace Initiative stands and is backed by intensive efforts,
including the support of the 57 member countries of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Should Israel
choose to persist with colonization, annexation and
oppression rather than choosing the path of peace, the
response by the international community, including the
Council, must be firm and based on the law and the
global consensus on the conflict. The message to Israel
must be clear: illegal actions entail consequences, and
Israel will be held responsible should its actions lead to
the collapse ofpeace efforts and the two-State solution.

Once again, before concluding, I must convey our
grave concerns about the tragic situation of Palestinian
refugees in Syria. As the conflict rages, our refugees,
like other civilians in the country, continue to suffer
death, injury, destruction and displacement, even
including the starvation to death of children, women
and men. The plight of thousands of Palestinian
refugees trapped in the Yarmouk camp is shocking
and inhumane. It is a humanitarian catastrophe. We
urgently appeal for humanitarian access to the camp
and to all civilians suffering in the conflict, in line with
international law.

This crisis reconfirms the extreme vulnerability of
the Palestinian refugees and the need for ajust solution
to their plight in the context of any peace agreement and

of regional peace. We commend the efforts of UNRWA
and other humanitarian organizations that are providing
emergency aid to the Palestinian refugees in Syria and
to those who have fled to Lebanon, Jordan and other
countries. As the Geneva Conference approaches, we
appeal for the exertion of maximum efforts to ensure
the protection of all civilians in Syria, including the
Palestinian refugees, and to find a political solution to
end this horrific conflict.
I thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretary-
General and the members of the Council, including the
Ministers of Luxembourg and the Republic of Korea,
for participating in the meeting and for their attention
to these important matters.

