Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to introduce the fifth Report of the
Secretary-General on Sierra Leone (S/2010/47l).

When the Secretary-General visited Freetown on
14 and 15 June, he wanted to draw attention to Sierra
Leone's extraordinary achievements in regaining its
peace and stability since the end of its civil war.
Indeed, Sierra Leone is a country that was able to leave
years of dictatorships, repeated military coups and
11 years of a devastating civil war behind it and to
embark on building a new peaceful, democratic and
more prosperous society. In the more recent period,
Sierra Leone has made considerable economic and
social progress. The Government has mastered
successfully the impact of the recent global food and
financial crises in the country, engaged in an ambitious
infrastructure development programme, improved
agricultural production and increased energy
production.

Against the background of the ongoing review of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the
Government's efforts to provide free medical care to
mothers and children under five, its successful
programmes to fight HIV/AIDS and malaria, its
commercialization programme for small and often
desperately poor farmers, and the construction of
feeder roads connecting isolated villages to the
national road grid are of particular importance. It is
10-55258
therefore not surprising that Sierra Leone has made
steady progress towards achieving the MDG.

In this context, we have also to recognize the
considerable long-term support that Sierra Leone has
received and still receives from the international
community. In particular, we commend President
Koroma's commitment to creating Africa's only second
independent public broadcaster, the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, which was inaugurated
during the Secretary-General's visit. The Corporation
is still in its infancy and will have to overcome many
challenges to live up to its aspirations and our
expectations for it as a professional and impartial voice
for Sierra Leone and, it is to be hoped, one day for the
subregion. But I am convinced that the enthusiasm and
integrity of its independent board members will make
it a reliable and impartial voice for Sierra Leone's
newly found democracy and an example for other
countries in the region to follow.

I will not expand further here on these
development issues, as we will discuss them at the
Peacebuilding Commission meeting this afternoon.
Instead, I would like to use this opportunity to
concentrate on three more recent developments that
could have a major impact on shaping Sierra Leone's
political, social and economic future: first, the
Government's efforts to make greater use of the
country's mineral and natural resources; secondly, the
preparations for the 2012 elections; and thirdly,
developments in neighbouring Guinea.

All three of these developments have the
potential to bring great benefits to Sierra Leone. The
increase in the exploitation of Sierra Leone's rich
mineral resources could help break the country's high
donor dependency and give it the resources needed to
pursue its development goals more aggressively. The
2012 elections could strengthen the country's still
young democracy, increase the credibility of State
institutions and ultimately help Sierra Leone to cross
the magic line of its tenth year since the end of the
civil war. Finally, elections and a successful
democratic transition in Guinea could, for the first
time, create a subregion of like-minded States and open
the potential for greater cooperation among the three
countries of the Mano River Union in solving many of
the shared problems.

While these three developments are indeed a
source of hope for Sierra Leone, they also bear
considerable risks for its future that, if not managed
carefully, could have adverse impacts on the progress
made in Sierra Leone in recent years. I shall first talk
about the recent mining contracts.

Sierra Leone is a country endowed with rich
natural and mineral resources. To manage its mineral
resources better, the Government enacted a new mining
law last year and began, with the assistance of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to
renegotiate existing mining contracts for the
exploitation of diamonds and rutile, a precursor for the
production of titanium. More recently, the Government
concluded two significant mining contracts for the
exploitation of the country's large iron ore resources
that could give extractive industries in Sierra Leone's
economy an unprecedented dominant role. In fact, with
its largely unexploited gold resources and the potential
of economically viable off-shore oil and gas reserves,
Sierra Leone may be on the verge of turning from a
major recipient of foreign aid to becoming a major
exporter of primary mineral and hydrocarbon products.
This is surely a welcome development for Sierra
Leone, as well as for an international community that
has invested so much in Sierra Leone's stability and
development over the past 10 years or more.

However, experiences in different parts of the
world suggest that countries depending on the export
of raw materials are often plagued with great
difficulties. Dependence on mining and oil exports has
often resulted in social dislocations, huge income
disparities and rampant corruption that have at times
erupted into violent internal conflicts. In fact, Sierra
Leone itself has had such bitter experience in the past.
Today, its formerly diamond-rich district of Kono is
one of the poorest areas of Sierra Leone, with one of
the highest unemployment rates in the country,
especially among its youth. Much of its once fertile
agricultural lands are now dotted with water-logged
holes and Kono's destroyed infrastructure. The many
burned-out houses still bear witness to the destructive
force of a civil war that was largely funded by so-
called blood diamonds from that very district.

It is the sheer size of the two iron ore mining
contracts that elicit unease, as they could become a
game-changer for Sierra Leone, with the potential to
dramatically change the country's economic, social and
political landscape. This applies in particular to the
mining agreement for the large Tonkolili iron ore
deposits. If official pronouncements are correct, the
financial turnover of that mining operation alone would
dwarf the financial and organizational capacities of the
Government itself.

Therefore, it is incumbent on all concerned, in
particular the Government of Sierra Leone, to make all
the necessary efforts to ensure that its emphasis on
extractive industries is put on the right track from the
very beginning. Concerns about the mining agreements -
especially their compliance with Sierra Leone's mining
law, the transparency of contract negotiations or
concerns about how much economic power has been
given to a single external investor - should be taken
seriously. Further, concerns about the influence that
such huge commercial interests could have on the
integrity of an underpaid public service, the media and
civil society will require attention.

I am convinced that even large-scale mining
contracts can be managed in a way that both the
international investor and the country will emerge as
winners. Against that background, I welcome the
assurances given by President Koroma of his
determination to ensure that all mining agreements will
be compliant with Sierra Leone's laws and with
international practices, to increase transparency in the
mining sector, and to seek external assistance in
beefing up national capacities to deal with the
challenges of large-scale mining concessions. I also
wish to express gratitude to the World Bank, the
African Development Bank, the Department for
International Development of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and, closer to home,
UNDP for their offers of assistance to enable the
Government to manage this critical aspect of Sierra
Leone's development.

I shall now turn to the elections. The next
nationwide elections in Sierra Leone will be held in the
latter part of 2012 - that is, only two years from now.
Despite the remaining time, it feels as if the electoral
campaign has already started. Press statements,
interviews, relatively unimportant by-elections and
even certain other social events are taking on the form
of early electoral campaigns. Regrettably, the main
political parties accuse each other of shady intentions,
and the opposition has expressed increasing mistrust of
the impartiality of key State institutions. There are
fears that both sides could try to prevent the other from
campaigning legitimately in their respective political
strongholds. Recent by-elections for parliamentary and
local council seats also witnessed similar incidents, as
well as violence or the threat of violence.

All indications are that the 2012 elections could
be challenging and complex. This is partly due to the
fact that the country will run three nation-wide
elections at the same time: presidential, parliamentary
and local council elections. But also other factors -
such as a winner-take-all electoral system, a likely two-
party contest, both with their regional strongholds,
temptations to exploit regional and ethnic differences
as well as the newly found wealth from recent mining
contracts - could all contribute to highly contested
and potentially difficult elections.

To mitigate conflicts in the run-up to and during
the 2012 elections, it is critical that the institutional
framework responsible for conducting the elections be
accepted by all sides as being professional, credible
and, even more important, impartial. This applies in
particular to the two main electoral bodies: the
National Electoral Commission and the Political Party
Registration Commission. Other national institutions,
such as the Sierra Leone police, the Independent Media
Commission and the newly established Independent
Broadcasting Corporation also have very important
roles to play in this context. In view of that, serious
efforts should be made to address all outstanding issues
involving electoral management bodies and other
relevant institutions well in advance of the elections.

In this context, I would like to urge the National
Electoral Commission to do more to alleviate fears
within the main opposition following the
reappointment of the chief electoral officer. At the
same time, I call on the main opposition party to show
greater flexibility in discussing their electoral concerns
without getting entangled in personality conflicts.
Although much work has been done in strengthening
the Political Party Registration Commission to carry
out its important regulatory and mediation functions,
its effectiveness is hampered by the fact that its chair
has been vacant for over two years.

We are pleased to note that the Sierra Leone
police and its leadership have committed themselves to
regular dialogue with all political parties and to protect
the operational impartiality and professionalism of the
force in providing security during the electoral process.
The police should increase its capacity in non-lethal
crowd-control techniques and refrain from any
temptation to use assault weapons in social
10-55258
disturbances. An early establishment of an independent
police complaints committee, as envisaged in the joint
communique, will also greatly enhance confidence in
the police.

The role of the media in the electoral process will
be critical and the Independent Media Commission is
expected to protect the media from undue political and
commercial influences. In this context, the creation of
the Guild of Editors of the major newspapers is a very
welcome initiative.

If the 2007 and 2008 elections or recent by-
elections are any indication, ethnicity and regional
divisions may play a much greater role in the
upcoming elections. This could add a dangerous
dimension to the elections. I therefore hope that more
efforts will be made by all political stakeholders to
defuse this potential for conflict well in advance of the
election. This could also include greater efforts by the
Government to create a better regional balance in
appointments of its senior political and civil service
positions.

Finally, we are concerned about the
Government's intention to hold an inquest into the
1992 extrajudicial executions by the former military
Government, the National Provisional Ruling Council,
which ruled the country between 1992 and 1996. This
action by the Government could be misunderstood by
many in the opposition as an effort to influence the
2012 elections and could open the way for demands for
all sorts of new inquests into past atrocities. If the
Government proceeds with the inquest, it should make
its intentions much clearer in order to obviate
misinterpretations later.

Let me now turn to the third issue: Guinea. It may
be no surprise to Council members that Sierra
Leoneans look with apprehension at developments in
its larger neighbour, Guinea. There is much at stake for
Sierra Leone. Should Guinea manage its democratic
transition well, it would make the subregion more
stable and give Sierra Leone wider options in solving
subregional problems, including cross-border trading
and subregional security concerns such as illicit drug
trafficking and illegal fishing. However, should the
democratic transition in Guinea be stalled or even
reversed, that could have serious negative
consequences for Sierra Leone. The ethnic, cultural
and geographical links between the two countries, the
long border with a number of yet unsolved issues, as
10-55258
well as the large quantities of small weapons in
Guinea, could make any potential conflict in Guinea
trickle down into Sierra Leone.

Against this background, I feel that we should all
commend President Koroma and his Liberian
counterpart, President Johnson-Sirleaf for their careful
approach in support of the democratic transition in
their fellow neighbouring country.

Finally, let me use this opportunity to share with
this Council some concerns about our own integrated
peacebuilding mission in Sierra Leone. When the
Secretary-General visited Sierra Leone, he wanted also
to draw attention to a successful United Nations
intervention and in particular to the new model of an
integrated peacebuilding mission that could serve as an
example to other United Nations interventions. We
have been able to prove that it is possible to draw down
from one of the largest peacekeeping missions into a
much smaller and purely civilian mission while
maintaining a credible political and development
engagement in the country. As I mentioned before, the
new peacebuilding mission costs Member States only
2.2 per cent of the previous peacekeeping operations.

Unfortunately, all of these successes and savings
have not translated into any increase in United Nations
financial resources for development purposes, in Sierra
Leone a key factor for our peacebuilding strategy. In
fact, funding to United Nations operations is steadily
declining. This is a worrying trend as it will no doubt
jeopardize the United Nations work and credibility. It
could also jeopardize the integrated approach to
peacebuilding. I intend to discuss this issue in more
detail at the Peacebuilding Commission meeting this
afternoon but would appreciate also the Council's
continued support.

Sierra Leone may today no longer be one of the
Council's most critical concerns today. And this is a
good sign. But I would urge the Council not to abandon
Sierra Leone completely: it is a potential success story,
not only for Sierra Leone but also for the Security
Council. Sierra Leone will continue to need the
Council as the United Nations will continue to need
Sierra Leone.

Finally, let me express here my thanks through
the Minister for Foreign Affairs to President Koroma
and his Government, members of the political parties
and civil society in Sierra Leone for their cooperation
and hospitality.
5
