Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset to
thank the Rwandan presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate. We are also grateful
to the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing.

Before I go further, the delegation of Indonesia
would like to associate itself with the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Like other members of the international community,
Indonesia remains concerned over the absence of
progress in the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Attempts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations between the two parties have been made to
no avail. Nonetheless, we are encouraged by the recent
efforts of the concerned parties to revive the path of
peace, and create an atmosphere conducive to progress.
In this regard, Indonesia remains fervently supportive
of the two-State solution of Israel and a viable and
independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living side by side in peace and security, on the
basis of the principle of land for peace and a just and
comprehensive peace consistent with relevant Security
Council resolutions, the road map of the Quartet, and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

Yet, Israeli policy in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially its continued illegal settlement
activities, continues to prove to be an intractable
obstacle towards that objective. Continued Israeli
settlement activity not only compounds the problem of
the fragmentation of the West Bank, but also signals
a complete absence of commitment to engaging the
Palestinians in fair and realistic negotiations.

In Gaza, the humanitarian situation remains
debilitating as Israel's severe blockade hinders the
movement of people and goods, thereby leading to
increasing unemployment and the shrinking of private
businesses and economic activities. Accordingly,
Indonesia again urges Israel to stop ignoring and defying
relevant United Nations resolutions and international
law, which it has done without repercussion or
consequence thus far.

It is discouraging to note that within the past year,
there has been only one positive development in the
Palestinian cause. That was last November's historic
admission to the United Nations of Palestine as a
non-member observer State. Regretably, that action of
the General Assembly was met with extreme retaliatory
measures by Israel. We are extremely concerned over
Israel's continued inhumane and unlawful detention and
imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians, including
children and women, who continue to be subjected to
mental and physical mistreatment without recourse to
just and impartial legal proceedings.

Many members of the international community,
including Indonesia, have persistently condemned
Israeli actions. Yet Israel continues to demonstrate
its disregard for international law. We call on the
international community to work harder to consolidate
our efforts against Israel's violations of international
law, and to ensure justice and freedom for the people
of Palestine.

On the situation in Syria, a humanitarian catastrophe
has regrettably continued to evolve, without proper
response from the international community, including
the Council. The situation on the ground has become
so dire that it now threatens the stability of the region.

Against this unfolding crisis, earnest efforts to stop
the violence must commence immediately. Members of
the Council must put their differences aside and find
the best way to convince all parties to the conflict to
halt the violence. The grave humanitarian situation on
the ground, particularly with reference to refugees and
displaced persons, must be addressed as a matter of
urgency. Finally, we must start without delay a political
process that will lead to a permanent solution to the
conflict, in accordance with the aspirations of the
Syrian people.

