Mr. Egunsola (Nigeria): Let me begin by Wishing, on
behalf of my delegation, Ambassador Merimee of France
all the best in his new assignment, and Godspeed.

My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his twelfth progress report on the
situation in Liberia and the performance of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). The
report, in our view, gives a fair account of the
developments on the ground since the adoption of
resolution 1001 (1995) on 30 June 1995. In that resolution,
the Security Council had demanded of the Liberian parties
certain conditions which they had to fulfil if UNOMIL's
mandate was to be renewed. It further requested of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
leaders a harmonization of their policies on Liberia.

I think it fair to say that a breakthrough in the search
for peace in Liberia has occurred following the successful
conclusion of the Abuja talks and the Agreement involving
the parties, which was signed on 19 August 1995, amending
and supplementing the Cotonou and Akosombo
Agreements, as subsequently clarified by the Accra
Agreement.

As a representative of Nigeria, whose Government and
people have made enormous sacrifices in the search for
peace in Liberia, I am pleased to note today the significant
steps that have been recorded by the Liberian parties under
the auspices of ECOWAS. Following the signing of the
Abuja Agreement, an effective cease-fire has been
established throughout Liberia. The Council of State has
been installed and is now functioning. The factions have
begun disengaging their forces, and we have a new
timetable and schedule of implementation of the
Agreements. Furthermore, the improved political and
security climate has had a positive impact on the delivery
of humanitarian assistance.

Prior to the Abuja Agreement, several other
agreements were signed and subsequently broken by the
parties. Nevertheless, there is a general feeling that there
exists a qualitative difference in the attitudes of the parties
to the new Agreement and in their commitment to a
peaceful settlement. We share this sense of optimism,
which is in large part due to the following factors: first, the
recognition by the leaders of the various factions that the
people of Liberia are genuinely weary of war; and,
secondly, the fact that the faction leaders themselves now
constitute the Council of State.

None the less, we realize that in spite of these
positive developments, the real test of the new
commitment to peace by the Liberian parties lies in their
readiness to implement the key aspects of the Agreement,
particularly disengagement, encampment and
disarmament, as provided for in the revised schedule and
timetable.

The ECOWAS leaders have played their part, and
the Liberian parties have done what the Security Council
asked of them. They now wait to see what the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, is prepared to do in assisting the Liberian parties
to implement all their Agreements and to support
ECOMOG, the subregional initiative that has the primary
responsibility, under the Cotonou and subsequent
Agreements, for the implementation of the key aspects of
the Agreement. The Secretary-General has rightly
observed, in paragraph 40 of his report, that While the
success of the peace process in Liberia is primarily
dependent upon the goodwill of the Liberian parties, there
are several critical elements in this process, which require
the full involvement and support of the international
community. These include disarmament and
demobilization, the reintegration into civilian life of an
estimated 50,000 to 60,000 combatants, and assistance to
ECOMOG.

ECOMOG has so far been hampered in the
performance of its complex task by a lack of financial
and logistical resources. Without the necessary resources,
ECOMOG cannot deploy across the country to oversee
the full implementation of the various aspects of the
Abuja Agreement. Response to the Trust Fund set up by
the Secretary-General has to date not been very
encouraging. While we thank those Member States that
have contributed to peace efforts and to the Trust Fund,
we have to say that more needs to be done in support of
ECOMOG. In this regard, we hope the proposal of the
Secretary-General to organize a pledging conference for
Liberia, specifically to raise the resources needed by
ECOMOG, will soon get off the ground, and we appeal
to the international community to respond generously.

Concerning the draft resolution before us, my
delegation is happy to go along with the
Secretary-General's recommendation for a renewal of
UNOMIL's mandate until 31 January 1996. However, we
would have wished for a commitment from the Council

 

at this stage to a restoration of UN OMIL to its full strength
as a firm expression of political support and of the
commitment of the Council to the Liberian peace process.
We note, however, the ongoing discussions between
ECOMOG and UNOMIL about a new concept of operation
for UNOMIL, including its relationship with ECOMOG,
and we look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendation in that regard.

Finally, my delegation's message to the Liberian
parties is something that we have said in the past: that all
we can do as Member States of the region, and indeed what
our collective efforts as members of the international
community can do, is to create an enabling environment for
negotiation and dialogue among the parties. It is left to
them to take advantage of the opportunity thus created to
work for peace. They have let many such opportunities slip
away, and we urge them not to allow this one to suffer a
similar fate.

My delegation will, of course, vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

