Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly welcome you back, Mr. Minister, to the
presidency chair, together with your fellow Ministers
from Africa in this room. I am delighted that we also
have among us senior representatives of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development (PCASED), whose briefings to us this
morning were important.

Mr. President, congratulations on the
establishment of this workshop, which we
enthusiastically support. Small arms and light weapons
are the predominant instruments of conflict in a great
majority of recent conflicts, and it is estimated that at
least half a million people die every year as a result of
their use. This is something rightly of concern to the
Security Council.

Illegal trafficking in small arms and light
weapons threatens international peace and security. It is
closely connected with other forms of international
organized crime and with terrorism. It poses a complex
challenge, involving security, humanitarian and
development dimensions. This is, sadly, too well-
illustrated in West Africa, where small arms in the
hands of rebels have exacerbated and prolonged
conflicts.

Action needs to be taken by various players in
different forums: first, we warmly encourage ECOWAS
to work on practical steps to implement the well-
constructed Moratorium it adopted in 1998. Mr.
Chambas has described how this is being done. The
Presidential Statement we are to adopt this morning
includes several suggestions, including establishing an
ECOWAS register of small arms and light weapons,
strengthening national commissions, and introducing
standardized end-user certificates for imported
weapons. We encourage donors to provide additional
assistance to ECOWAS to meet these challenges. And I
would like to know whether the Executive Secretary
can tell us more precisely what is needed in terms of
items and cost, so that donors can respond to the
requirements of his organization.

Secondly, we also encourage arms producing and
exporting countries to exercise the highest degree of
responsibility in small arms and light weapons
transactions. The Governments of those States that
transfer small arms and light weapons bear a
significant responsibility for controlling trade in such
weapons. Strengthening export controls has to be an
important step in the right direction. This includes
careful scrutiny, not only of end-user certificates, but
also of the wider environment in which the weapons
are to be deployed.

The United Kingdom held a conference in
London in January during which participants
recognized the central role for the United Nations in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. This conference discussed how to strengthen
efforts to implement relevant commitments in the
United Nations Programme of Action. These include
the need for States to have adequate laws and
procedures to exercise effective control over these
weapons transfers, as well as to assess applications for
export authorizations according to strict national
regulations and procedures. We look forward to
working with partners to follow up the conclusions of
this conference.

In this context, we welcome the establishment of
the United Nations group of governmental experts that
examines the feasibility of developing an international
instrument, enabling States to identify and trace illicit
small arms and light weapons. We believe that the
Council itself must take a close interest in how all
these initiatives are followed up and implemented.

Thirdly, it is crucial that United Nations sanctions
are more effectively implemented. This was the
motivation behind the proposal by the United Kingdom
and France last year for an independent monitoring
mechanism on sanctions. Mechanisms need to be
developed to strengthen the capacity to enforce United
Nations arms embargoes at the national, regional and
international levels. We would like to work further with
Council partners on this.

Others have made interesting proposals this
morning. The Foreign Minister of Gambia, for
instance, has pointed to the need for an international
legal instrument to hold those who foster the small
arms trade to greater account and for an international
convention on mercenaries. We would be happy to
consider these and other ideas, as well as ways of
promoting greater coordination between all the
different mechanisms and concepts in these areas.

In conclusion, we believe that trade in small arms
and light weapons poses real and urgent problems. The
human dimension of these problems, including their
impact on women and families, should be a powerful
incentive for Governments throughout the world, not

just in West Africa, to coordinate their efforts in
combating the proliferation of these deadly weapons.

The Council must therefore, from today onwards,
act to ensure that ideas for curtailing the trade are put
into effect and make a difference where it matters, in
West Africa and elsewhere. The Presidential Statement
we are considering is a good start and has our support.

