Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing.

I welcome Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, to the Chamber to deliver his statement. I
have also listened very carefully to the statement by
Ms. Citaku.

Resolution 1244 (1995) provides the important
legal foundation for resolving the question of Kosovo.
All parties should adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
reach a settlement acceptable to all through dialogue
and negotiation within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands the country's legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo and appreciates its
efforts to achieve a political settlement of the question
of Kosovo. Currently, the security situation in the
Kosovo region remains relatively stable, although many
underlying complex issues remain. China welcomes the
continued contact between Belgrade and Pristina and
efforts to push the dialogue into a new phase. We hope
that the two sides will remain committed to the general
direction of a political settlement, resume high-level
political dialogue as soon as possible, continuously

implement the agreements already reached and
gradually increase mutual trust so as to establish
favourable conditions, thereby ultimately resolving
differences peacefully.

For the ethnic communities in Kosovo,
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence serve the
common interests of all and meet the needs of the
development and prosperity of Kosovo and other
countries in the region. China hopes that all parties
will always put the well-being of their people first,
take effective measures to protect the legitimate rights
and interests of all communities in Kosovo, avoid any
rhetoric that might escalate tensions, and safeguard the
peace, stability and development of the Balkans. The
Security Council should keep its attention focused
on the question of Kosovo, and remain committed to
promoting its proper settlement.

China supports the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tanin in discharging its duties in accordance
with its mandate and in constructively cooperating with
all sides. We hope that UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
will work in close collaboration, make steady headway
in improving the situation on the ground and play a
positive and constructive role for the early settlement
of the question of Kosovo.

