Mr. Naidu (Fiji): Fiji congratulates the United
Kingdom and you personally, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency, and we commend you for promptly
convening this open debate.

Fiji sees both peacekeeping and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) as solid reinforcements of the
Charter goal of maintaining international peace and
security, for which the Security Council is the
mandated organ. It is inconceivable that one stands to
threaten the other. They must be nurtured and
encouraged to grow together, rather than one
undermining the other.

Fiji has continued to contribute peacekeeping
personnel since joining the United Nations some 30
years ago. Fiji was also the fifth Member State to have
ratified the Rome Statute, which it did on 29 November
1999. We did so with the full knowledge that the
Statute permits States parties to repatriate their
personnel serving in missions or operations abroad to
be subjected to its national legal jurisdiction under the
principle of complementarity set out in article 17. Fiji
has, in fact, taken this course of action in a few recent
cases. We are also confident that mischievous,
malicious allegations or complaints will be screened by
a majority decision of judges in the Court's Pre-Trial
Chamber and in review in the Appellate Chamber.
These mechanisms safeguard the integrity and the
impartiality of the Court against politically motivated
claims.

It is for this reason that my Government ratified
the Rome Statute. We do not see the ICC as a threat to
international peace and security. As such, we definitely
do not object to article 16 of the Rome Statute, which
is concerned primarily with security threats or
breaches, or acts of aggression under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

The emergence of the ICC at this juncture can
only lend support to the emerging global vision to
boost preventive diplomacy - or conflict
prevention- peace-building and peacemaking. This
shifting focus is a positive global step that is reflective
of the mood of rapprochement at the end of the
twentieth century. The deep scars of the world wars of
that century created the need for international
governance and peacekeeping by the United Nations.
We now celebrate relative world peace; we recognize
where genocide aggression and crimes against
humanity have occurred and where, hopefully, they
have been averted; and we move forward the process of
building peace and preventing conflict. We can achieve
these goals with the United Nations as robust as it is
today, more enlightened and positively invigorated to
take the goals of the Organization and the Charter
higher than when they were first espoused, over 50
years ago - even more so with the ICC on board.

Under Article 24 of the Charter, the United
Nations membership confers on the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In carrying out its
duties under that responsibility, the Security Council
acts on our behalf - collectively - making this open
meeting a critical discussion that will assist you in your
task, Mr. President, of settling this difficult question
expeditiously and amicably. Moreover, the Security
Council's functions and powers, including those set out
in Chapter VII, do not include amending treaties. To do
that would violate established principles of
international treaty law.

Based on those considerations, Fiji cautions that
granting the concessions contained in the draft
resolutions would set a dangerous precedent, with
drastic consequences, and most certainly would
compromise the underlying principles and the integrity
of both the ICC and the Security Council.

