Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Like other delegations,
let me thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting
today on Bougainville. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Sir Kieran Prendergast, for his useful and
comprehensive briefing on developments in the
Bougainville peace process.

We commend the authorities and the people of
Bougainville for their continuing commitment to
implement the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
Bougainville is yet another concrete example where the
Security Council and the international community, and
especially the neighbouring countries, are playing a
significant role in taking the peace process forward.

We take particular note of the progress towards
achievement of the goals set in the Peace Agreement,
signed at Arawa on 30 August 2001. We are happy to
learn that agreements have now been concluded on the
issue of a referendum to determine the eventual
political future of Bougainville, within the framework
of the constitution of Papua New Guinea.

We share the view that the peace process is on the
right track, despite some setbacks. The Bougainville
Peace Agreement is indeed a major watershed in the
political history of Bougainville and Papua New
Guinea.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
and support to the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) which, despite its small size,
has done a remarkable job in actively coordinating,
implementing and carrying out the agreed weapons
disposal plan. We are happy to note that, despite
practical difficulties, UNPOB has successfully carried
out the stage I process in the weapons disposal plan.
We are, however, concerned about the information Sir
Kieran has just given us on the growing number of
incidents in which trunks and containers have been
forced open and guns removed. These incidents would
negatively impact on the good work performed by
UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring Group and can risk
derailing the whole process, thereby hampering the
completion of stage II. We commend, however, the
initiatives undertaken by the senior commanders, both
from the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and the
Bougainville Resistance Forces, in investigating,
advising and encouraging the offenders to return these
weapons. We hope those responsible will do so in the
interest of peace and stability.

The progress in weapons disposal is inextricably
linked to the establishment of the autonomous
Bougainville government by the legal device which
makes the provision on autonomy and referendum in
the new part XIV of the national constitution
conditional upon verification and certification by
UNPOB that stage II of the agreed weapons disposal
plan has been achieved. It is therefore extremely
important for everyone to ensure the completion of the
weapons disposal plan. We are pleased to note that a
total of 1,684 guns have so far been disposed of,
including 301 high-powered factory made weapons. We
urge the people of Bougainville to strictly respect the
provisions of the Plan and put aside political and other
differences in the spirit of community building.

As in any peace process, reconciliation and the
reintegration of ex-combatants remain absolute
priorities to ensure long term and sustainable peace.
The early reintegration of former combatants and their
engagement into gainful employment should therefore
be addressed urgently. We appreciate the setting up of
the Bougainville Ex-Combatants Trust Fund account,
established under AusAID. We encourage the donor
communities to inject more funds into this programme
for its effective implementation.

The peace-building process in Bougainville
cannot be realizable without heavy investment in the
reconstruction of the infrastructure and the restoration
of civil authority. My delegation recognizes and
welcomes the desire of the Bougainville people to
participate actively in the rebuilding of their province.
It is therefore important that priority be given to health,
education, agriculture and basic infrastructure. No
peace dividend would be possible without progress in
these fields. We appeal to the international community
to provide assistance in this regard.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that there
has been significant progress, even though the initial
timetable has not been respected due to circumstances
not attributable to the responsibility of the parties in
the implementation of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. We strongly believe that the Security
Council must continue to remain fully engaged in the
process and we therefore support the request of the
Government of Papua New Guinea, as well as the
decision of the Secretary-General, to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville, which expires on 31 December 2002, for
a further 12-month period.
