Mr. Djani (Indonesia): After hearing the statement made by my dear brother Christoph Heusgen, it seems that we are already leaving the Council. But on a more serious note, I would also like to echo my fellow co-penholder, Christoph from Germany, as Indonesia expresses its sincere appreciation to all members of the Council for their support on resolution 2543 (2020), on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as the support extended to us as co-penholders. The unanimous adoption of the resolution renewing UNAMA's mandate sends a strong signal of support to the people of Afghanistan from the Security Council and the international community. The spirit of cooperation and solidarity shown during the negotiations on the resolution was profound. We take pride in this collective effort and the wisdom of the Council, which has resulted in a comprehensive, robust and timely renewal of the mandate of UNAMA. Indeed, this is a critical moment in history. The peace negotiations started on 12 September in Doha. It is the start of a process that Indonesia welcomes with the fervent hope that it will lead to the fulfilment of the long-awaited aspiration of all Afghans to a peaceful, prosperous and united homeland. We wish the negotiators and interlocutors the very best in their work. As Afghanistan embarks on this new journey towards reconciliation and peace, the role of UNAMA becomes even more important. A number of aspects of the mandate of UNAMA have been laid out in the resolution. They all are vital, and hence continued attention to and support for them will promote conducive conditions in the country and foster the flow of peace negotiations. These range, among other things, from supporting the Government of Afghanistan on future elections and electoral reform processes to supporting regional cooperation for peace and stability, as well as from supporting the Government on the protection and promotion of human rights, including strengthening safeguards for children and women, to supporting the Government in undertaking governance reforms and development. UNAMA's contribution will certainly be essential. We hope that the Council and other partners will continue to accord befitting support to Afghanistan and to UNAMA. Indonesia is honoured to have been the co-penholder along with my colleagues from Germany, and, as a long-standing supporter of peace and well- being in Afghanistan, we will continue to do what we can for our Afghan brothers and sisters, be it though our multisectoral capacity-building and _ training programmes or as a dialogue facilitator to assist them in realizing the peaceful and prosperous country that they fully deserve. Our patience, our undertakings, our support and our love for the people of Afghanistan have been a vital part of our contribution during our terms in the Security Council. Rest assured that Indonesia, during the remainder of its term in the Council and beyond, will continue to work tirelessly to garner support for Afghanistan bilaterally and multilaterally. We are convinced that the dawn of a new era in which all people in Afghanistan can once again live in peace and harmony is nearer than it appears. Before closing, we would also like to commend our co-penholder, Germany - I was not yet counting, but he mentioned 20 months, which seems like a short time - as well as the experts and the political coordinators, whose contribution and support have been invaluable. I thank all the experts who have engaged in the negotiations constructively, and, as I mentioned earlier, the resolution before us has been made possible by the combined and collective wisdom and efforts of the Council.
