Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I, too, wish to tell my friend,
Ambassador Francis Butagira, now that he is leaving
us, how deeply we have appreciated his effective
contributions to the work of the Security Council. I
wish him all the best in his future duties.

Mr. President, we would also like to thank you
and the entire French delegation for your choice of this
subject, which is most timely. We have no doubt that
today's debate will contribute to enriching our
thinking on one of the important activities of the
United Nations - peacekeeping operations.

We also would like to thank Mr. Le Roy,
Ms. Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for their statements.

In a world in which crises are more complex than
ever, where the resolution of conflicts often favours the
use of the force and violence, ensuring international
peace and security, as is done by the United Nations, is
no easy task. It is all the more difficult when the
soldiers of peace become potential targets of fighters or
are themselves responsible for reprehensible acts.

Most fortunately, and despite a few missteps, the
Organization is discharging its mission fairly well.
Moreover, it is tirelessly working to adapt to new
paradigms of conflict. Thus, it has decided to
incorporate in the field of action of peacekeeping
operations such issues as humanitarian and human
rights issues, electoral assistance, demining,
disarmament, the demobilization and reintegration of
fighters, the strengthening of cooperation with regional
organizations, and so on. All of those are things that
require, if not a new approach, a different way of
dealing with peacekeeping operations, from the
establishment or alteration of a mandate to the
organization and coordination of participants on the
ground.

Various developments in countries in conflict
have underscored the need to strengthen the capacity of
peacekeeping operations by giving them mandates with
clearly defined goals and command structures. In
addition, they should also have the appropriate
logistical capabilities and financing to enable them to
be more effective on the ground. Along the same lines,
it is essential to share best practices in order to enhance
effectiveness.

The slow pace of deployment in urgent situations
is another area of concern. As recommended in the
Brahimi report (S/2000/ 809), we should work to ensure
that delays are reasonable. In that regard, the troubled
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur provides us with a perfect
illustration of the efforts that still need to be carried
out.

Effective coordination is one of the keys to the
success of peacekeeping operations. We must therefore
decisively improve communication and coordination
among the various bodies involved in the decision-
making process, namely, the Fifth Committee, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies
and programmes and the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations.

There has already been substantial progress with
regard to the process of planning for integrated
missions. It is important that that be strengthened by
better coordination and unity of purpose with regard to
efforts on the ground. The effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the credibility of the
United Nations also hinge on the policy of zero
tolerance, which my delegation strongly supports.

With regard to cooperation with Member States,
it is important to improve relations between those who
plan, coordinate and manage peacekeeping operations
and the troop-contributing countries. The experience
and specific knowledge of those countries can
contribute to the planning process as well as to
clarifying the decision-making process. It would
therefore be useful to strengthen the system of three-
way communication between troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.

As has been pointed out in the Council itself, the
maintenance of international peace and security is both
a shared and collective responsibility. Member States
should therefore continue to support the Organization
by deploying contingents and mobilizing the necessary
resources of all kinds. For its part, my country, which
has made contributing to the settlement of conflicts a
major focus of its foreign policy, continues to honour
its commitments in that regard.

The planning process should not ignore the role
of the host country, upon which the success of a
peacekeeping mission sometimes depends. To that end,
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
it is important to clearly bear in mind the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. Peacekeeping operations must be carried out
both with the consent of the host country and in an
impartial way.

The contributions of subregional and regional
organizations are crucial to the success of the
operations deployed by the United Nations. Being
close to the protagonists in a conflict and to the reality
on the ground, those organizations, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, play an
important and unique role in that regard. Unfortunately,
the demands of some conflicts are such that regional
arrangements do not yet have the necessary resources
to meet the task.

That reality is most in evidence, and the
consequences most tragic, on the African continent,
which, unfortunately, is where most of the world's
areas of tension are found. Such is the case with the
African Union Mission in Somalia, whose current
configuration does not allow it to address the
challenges of the conflict in that country. The adoption
of resolution 1863 (2009) was an important step that
must be followed up as soon as possible, for in Somalia
time is against those who are working towards peace
and national reconciliation.

We therefore urge the international community to
support the efforts of the African Union, both in
Somalia and elsewhere on the continent. We also
appeal for greater support for the efforts of African
subregional organizations, which are essential but often
forgotten links in the chain of peace.

The right to security and protection for which the
United Nations is working requires that we accord the
same attention to saving, comforting and helping
people in dire situations or in places where there is
need. At the same time, the Organization, first and
foremost the Security Council, must continue to
emphasize the prevention of conflict by strengthening
mechanisms for early warning and rapid reaction.
Above all, it must invest further in eradicating the
underlying causes of conflict through coordinated,
well-planned and coherent efforts. Only development
and the full realization of people's potential, supported
by effective preventive diplomacy, as required, will
make it possible to ensure peace and to alleviate the
situations of the already overburdened peacekeeping
operations.

In conclusion, allow me to express our great
appreciation to peacekeepers, who, under extremely
difficult conditions and at the risk of their lives, make
an invaluable contribution to the establishment of a
safer world. We unreservedly condemn deliberate
attacks on United Nations forces, for which there is no
justification whatever.

