Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Yesterday the Croatian Government and the local
Serbian authorities signed the Basic Agreement on the
question of Eastern Slavonia. This is a gratifying step taken
by the two parties concerned, through the mediation of the
United Nations and the international community, in the
comprehensive settlement of the Croatian question through
peaceful negotiations. The Chinese delegation welcomes
this development.

We have all along held that, in any settlement of the
Croatian question, the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Croatia should be respected and that the
Croatian Government and the local Serbian authorities
should seek a solution acceptable to both sides to the
conflict, through peaceful negotiation. We hope that the
parties will implement in earnest the Agreement that has
been reached and will each do all they can to secure a
comprehensive political settlement of the Croatian question.
This would also facilitate the process of securing a
comprehensive settlement of the question of the former
Yugoslavia.

On the basis of this position, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before the
Council.

We also note that the Basic Agreement contains some
requests to the United Nations and the Security Council,
including one concerning authorization by the Council of
the establishment of a Transitional Administration and an
international force. These requests involve many
complicated political and legal issues. We therefore need to
conduct careful studies and discussions and to refrain from
making hasty decisions as to how the United Nations might
facilitate and participate in the implementation of the peace
plan in the region, following progress in the peace process.
It would be both illogical and unreasonable to ask the
Council to commit itself in advance to future participation.
The Council should be particularly prudent in its
consideration of such major issues involving important
decisions.

