Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU), Mr. Zachary
Muburi-Muita, for his informative briefing. I also
congratulate him on his appointment to that very
important and demanding post.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the early
activities of the Office. We are convinced that it will
contribute significantly, in close cooperation with
subregional actors, to the promotion of peace and
stability in Africa. The mandate of the UNOAU
includes enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the areas of
peace and security as well as providing support to
better engage the AU in these areas. The importance of
providing coordinated and consistent United Nations
support to the African Union, in terms of long-term
institutional capacity-building and short-term
operational support, cannot be overemphasized.

The UNOAU integrated three offices: the United
Nations Liaison Office to the African Union, the
African Union Peacekeeping Support Team and the
United Nations Planning Team for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, as well as support elements of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur Joint Support Coordination Mechanism. This
integration will strengthen cooperation and the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which is of key importance for
security, stability and durable peace on the African
continent. My delegation believes that this concrete
step will also improve cooperation between the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
and contribute to minimizing duplication of effort.

Besides the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the Office will play a
leading role in the implementation of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union.
As noted in the relevant report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/54), the lack of a well-defined
programme of work related to the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme and of resources has negatively
affected implementation efforts.

UNOAU should continue to work with African
Union institutions to implement the Programme within
the framework of the Regional Coordination
Mechanism. The success of this endeavour will depend
on the leadership and ownership of the African Union
Commission and the effective provision by the United
Nations of regional support in line with the
Commission's priorities. To that end, building AU
management capacity is essential as part of the
transition to a more predictable funding process.

Much has been achieved in the context of the
relationship between the two organizations, on the
basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. There are a number of noteworthy recent
positive examples of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, such as the activities of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
aimed at the resolution of the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire
and the role of the Economic Community of West
African States in resolving the Ivorian post-election
conflict.

It is therefore critical to develop a broader
strategic framework for partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. Meetings of the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security in New York and Addis Ababa
should contribute to a better focus on strategic and
specific issues relating to the African continent that are
relevant and of interest to both organizations. The
United Nations-African Union partnership must be
built on a shared vision and advantages.

Finally, we emphasize that cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union has become
increasingly important in addressing various challenges
and issues of concern in the areas of peace and
security. Bosnia and Herzegovina supports all United
Nations efforts and welcomes the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations and donors in mobilizing
resources that can contribute to strengthening the

African Union and its structure so as to better deal with
conflicts and to help maintain peace and security in
Africa.

