Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the convening of this open debate on
Afghanistan. I wish to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan has a bearing
on the fundamental interests of the Afghan people,
as well as regional security, stability, development
and prosperity. China commends the efforts of the
Afghan Government in promoting national stability,
reconciliation and economic development, and
appreciates the constructive help of the neighbours of
Afghanistan and the relevant countries in the region.

Afghanistan faces daunting challenges in the
political, economic and security sectors. Recently,
the security situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated,
with frequent armed conflicts and terrorist incidents
leading to massive civilian casualties, which has
captured the attention of all parties. It is imperative
for the international community to step up efforts in
taking comprehensive measures to promote the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan so as to help
the country overcome difficulties and get through this
challenging period.

First of all, priority should be given to the prompt
restoration of security and stability in the country. The
international community should vigorously support
the capacity-building efforts of the Afghan national
security forces to improve its self-defence capabilities
in order to effectively cope with the threats posed by
terrorism, cross-border crime and drug trafficking.
The international community should stick to a unified
standard in enhancing coordination and cooperation to
fight against terrorist forces in Afghanistan, cut off the
supply of funds and weapons to terrorist organizations,
prevent the inflow and return of terrorist combatants,
curb the spread of terrorist ideology and eliminate the
root causes of terrorism.

Secondly, promoting the national reconciliation
process is an important foundation for the long-term
peace and stability of the country. Parties in Afghanistan
should bear in mind the future of the country and the
interests of its people by actively participating in
the reconciliation process, resolve differences and
conflicts and restore trust through dialogue with a View
to finding a solution that is acceptable to all.

The peace agreement between the Afghan
Government and the Hezb-i Islami (Gulbuddin)
should be implemented, which will serve as a model
for further promoting national reconcil the country.
The international community should continue its full
support for an inclusive reconciliation process that is
led and owned by the Afghan people and encourage the
parties concerned in Afghanistan to launch peace talks
as soon as possible.

Thirdly, strengthening governance capabilities is an
important guarantee for peace and reconstruction in the
country. Afghan issues should ultimately be managed by
the Afghan people. All political factions in Afghanistan
should strengthen unity, resolve differences through
dialogue and consultations and reach consensus in order
to build strong and effective governance capabilities.
The international community should respect the right
of the Afghan people to independently choose their
political system and path to development. Meanwhile,
in the light of the national development strategy and
Afghanistan's special needs, targeted assistance should
be provided to help the Afghan Government improve its
governance capabilities.

Fourthly, integration in regional development
is a viable solution for peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan. The international community should
actively honour its commitments to provide assistance
and support the economic and social development
of the country. Afghanistan enjoys advantages in
resources and geographic location, which brings about
great prospects for regional cooperation. As resolution
2344 (2017) and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions stipulate, parties should be committed
to creating a community with a shared destiny in a
spirit of cooperation in which everyone wins, and to
promoting the economic and social development of
Afghanistan and regional cooperation through the Belt
and Road Initiative. We hope that parties will actively
encourage the alignment of the Afghanistan national
development strategy with the Belt and Road Initiative,
improve links between Afghanistan and Central Asia
and other neighbouring countries and provide security
guarantees for the implementation of relevant projects
so as to help Afghanistan achieve regional development
and capitalize on shared development opportunities.

China commends the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
hopes UNAMA will play an active role in helping
Afghanistan restore stability, advance national
reconciliation, improve its governance capabilities
and promote economic and social development. China
will continue to support UNAMA's work. China hopes
that the ongoing strategic review will help UNAMA
focus more on peace, reconciliation and development,
strengthen its capabilities in coordinating international
support, further optimize resource allocation, improve
the management process and enhance its ability to cope
with complicated situations.

China has always been a friendly neighbour to
Afghanistan and respects the country's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We have been
promoting the peace and reconciliation process in
Afghanistan through the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group - made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and
the United States. We support Afghanistan's efforts to
eliminate the threats of terrorism, extremism and drug-
related crime, in order to achieve peace, stability and
prosperity as soon as possible. China will continue to
support Afghanistan in stepping up capacity-building
in the security sector and we support an active role
by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in helping
Afghanistan combat terrorism. China supports
Afghanistan's integration in regional cooperation and
actively promotes the alignment of the Belt and Road
Initiative with the Afghanistan national development
strategy. We stand ready to work with the international
community to make unremitting efforts in promoting
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan as
soon as possible.

