Mr. Madrakhimov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I want to express our sincere
condolences in connection with the sudden death of the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
Vitaly Ivanovich Churkin. We were stunned and deeply
saddened by this news. The memory of this wonderful
and bright person will always remain with us. We
offer our support and condolences to the family of
Vitaly Churkin and all our colleagues in the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

At the outset, I would like to thank the Ukrainian
presidency for convening this open debate on the the
topic "Maintenance of international peace and security:
conflicts in Europe", and for submitting the concept
note on the topic (S/2017/108, annex).
International peace and security are faced
nowadays with many threats and challenges, and it is
important that the United Nations and regional and other
organizations enhance their cooperation to address
them comprehensively and effectively. The Charter
of the OIC reaffirms the commitment of its Member
States to the Charter of the United Nations and stresses
their determination to contribute to international
peace and security, understanding and dialogue among
civilizations, cultures and religions, and to promote and
encourage friendly relations and good-neighbourliness,
mutual respect and cooperation.

The OIC is an important partner of the United
Nations in promoting peace, security and post-
conflict reconstruction, fostering a culture of peace
and enhancing cooperation in the humanitarian,
human rights, social, economic and cultural fields.
In its presidential statement of 28 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/16), the Security Council recognized and
further encouraged the active contribution of the OIC to
the work of the United Nations towards the realization
of the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations.

The OIC has consistently expressed its principled
position on the conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan. Most recently, that position was reiterated
at the thirteenth Islamic Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the OIC Member States, held in
April 2016 in Istanbul, and during the forty-third
session of the OIC Council of Foreign Ministers, held
in October 2016 in Tashkent.

In the final communique of the thirteenth Islamic
Summit and in the special resolution adopted by the OIC
Council of Foreign Ministers, the OIC Member States,
inter alia, reaffirmed that the acquisition of territory
by use of force was inadmissible under the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, urged the
strict implementation of Security Council resolutions
822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993) and
the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal
of the armed forces of Armenia from the Nagorno
Karabakh region and other occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, and called for the resolution of the conflict
on the basis of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of the internationally recognized borders
of Azerbaijan.

Following the decision of the thirteenth Islamic
Summit, the Contact Group on the aggression of
the Republic of Armenia against the Republic of
Azerbaijan was established within the OIC. At its first
ministerial-level meeting, held on 19 September 2016
in New York, on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly at its seventy-first session,
the Contact Group, inter alia, stressed the importance
of putting the conflict at the top of the international
agenda in order to find a negotiated settlement. The
OIC looks forward to working closely with the United
Nations, the OSCE and other partners in fostering the
earliest possible resolution of the conflict, based on the
aforementioned position, and to bringing peace and
stability to the region.

In conclusion, I would like to express once again
the commitment of the OIC to remaining a strong and
active partner of the United Nations in addressing
issues of mutual interest and concern and in promoting
global peace, security and development.

