Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): The Security Council is
about to adopt a draft resolution extending the relevant
provisions of resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997) for a
further period of six months to ensure the continuity of the
oil-for-food programme instituted by this Council as a
temporary and subsidiary measure to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and mitigate the unintended
effects of measures imposed on that country.

The Polish delegation remains strongly committed to
the humanitarian objectives of the programme, whose
complexity and unique character has been underlined by the
Secretary-General in his latest report concerning this issue.

Having examined this document, we note with great
concern that despite the ongoing implementation of the
humanitarian programme for almost 12 months now, the
people in Iraq continue to be confronted with serious
nutritional shortages and a lack of adequate health care. In
addressing this very serious and painful problem, we wish
to reaffirm our view that full normalization of the critical
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi population will be
possible only after Iraq has fulfilled its obligations by
responding in a positive and decisive fashion to the Security
Council decisions, thus allowing the Council to lift the
present sanctions regime.

Nevertheless, we believe that at this juncture the
Security Council, which is determined to avoid any further
deterioration of the current humanitarian crisis, should make
every effort to ensure that the programme under resolution
986 (1995) effectively addresses the essential needs of the
Iraqi people, who are bearing the brunt of the sanctions
regime.

We share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-
General in his report, and we see an urgent need to review,
and possibly improve, the process of the implementation of
the programme in all of its aspects, including procedures
and working methods; the level of necessary cooperation
of the Iraqi authorities; the unsatisfactory pace of the
arrival of humanitarian supplies in Iraq; the operating
difficulties of the distribution system; the nutritional value
of the current food basket, especially in relation to the
pressing needs of the vulnerable groups; and the adequacy
of the revenues currently envisaged to meet Iraq's priority
humanitarian requirements.

With regard to the latter issue, we note with concern
the observation of the Secretary-General contained in his
report that even if all of the humanitarian supplies
provided under resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997)
were to arrive in time in Iraq, they would be insufficient
to address, even as a temporary measure, all the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, given their scale
and urgency.

In this context, we wish to express our satisfaction
at the fact that the present draft resolution notes with
appreciation the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Council re-examine the adequacy of revenues and
consider the possibility o£ increasing them in accordance
with the priority needs to be determined by the Secretary-
General.

I wish to point out that we are grateful to the
Secretary-General for the steps he has already taken to
define those priority requirements, and we welcome his
readiness to submit to the Council the results of this work
by the end of January next year.

We are confident that the Council will find ways to
respond positively to all of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on how best to meet the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people by enhancing the efficiency and
adequacy of the programme.

We note with appreciation the progress that has been
made by the Committee established by resolution 661
(1990) in refining and clarifying its working procedures,
and we endorse the encouragement addressed to the
Committee in the present draft resolution to continue its
efforts in that direction in order to expedite the approval
process.

Finally, we wish to express our earnest hope that the
present draft resolution, as well as the efforts that will be
undertaken by the Council as a follow-up to the
supplementary report of the Secretary-General, will
contribute effectively to the alleviation of the acute
humanitarian crisis in Iraq. That is a goal shared by all

 

members of the Security Council as well as by the
international community at large.

Poland will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

