Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report, and to thank
Mr. Cheikh Tidiane Sy, Representative of the
Secretary-General, for further updating us on the
situation. We are also grateful to the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and of the
World Bank for their briefings.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the enormous
amount of work done by Mr. Sy and the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) in promoting and protecting
human rights and strengthening the capacity of the law
enforcement agencies there.

The political, economic and social situation in the
Central African Republic is currently of great concern.
We have noted the absence of dialogue between the
Government and the opposition and the refusal of the
opposition to cooperate with the Government, which is
leading to tension in their relationship. Hostilities have
increased, particularly in recent weeks, creating a
serious impediment to national reconciliation, and we
should like to express our concern in this regard. We
hope that all the parties in the Central African Republic
will summon up the political will to adopt specific
measures. In particular, the Government and the
opposition should undertake the necessary dialogue and
alleviate the tension, thereby creating favourable
conditions for bringing about national reconciliation.
At the same time, we believe that the United Nations
should further facilitate dialogue and reconciliation
between the Government and the opposition.

It should be recognized that any deterioration in
the social and economic situation in the Central
African Republic would, in turn, have a negative
impact on political reconciliation in that country and
increase social unrest. China welcomes the intention of
the Bretton Woods institutions to provide financial
support to the Central African Republic. We hope that
the Bretton Woods institutions and other donors will
increase their financial support to the Central African
Republic. We hope that all those donors who pledged at
the most recent special meeting, held in New York in
May, will implement their commitments, and we call
upon them to do so in order to help the Central African
Republic deal with its present difficulties.
We also hope that debt relief measures will be
implemented even sooner. During the most recent
forum on Central Africa, we announced that we would
write off certain debts owed to China by the Central
African Republic, and we hope that that action will
contribute to increasing and improving the economic
situation there. The international community should
certainly consider long-term measures to improve the
social and economic situation.

We have also noted that the Government of the
Central African Republic has taken specific actions to
re-establish its national defence and security forces. We
express our concern about the fact that BONUCA
convoys have been held up and attacked, and we hope
that the Central African Republic will adopt effective
measures to punish those responsible for those criminal
activities and to guarantee the safety and security of
BONUCA personnel and property.

We support the mission of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to assess on the ground the
negative impact of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the Central African
Republic. We hope that the parties concerned will unite
their efforts to create favourable external conditions for
the early realization of national reconciliation and to
improve social and economic conditions in the Central
African Republic.

In conclusion, we support the presidential
statement to be issued later.

