Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this briefing on the human rights situation
in South Sudan. I thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, for their respective briefings
following their recent visit to South Sudan. I would
also like to recognize the Ambassador of South Sudan,
Ambassador Deng.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's dispatch of
several United Nations teams to South Sudan to monitor
the situation on the ground and for his unequivocal
messages to both the South Sudan leadership and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition.

On 14 July 2011, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 65/308, introduced by Rwanda on behalf of
the African Group, admitting the Republic of South
Sudan as the l93rd State Member of the United Nations.
As we admitted that young nation, it was with hope,
anticipation and pride that the international community
stood ready to accompany South Sudan as it built its
State institutions and forged a united South Sudan for
all its citizens. However, three years later, considering
the widespread killing of civilians and the human rights
situation described by our briefers today and emphasized
by Ambassador Samantha Power, we cannot remain
bystanders. We cannot remain bystanders.

You cannot fight for independence for years and
then turn around and kill our own people. It is a shame.
Almost five months have passed since the beginning
of the conflict in South Sudan. Hundreds of innocent
civilians have been killed due to their ethnicity and
political affiliation; 1.5 million civilians have been
displaced. All of that has been happening while the
world is watching. During our most recent consultations
on South Sudan, held on 23 April, we were shown
very painful images of hundreds of dead bodies piled
on the ground. For Rwandans like me, those images
take us back to 20 years ago. After the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi, the international community said,
"Never again". Now we say, "lessons learned". That
has - unfortunately, we believe - become just a
cosmetic word. It is, again, a real shame.

What do we do now about the continued killings
of innocent civilians in South Sudan? What do we do
about the recent mass atrocities committed against
civilians in Bentiu and in Bor? Or, for that case, what
do we do now when we hear a radio station which, 20
years after the infamous RTLM. broadcasts in Rwanda,
has called upon one group of the community to rape
women of another group in retribution? Do we again
condemn and adopt statements expressing outrage?

Recently Ambassador Joy ngu of Nigeria,
during her last meeting as President of the Council
(see S/PV.7166), expressed regret that sometimes we
become bystanders and display a lack of unity in the
Council, due to national interests. I hope that on this
issue, the Council will do whatever it takes to stop the
killing of innocent people in South Sudan. That being
said, we commend the men and women of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) who, under
intense pressure, opened their compound to the civilian
population in distress, saving thousands of innocent
lives. I recall that while in Kigali during the twentieth
commemoration of the genocide against the Tutsi, the
Secretary-General made an important statement, very
clearly. He said,

"I have sent my own signal to United Nations
representatives around the world. My message to
them is simply this: When you see people at risk of
atrocity crimes, do not wait for instructions from
afar; speak up, even if it may offend. Act. Our first
duty must always be to protect people - to protect
human beings in need and distress." (SG/SM/I5755)

But we definitely need to do more. There are millions
of people outside of UNMISS compounds who still
need our protection. As UNMISS compounds cannot
also receive Sudanese under threat, we should find a
way to stop what is going on there, without wasting
further time.

Rwanda's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, stated on Saturday in Nairobi, "Let us
stop this idea that people have to die when we want
power. Let us distance citizens from power differences".
We believe that it is the primary responsibility of the
Government of South Sudan to protect civilians from
mass atrocities. That responsibility shifts to the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A) in the areas under its control.

Why do innocent children, women and men always
pay the price when politicians are fighting for power?
Why? Let us be clear. Leaders shall be held responsible
for all atrocities committed by people under their
control. Indeed, they bear command responsibility. I
prod the leaders of South Sudan to envision the future
of their country after this crisis. The choices and
opportunities that they have today to solve the crisis
may not exist in the future.

As we welcome the resumption of negotiations
among the parties, in Addis Ababa this week, I would
like to point out three key elements that Rwanda
believes will improve the current situation in South
Sudan, if they are given priority.

First, the parties must immediately cease hostilities
and stop the continuing killing of innocent civilians.
That will save thousands of displaced people from the
humanitarian crisis, especially during the upcoming
rainy season, which will further aggravate the situation.
The parties have signed the ceasefire, but regrettably
they have not abided by their commitments. This time,
the international community should use all necessary
means to convince the parties to cease their hostilities
if, of course, they cannot do so themselves. They should
ensure full respect for the cessation-of hostilities-
agreement. I urge both parties to fully cooperate with
the monitoring and verification mechanism led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
It is also urgent that the United Nations and IGAD agree,
as soon as possible, on how the mechanism, which
includes the deployment of a protection and deterrent
force, can be supported in order to fulfil its mandate.
We wish the parties to have the same understanding of
the mechanism.

Secondly, it is an obligation of the international
community, including the Council, to make sure that
all perpetrators of atrocity crimes in South Sudan are
brought to justice. In that regard, we encourage both the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the African Union commission of
inquiry on South Sudan to expedite their investigations
so that the perpetrators are held accountable. In the
meantime, the fact that both President Salva Kiir and
former Vice-President Reik Machar have committed
themselves to investigating the human rights abuses
committed by their respective combatants, especially
the ethnic killings in Juba in December and the recent
atrocities in Bentiu and Bor, is very encouraging and
must be translated into tangible action.

Thirdly, with regard to the ongoing IGAD
mediation in Addis Ababa, the parties should put their
own interests behind the national interest and engage
in a constructive dialogue with a view to finding a
sustainable political solution. In that context, Rwanda
welcomes the decision taken by President Kiir to
release the four remaining detainees arrested following
the outbreak of the crisis in December, and to drop the
charges against them. While that will create a better
environment for negotiations, the willingness recently
expressed by President Kiir to hold direct talks with
Mr. Machar is also commendable. Furthermore,
we believe that the ongoing initiative of the SPLM
intraparty dialogue, launched in Addis Ababa recently,
could be another milestone towards identifying fault
lines in South Sudan's political process and thus
lead to the necessary political reforms. We take this
opportunity to commend IGAD for its commitment to
finding a solution to the crisis and look forward to the
upcoming IGAD summit on the crisis in South Sudan.

As we continue to urge UNMISS to ensure the
increased protection of civilians, the Secretariat needs
to expedite the full deployment of additional troops
through inter-mission cooperation, as authorized by
resolution 2132 (2013). That is important in order to
increase the Mission's protection capacity. In that
regard, we urge all stakeholders, especially donors, to
support the Mission on the ground and provide the air-
lift capability necessary for the swift deployment of the
required troops and police personnel. Furthermore, it
is also important that the Government of South Sudan
improve its relations with UNMISS and consider the
Mission as a partner in the restoration of peace.

To conclude, I call on all of us to exercise our
respective responsibilities to solve the crisis in South
Sudan. The warring SPLM/A parties must stop the war
and the killing of civilians and engage in a genuine
dialogue. IGAD and the countries of the region should
strive to help the parties find a solution to the conflict,
and the United Nations must protect civilians effectively,
ensure the end ofhostilities and killings and ensure that
the perpetrators in Bentiu, Bor and elsewhere in South
Sudan are held accountable for their crimes.

I also look forward to the United States proposal of
a draft resolution and to working together on that.

