Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
insightful briefing.

After the tragic events linked to the March of
Return, the Gaza Strip is once again the scene ofviolent
clashes, following a series of Israeli strikes carried
out in reprisal for dozens of mortars and rockets fired
at Israel from the Palestinian enclave. My delegation
remains deeply concerned about this new cycle of
violence, which threatens to plunge the entire region
into chaos. We unreservedly condemn these acts of
violence and call on the various parties to agree to an
immediate and lasting ceasefire. My country also urges
the parties to the conflict to engage in a constructive
dialogue to find a political solution to a crisis that has
shaken the region for decades.

Cote d'Ivoire cannot say it enough: there is no
alternative to peace, any more than there can be a
military solution to the conflict between Palestinians
and Israelis. Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its principled
position that only credible dialogue and political
negotiations between the parties will lead to a Viable
solution for the two States living side by side in peace
and security, based on the mutual recognition of the
legitimate rights of both parties. My delegation therefore
urges the international community to continue, without
respite, its mediation efforts in the context of the
resumption of the political process between the two
parties, with a view to making the two-State solution
a tangible reality, in the best interests of the Israeli and
Palestinian populations.

My delegation deplores the lack of political prospects

in the settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We are particularly concerned about the outbreak of
violence that we are unfortunately witnessing in the
Gaza Strip, which is largely sustained by a difficult
economic and humanitarian situation, heavily affected
by the blockade in force, youth unemployment and
various shortages of water, electricity and medicines. It
is therefore important that the international community
intensify its efforts to implement projects and concrete
measures to improve the humanitarian situation, but also
the economic development of the Gaza Strip. Moreover,
this situation also highlights the need to continue the
inter-Palestinian dialogue for the implementation of the
reconciliation agreement signed in Cairo on 12 October
2017 between Hamas and Fatah. That will allow the
effective return of the Palestinian Authority to, and
its full control of, the Gaza Strip to better address the
humanitarian and security needs of the people.

In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the
objective of a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East and reiterates its readiness to work with
all Council members towards a peaceful solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian crisis in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We reiterate our
call to the parties to refrain from any act of violence
that would have the effect of removing any hope of a
peaceful resolution ofa conflict that has lasted too long.

