Mr. Jurica (Croatia): May I begin by extending
our welcome to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. de Mistura, and expressing our
appreciation for the ongoing efforts and commitment
that he and his team are devoting to fulfilling the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). Allow me also to take the opportunity
to thank Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States for
his presentation on behalf of the multinational force
and Ambassador Al Bayati of Iraq for his presentation
today.

While Croatia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by France on behalf of the European Union,
allow me to make a few additional observations. The
gains achieved on the political and the security fronts
this year, with the assistance of UNAMI and the
support of the multinational force, underpin a
remarkable process of transformation of Iraq towards a
democratic, stable, secure and prosperous country. The
democratically elected Government of Iraq is
extending its authority and security presence in a
growing number of provinces. The socio-economic
situation is improving, while microeconomic indicators
point to an expanding economy.

The recent adoption of the provincial election law
has opened the way for provincial elections to take
place in early 2009. That would be an excellent
opportunity to further consider the progress achieved.
It is important that the elections be well-prepared as
well as fair and inclusive. We salute the important
contributions that UNAMI has been making in that
regard, including its facilitation role on the issue of
minority representation in the provincial councils.

A secure environment is critical to the holding of
successful elections. The recent incidents of violence,
including an intimidation campaign against Christians
in Mosul, are unsettling. We deplore all attempts to
reignite the conflict, and we express our condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives in the recent
attacks.

However, that should not be allowed to
overshadow the overall security gains witnessed over
the past year. We are encouraged to observe a
continuing period of improved stability, and we
welcome it. We are also pleased to hear that the
responsibility for security has been handed over to the
Government of Iraq in more than two thirds of its
provinces. The Iraqi Government has demonstrated its
increasing capabilities, including the ability to address
security challenges. We welcome the beginning of the
integration of ex-combatants into Government
functions and recognize that that is a long-term effort
that is essential in order to create impartial and non-
sectarian security forces that enjoy the trust and respect
of all Iraqi communities.

We have taken note of the belated discussions
under way between Iraq and the United States, and we
hope that they will lead to the rapid conclusion of a
status-of-forces agreement before the end of this year,
leaving no security gaps.

Security is also a precondition for the
reconstruction and development of the country. Last
May in Stockholm, the international community
reaffirmed its commitment to continuing to work in
partnership with the Iraqi Government within the
framework of the Iraqi Compact. We welcome the
signing of the United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq, notably its focus on mobilizing Iraq's resources
and on capacity-building.

Iraq has vast economic potential, which will be
translated into improvements in infrastructure and in
essential services for all Iraqi citizens. To echo the
Secretary-General's remarks, the mobilization of Iraq's
abundant economic and human resources can provide
further impetus to the national reconciliation effort.

Dialogue with and the constructive engagement
of Iraq's neighbours are other critical components in
the long-term stabilization and reconstruction of Iraq.
We salute and encourage the growing regional
diplomatic engagement, including through the
reopening of embassies of regional countries in
Baghdad.

National reconciliation remains a priority in Iraq.
In order to overcome sectarian violence, cross-
community cooperation efforts should be encouraged at
all levels. Iraqi leaders have demonstrated the ability to
work together and move beyond sectarianism. A
number of important legislative milestones have been
reached this year. We hope to see similar progress on
the issue of hydrocarbon resources, the implementation
of article 140 of the Constitution and the constitutional
revision process.

We encourage the extension of UNAMI's
presence in Iraq. UNAMI has proved to be a positive
force in advancing national reconciliation, facilitating
political consensus, engaging with the issues of
minority representation and disputed internal
boundaries, promoting regional dialogue, offering
substantial electoral assistance, promoting human
rights and supporting reconstruction and development.
It has our full and continuing support.

