Mr. Motlanthe: At the outset, I must extend my
appreciation to His Excellency President Ali Bongo
Ondimba of Gabon for convening this meeting. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, as
well as to Mr. Michel Sidibe', Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS).

Through your leadership, Mr. President, you have
placed before us today an issue of critical global
concern - the impact of HIV and AIDS on the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Tomorrow, the collective United Nations membership
in the General Assembly will speak as one voice in
assessing progress made and chart a global response to
HIV and AIDS in general. Be assured, Mr. President, of
my delegation's support and commitment to playing
our role in dealing with the critical matters before us.

Although we are faced with such a daunting
challenge, it is also fair to acknowledge the significant
progress that the global community has made in
addressing the HIV and AIDS epidemic. A substantial
level of resources has been contributed to the research
community on various fronts. Notable advances have
been made by the pharmaceutical industry in the
research and development of drugs, resulting in
millions of lives being saved or prolonged. Moreover,
Governments have committed themselves to addressing
the epidemic in earnest.

However, we must face the fact that all these
efforts have yet to turn the tide of this epidemic. Three
decades on, the rate of new infections still outpaces
treatment intervention, thereby compelling us to do
more. In this connection, the shortage of financial
resources remains a challenge for many developing
countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. We would
therefore like to encourage our donor partners to
continue to fulfil their financial commitments made in
various international forums.
We also share the view that no efforts should be
spared in arresting the massive loss of lives affecting
all sectors of society. It is imperative for the United
Nations system to continue to pursue this objective in
earnest. In this regard, the Security Council could also
play a role in an integrated manner within the ambit of
its mandate of maintaining international peace and

security.

We applaud all innovative and collaborative
efforts, such as those employed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNAIDS in addressing
the epidemic in conflict areas.

We are mindful of the Charter obligations of the
Security Council. In this context, my delegation views
vulnerability as a key concern in the relationship
between HIV and AIDS, and peace and security. The
infrastructure, health services and social structures that
traditionally provide support for communities are
invariably destroyed in areas of conflict, instability and
violence. These conditions increase exposure to ill-
health and, consequently, the risk of acquisition and
transmission of HIV. These conditions disrupt access to
basic amenities and haemorrhage fragile public and
health systems. In general, women and children bear
the brunt of these vulnerabilities, and even more so in
the context of conflict and displacement.

The United Nations would be well placed to
assist countries affected by conflict through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. In the short
term, qualitative United Nations peacekeeping
interventions should focus on achieving immediate
gains that would mitigate the harmful effects of the
epidemic. Decisive action to reduce and prevent
conflict-related sexual violence could be a critical
intervention in an integrated United Nations strategy.
In the medium to long term, such interventions could
take on a much more focused approach. An integrated
global response combined with resources and expertise
can help countries that require assistance to develop
strategies for preventing HIV infections, especially
among women and children.

Assistance for accessing universal health care by
improving the health sector, strengthening health
systems and devising roll-out strategies for anti-
retroviral therapies is an area to which United Nations-
led global action can add value in reconstructing post-
conflict societies.

Joint outreach activities to conflict-affected
communities by peacekeeping missions, enhanced
political cooperation between the leadership of the host
country and local United Nations leadership, and closer
coordination with local law enforcement and health
agencies could contribute substantially towards critical
prevention measures at the local level to contain the
spread of HIV and AIDS.

Peacebuilding efforts need to incorporate
strategies that address the context-specific needs of
effected communities, which may include new and
prolonged conflicts, post-conflict situations, refugee
camps with people in transit, stable environments, the
needs of armed personnel, humanitarian workers and,
most important, women and children. These
interventions require a vision and commitment that are
supported by long-term investment by countries
emerging from conflict, with the support of the
international community. These must be based on the
principles we all embrace: respect for human rights, the
right to dignity, safety and respect.

Through your leadership, Mr. President, the
Council has added its voice to renew global efforts in
combating HIV and AIDS. The resolution that you
placed before us builds on previous efforts by the
Council. Such efforts highlight the specific
contribution that the Security Council can make in
containing the spread of HIV and AIDS within this
defined mandate. These mutually supportive and
complementary efforts by the United Nations system
are a further reaffirmation of our collective
responsibility to combat HIV and AIDS.

