Mr. Oshima (Japan): I wish first to thank the
Presidents of the two Tribunals, Judge Pocar and Judge
Mose, as well as the Prosecutors, Ms. Del Ponte and
Mr. Jallow, for their reports on the activities of their
respective tribunals, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Since the last reports, both Tribunals have
continued their dedicated efforts to achieve justice and
end impunity in both cases. We take note positively of
the measures taken by the administration of the
Tribunals to expedite the trial processes in an effort to
meet their respective completion strategies. We
encourage both Tribunals to meet their completion
strategies by exploring all measures necessary and
appropriate for trial efficiency.

In the report from the ICTR, a need to increase
the number of judges in the Appeals Chamber is
mentioned. Japan understands that that will be
explored by decreasing the number of judges in the
Trial Chamber. An adequate distribution of resources,
in accordance with the workload, should be duly
considered.

With the prospects that both Tribunals will
complete their first round of trials within two years, the
arrest and transfer of the key remaining fugitives -
especially Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic - to
the ICTY and of Felicien Kabuga to the ICTR becomes
a matter of great urgency. We wish to reiterate our
strong appeal to all the States concerned - including
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina - to take all
necessary action and measures to that end. The
international community is strongly committed,
through decisions by the Security Council, to bringing
about justice and ending impunity in both cases. The
will of the international community to end impunity
must be matched by resolution and cooperation on the
part of the States concerned.

However, we deem it necessary to reiterate our
position that if the Tribunals should choose to
endlessly await the transfer of the remaining fugitives,
it would be very difficult to justify and sustain our
support for the Tribunals through the United Nations
regular budget. This cannot go on indefinitely. We
reiterate our view that possible funding beyond the
deadline set by the Tribunals' completion strategies
should be met through voluntary contributions by
concerned States and particularly interested States.
With regard to the transfer of mid- to low-level
accused to the domestic courts, we take positive note
of the efforts made to expedite such transfer despite
certain legal and technical constraints in the national
judicial systems with which both Tribunals must
contend. We welcome that step, because we believe
that closer involvement by the local authorities and by
people in the communities in the process of
strengthening the rule of law is vital for real justice and
for building confidence in the reconciliation processes
in the States and regions concerned.

However, that will require capacity-building
where there are constraints in national judicial systems.
That is why Japan, in cooperation with the United
Nations Development Programme, has launched a
project to assist in the capacity-building of the War
Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
includes training judicial staff members and providing
needed equipment. Under that project, more than 630
judges, prosecutors and judicial staff members have
been trained in 28 training courses over the past 18
months, since May 2005. The project also includes
awareness-raising programmes to help the local
population to understand that the accused war
criminals are being pursued and brought to justice.

In conclusion, we urge both Tribunals to continue
their dedicated efforts to attain their objective of
bringing to justice all remaining fugitives by the
deadlines of their completion strategies. We reiterate
our appeal to the States concerned to provide the
necessary cooperation. We strongly hope that the
efforts undertaken for more than 10 years by the
international community - supported by the Security
Council - to end impunity will not only constitute a
valuable legacy, but will also be fully integrated into
community, national and regional capacities.

