Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to express my gratitude for the very
comprehensive statement by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. I would also like to thank the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union. I will confine myself to making a few
brief comments.

First of all, France fully supports the work carried
out since the summer by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. His dynamism, his presence on
the ground and his leadership qualities have created a
fresh and very constructive climate for the efforts of
the international community in Kosovo. We would
therefore like to thank and encourage him. We would
also like to express our gratitude to the Commander of
KFOR, General de Kermabon, who is working in close
cooperation with Mr. Jessen-Petersen in carrying out
the stabilization activities of the international military
presence in Kosovo.

Secondly, we have given careful consideration to
the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the standards in Kosovo, published
last week. We support the comments made in that
document. In particular, we share the Secretary-
General's frustration with regard to the implementation
of the standards and the meagre progress achieved in
recent months. We appeal to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo to act
without delay in order to make concrete progress on
the standards. Each of the eight standards is important,
but we support the approach of the Special
Representative in identifying priority actions for each
standard in support of the protection of minorities,
decentralization, the return of refugees, the fight
against crime and the establishment of the rule of law.
We expect concrete results on those urgent questions
from the Provisional Institutions.

Thirdly, I would like to reaffirm that the
implementation of the standards remains, in our view, a
question on which we will make no concessions can be
made. This implementation is first and foremost the
responsibility of the Kosovars themselves, above all of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government - the
Government, the Assembly and the President.

No progress can be made in Kosovo without the
effective implementation of the standards. We hope
that that message will be heard by the Kosovo leaders.
It is up to them to get back to work as soon as possible
following the interruption due to the election
campaign.

