Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg): I have the honour
to address the Council on behalf of the Benelux
countries - Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg. First of all, I would like to thank the
President of the Security Council for convening this
debate and for his enduring commitment to enhance the
working methods and procedures of the Council.

As emphasized in the concept paper for today's
debate (see S/2010/165, annex), Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations mandates the Security
Council to take prompt and effective action to maintain
international peace and security on behalf of all
Member States. In order to fulfil this responsibility, the
Security Council has adopted, and should continue to
adopt, a pragmatic and incremental approach when it
comes to improving its working methods.

In August 2008, Belgium organized the last open
debate on Security Council working methods and
procedures during its presidency of the Council. At that
time, it was decided to focus the debate on three
closely interrelated issues, namely, transparency,
interaction and efficiency. Concerning transparency,
the Benelux countries welcome the fact that many
efforts have been made to increase the transparency of
the Security Council's work. For example, last year's

resolution 1904 (2009), which reviewed the mandate of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Monitoring Team,
considerably increased the transparency of the process
for listing and delisting. The creation of an Office of
the Ombudsperson further increases transparency,
efficiency and interaction. We therefore hope that an
ombudsperson will be appointed shortly.

With respect to the issue of access and interaction
with non-members of the Council, we would like to
make a number of remarks. First, as a general rule, we
believe that the deliberations of Council members
would be enriched if there were even more interaction
with States and non-State actors associated with a
conflict, which is especially important in the early
stages of the consultations and should include private
meetings. We welcome new formats like informal
interactive discussions and informal interactive
dialogues.

In the case of non-State actors, it is the Council's
prerogative to decide which requests it is to grant and
in which specific situation. However, we believe that
the parties to a conflict should be able to submit their
views to the Council in writing, which may decide to
distribute them as Security Council documents. We
further believe that interaction with non-State actors
under the Arria formula is commendable and deserves
further encouragement.

Secondly, given the increasing importance and
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in dealing with challenges to peace and security, we
believe that the Security Council benefits from
enhanced cooperation with such organizations, both in
public as in private deliberations. Furthermore, the fact
that a regional organization represents the views of a
larger group of Member States can contribute to shorter
and more efficient debates, at least when those
organizations are allowed to intervene early on in the
debate.

Finally, the Benelux countries are strong
proponents of further strengthening the relationship
between the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
Security Council. We welcome the fact that the PBC
Chairperson or the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations of the PBC are regularly invited to brief
the Council. We are convinced that the PBC and its
country-specific configurations could also bring added
value to the work of the Council in thematic areas,
such as women and peacebuilding, children and armed
conflict, and the future of peacekeeping.

On efficiency, the Benelux countries agree with
several of the ideas presented by the group of five
small countries, in particular that key provisions of
thematic resolutions could be incorporated into
country-specific resolutions. That would also be a
matter of coherence. The Council could also reflect on
how best to assess whether its decisions are being
implemented, analyze obstacles to implementation and
suggest mechanisms to enhance implementation.

The proposals I have just mentioned could be
enacted by the Security Council without delay.
However, the responsibility for improving the
relationship with the wider membership depends not
only upon the Security Council. It is up to each of us to
optimally use all means of interaction at hand. Today'
debate provides an opportunity for feedback from the
wider membership to the Security Council, and vice
versa, in order to improve mutual understanding.

We thank Japan for its readiness to ensure follow-
up to this debate in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
it chairs. We would indeed welcome an update of the
note contained in document (S/2006/507). Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg will remain
constructively engaged in the process of improving the
working methods of the Security Council.

