The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Our delegation abstained in the voting on resolution
2422 (2018), as it did in the voting on resolution 2269
(2016), on the same issue. At that time we voiced our
grave concerns (see S/PV.763 6) about the reappointment
of the same officials from the unfortuantely notorious
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY). Today our fears about those staffing decisions
have been justified. The latest two-year cycle of the work
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is drawing to an end, and its situation is far
from perfect. There are problems with its approaches
to justice and its internal administration and staffing
policies. Our delegation expressed its opinion about
those issues in the Security Council's meeting on 6 June
(see S/PV.8278), and we will not repeat them now.

However, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to one very serious issue concerning the right
to life and the provision of timely and appropriate
medical help to defendants. We repeatedly urged the
ICTY to conduct a serious inquiry into Ratko Mladie's
treatment and, if it was beyond the prison doctors'
capabilities, to temporarily release him for treatment
in Russia with our comprehensive guarantees.
Unfortunately, the Tribunal refused time and again to
grant the motion of the accused's lawyers, and Serbia's
guarantees were also rejected. The Mechanism rejected
the most recent application for the General's temporary
release on 8 June.

When we consider the materials in the Mladie case,
which can be openly accessed on the Mechanism's
website, some curious information emerges. Based
on a document from the Registrar of the Mechanism
concerning a report by independent medical experts,
one can conclude that Mr. Mladie fears the doctors of
the United Nations detention unit and does not wish to
follow their prescribed course of treatment. At the same
time, Mladie's lawyers are not allowed to be present
during his visits with the prison doctors, despite the
accused's wishes. The excuse they have invented is
medical ethics.

What sort of medical ethics - based on trust
between doctor and patient - are we talking about if,
as the lawyers testify, the Mechanism's medical service
has been hiding part of Mr. Mladie's electrocardiogram
under stickers, effectively distorting his data? But
even the medical information that the administration
has been unable to conceal has enabled the defence to
conclude that in the past three months the accused's
health has got considerably worse. He is not getting
adequate treatment, and the United Nations detention
unit authorities are doing everything they can to
protect themselves and justify their incompetence. This
raises the question of whether the information that the
judges are being given about the accused's health is
similarly redacted.

The fight between Mr. Mladie's lawyers and the
United Nations detention unit over his health has been
going on for a number of months now. The Appeals
Chamber and the President have denied every petition
by the defence time and again. Things have gone so far
that there is a petition to disqualify judges for reasons
of bias.

In that connection, I would like to ask the
Mechanism's leadership whether it realizes where this
scandalous situation could lead.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.

