Mr. Shalita (Rwanda): This being the first time
my delegation has taken the floor in the Security
Council this month, I would like to begin by warmly
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to congratulate you on
the very able manner in which you have chaired its
work. I would also like to express our thanks for your
convening this meeting and that earlier this month on
the Great Lakes region.

We would also like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kalomoh,
for presenting the interim report of the multi-
disciplinary assessment mission to Central Africa and
to congratulate him on the success of the mission. We
find the report to be wide-ranging and comprehensive,
focusing as it does on issues of peace and security,
economic development, humanitarian affairs, human
rights and HIV/AIDS.

It is indeed a great tragedy that, while Central
Africa has the human and natural resource potential to
make it among the richest subregions of the world, it is
among the world's poorest subregions, blighted by
extreme poverty, hunger, disease and ignorance. Both
cause and effect of this are political instability, internal
strife and nations with very weak State structures.
Rwanda fully supports the mission's View that, as a
result of the cross-cutting challenges that transcend
national boundaries, an integrated and holistic
subregional approach is required to complement
national solutions to the numerous challenges that
affect Central Africa.

There have been important positive developments
in the region over the last few months. My country,
Rwanda, is a very good example. We held free and fair
presidential and parliamentary elections in August and
September, ending the nine-year transition process, and
consolidated the national democratization programme
that began in 1998 with elections at the grass-roots
level of administration. Today, all levels of
administration have been democratized and elected
local Governments have been empowered by a
decentralization programme that aims at giving them a
leading role in the decision-making process. Sections
of our population that for generations had been
marginalized, such as women, are now playing an
active role in the political process. In that connection,
it gives me great pleasure to note that Rwanda now has
the highest percentage of elected women
representatives in national parliament, comprising 48.8
per cent of the National Assembly and 30 per cent of
the Senate.

The elections in Rwanda came after a
constitution-making process, which for the first time in
our history involved the entire population in the
drafting process. A dynamic and progressive national
unity and reconciliation programme has been ongoing
for six years now and has made significant progress in
helping heal the wounds of the past while reminding us
of what we must do to ensure that those mistakes are
not repeated.

We also welcome the positive developments
taking place in Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Sao Tome and Principe and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the formation of a new
transitional Government of national unity has given
that country its first realistic prospects for peace and
stability in many years. Those developments give us
optimism for the entire Central African region.

Rwanda shares the mission's observation about
the link between poverty and conflict. We therefore
also agree on the need to develop holistic and
integrated strategies to address the problems of the
region.

We welcome and strongly support the ongoing
preparations for the conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. We recognize
that the approach of the conference must, in a holistic
manner, address the present challenges to peace and
security in the region on the one hand, and on the other
reflect on the measures that need to be taken at the
national, regional and global levels to transform our
economies and give the people of Central Africa hope
for a better life. That holistic approach should consider
that one of the major challenges to peace and security
at present is the existence of large numbers of armed
and dangerous militia in some parts of the subregion.
We must focus our attention on how the threats posed
by those negative forces can be effectively neutralized.

With regard to economic transformation, a
holistic approach must look at issues such as the
marginalization of Africa in general, and Central
Africa in particular, in the global trading system and
look at what international support can be mobilized for
education and training to enable those countries to
transform their economies by adding value to, and
increasing the volume of, their exports.

Finally, HIV/AIDS presents a serious challenge to
security and development in the subregion. Given the
high level of the cross-border movement of people, we
must develop joint strategies to address that growing
challenge. Subregional organizations should provide a
coordination and reporting function and also act as a
focal-point for international support for initiatives to
fight the epidemic.

