Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I wish a
happy new year to all of the members of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

In the past week, what has happened on the ground
throughout the nation of Iran is something the world
must take note of. It is a spontaneous expression of
fundamental human rights. The Iranian people are
rising up in over 79 locations throughout the country.
It is a powerful exhibition by brave people who have
become so fed up with their oppressive Government
that they are willing to risk their lives in protest. The
world should applaud their courage. The voices of the
Iranian people should be heard.

We have debated the proper role of human rights in
the Security Council. Some of our colleagues believe
that the subject has no place here. They believe that
human rights and fundamental freedoms are the business
solely of the Governments that control them. The United
States does not share that belief. Human rights are not
the gift of Governments. They are the inalienable rights
of the people themselves. Freedom and human dignity
cannot be separated from peace and security. When
the rights of the people are denied, the people rightly
resist. If their concerns are not acknowledged, peace
and security are inevitably threatened. We have seen
that repeatedly throughout human history. The case of
Syria is a horrible recent testament to that fact. And
what is happening in towns and cities across Iran right
now bears out that fundamental truth.

The Iranian regime's contempt for the rights of its
people has been widely documented for many years.
The people of Iran have finally had enough, and they are
showing it by taking to the streets. The Iranian people
understand the nature of their regime. They understand
that their lack of voice in their Government has allowed
the regime to ignore them, and to spread conflict and
instability far and wide. If we listen to the slogans they
chant in the street, that understanding comes through
loud and clear. The United Nations reports that the
Iranian regime spends at least $6 billion every year
propping up the murderous Al-Assad regime in Syria.
The people of Iran know that, and they are therefore
telling the Government, "Let go of Syria. Think of us."
The Iranian regime spends millions on militias in
Iraq every year. Every year it gives millions more to
the Houthi rebels in Yemen, including by sending them
ballistic missiles to fire at other countries. Meanwhile,
the average Iranian family is 15 per cent poorer today
than it was 10 years ago, so the Iranian people are
demanding, "Think of us." The regime gives low-
interest loans to the elite and well connected. It rewards
construction contracts to corrupt firms affiliated with
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. It constructs
buildings that skimp on safety. Thousands of those
buildings collapsed during an earthquake in which
hundreds of people died. And the Iranian people chant,
"Think of us." Today, the people of Iran are speaking
to their Government, and their message is undeniable.
"Stop the support for terrorism. Stop giving billions
of our money to killers and dictators. Stop taking our
wealth and spending it on foreign fighters and proxy
wars. Think of us."

Freedom-loving nations worldwide have spread
support for the cause of the Iranian people - Canada,
Norway, the United Kingdom, Israel, France, Sweden
and other countries of the European Union. We honour
and appreciate all of their statements of support for
universal human rights. But we must do more. The
Iranian regime is cutting off Internet access in an
attempt to shut down communication among the
protesters. They are attempting to silence the voice of
the Iranian people. We cannot allow that to happen.
Every State Member of the United Nations is sovereign,
but Member States cannot use sovereignty as a shield
when they categorically deny their people human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

I call on all of my colleagues to join me in
amplifying the Iranian people's message. And I call on
the Government of Iran to stop censoring the voice of
the people and to restore their access to the Internet,
because, in the end, the Iranian people will determine
their own destiny. Let there be no doubt whatever that
the United States stands unapologetically with those in
Iran who seek freedom for themselves, prosperity for
their families and dignity for their nation. We will not
be quiet. No dishonest attempt to call the protesters
puppets of foreign Powers will change that. The Iranian
people know the truth, and so do we. They are acting
of their own will, on their own behalf, for their own
future. Nothing will stop Americans from standing in
solidarity with them.

In 2009, the world stood by passively while the
hopes of the Iranian people were crushed by their
Government. In 2018, we will not be silent. Once again,
the people of Iran are rising up. They are asking for
something that no Government can legitimately deny
them - their human rights and fundamental freedoms.
They are calling out, "Think of us." If the founding
principles of this institution mean anything, we will
not only hear their cry; we will finally answer it. The
Iranian regime is now on notice. The world will be
watching what it does.

