Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste. We would also
like to welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma.

We often refer to Timor-Leste as a United
Nations success story in general, and as a success story
for this body in particular. Almost a year has gone by
since the Council celebrated, in this Chamber, the
independence of that country, and almost eight months

have passed since Timor-Leste joined the Organization.
However, the fact that this has been a success
story does not mean that everything has gone as
planned, nor that the role of the United Nations in the
country is over. The latest report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) make this clear.
The report indicates that progress has been achieved as
well as important initiatives taken by the Government
of Timor-Leste in the promotion of transparency and in
the responsible management of public affairs, as well
as in the promotion of human rights. As the report
indicates, the support of the international community
for these initiatives will be key if they are to be
successful.

Many other objectives remain to be achieved for
which the continued support of the international
community will also be necessary. The report lists the
tremendous difficulties in terms of economic and social
development which are yet to be tackled and also
indicates major challenges in the area of administrative
and judicial training, and in particular in the area of the
maintenance of security.

As we saw at the end of last year and at the
beginning of this one, Timor-Leste still faces serious
threat to law and order. The Council shows its ability to
react by adopting, on 4 April last, resolution 1473
(2003), which postponed the downsizing of the military
component of UNMISET to the planned end of the
Mission.

We welcome the wise decision to accede to the
request of the Secretary-General, which will allow
more time to establish and train the Timorese forces to
exercise the fundamental activities of guaranteeing
public security and ensuring the territorial integrity of
the country. We therefore support an extension of
UNMISET's mandate to May 2004.

The importance of the current efforts of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste goes beyond the reality
of that small country. The results that have been
achieved show the effectiveness of coordinated actions
at the multilateral level and the international
community's ability to act through this body. The
incidents of December 2002 and January 2003 served,
however, as a reminder of the temporary nature of
incomplete solutions. Resolution 1473 (2003) was a
proper and immediate reaction to the situation, and it
seems to have led to the necessary adjustments for a
short-term solution.

The continued support of the international
community, in order to make it possible to conclude the
training process in Timor-Leste, will be crucial if we
want this success story to continue.

Brazil, to the extent possible, will continue to
support the efforts of the United Nations and of the
Government of Timor-Leste on the path to building its
institutions, in order to foster the economic and social
development of the country and of its people.

