The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress on withdrawal of foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, stresses that these withdrawals must be
completed, and calls for the implementation of all
the agreements signed by the parties and all
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. At
the same time, the Council expresses its strong
concerns at the rising tensions in the east of the
country, in particular in Uvira and in the Ituri
region.

"The Security Council condemns the
continuing violence in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular the attack on
Uvira by Mai Mai and other forces, and views

with great concern the build-up of forces around
Bukavu. The Council notes with concern that
these actions add to the instability in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
threaten regional stability, have severe
humanitarian consequences, especially by
increasing the numbers of internally displaced
persons and refugees, and could threaten the
border security of Burundi and Rwanda.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
the conflict to cease hostilities immediately and
without preconditions, welcomes the call by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in its communique of 14 October
(S/2002/1143) for such a ceasefire and calls on
the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and all Governments in the region to
exert their influence on all the parties to this
effect and to refrain from any action which would
further exacerbate the situation or undermine the
peace process.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to report further on the events in the
region of Uvira and stresses the importance for
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
increase its monitoring presence in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
in the regions bordering Burundi and Rwanda, as
soon as security conditions allow such a
deployment. It encourages all local actors,
including the parties to the conflict, as well as
civil society and the religious organizations, to
engage in talks in order to end the hostilities and
agree on a basis for peaceful coexistence in the
region during the transitional period in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard,
the Council encourages the Secretary-General to
consider using his good offices to promote and
facilitate such talks, with MONUC providing
support where applicable.

"The Security Council reminds all parties in
Uvira and in the area that they must abide by
international humanitarian standards and ensure
respect for human rights in the sectors they
control.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the intensification of ethnically

targeted violence in the Ituri region. It condemns
all such violence or incitement to violence. It
requests all parties to take immediate action to
defuse these tensions, ensure the protection of
the

civilians and end violations of human rights. The
Council welcomes the efforts by the Governments
of Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to set up the Ituri Pacification
Commission, as set out under the Luanda
Agreement, and requests MONUC to provide
support in this regard when applicable.

"The Security Council stresses that no
Government, military force or any other
organization or individual should provide military
or other supplies or any other form of support to
any of the groups involved in the fighting in the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi.

"The Security Council also expresses its
concern at the situation in Kisangani and
reiterates its demand that the city be
demiIitarized.

"The Security Council urges all Congolese
parties to accelerate efforts to reach agreement on
an all-inclusive transitional government and
expresses its support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in this regard.

"The Security Council calls on all parties
and armed groups involved in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to commit
themselves to achieving a peaceful settlement for
the region, and condemns any attempt to use
military action to influence the peace process.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
MONUC and the Government of South Africa.

"The Security Council calls on regional
leaders to continue to support efforts to end the
conflict in Burundi, and in this regard welcomes
the recent visit of the Foreign Minister of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Burundi
and the adoption of a joint communique by the
two Governments (8/2002/1142). The Council
calls on the two Governments rapidly to conclude
an agreement on the normalization of relations
and cooperation in security matters."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15pm.

