Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): As a country producing
and using nuclear energy to produce electricity,
Slovakia supports the right of every country to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Based on its strict adherence to the
NPT and to the statute of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), my Government would never
support any action that would infringe upon that
inalienable right of States.

However, we are fully convinced that the
international community is right to ask for guarantees
as to the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. The fact is that we still do not have those
assurances. The IAEA remains unable to make further
progress in its efforts to fully verify the past
development of Iran's nuclear programme and certain
aspects of its scope and nature. We urge Iran to provide
maximum cooperation and transparency to the IAEA
and to all partners concerned to solve all outstanding
issues and restore confidence about its nuclear
programme.

For nearly four years, the IAEA has been
investigating Iran's undeclared nuclear activities. As a
result of its findings, in September 2005 the IAEA
Board of Governors found that Iran's many failures and
breaches of its obligations to comply with its NPT
safeguards agreement constituted non-compliance in
the context of the Agency's statute. In February 2006,
the Board of Governors, meeting in extraordinary
session, requested the IAEA Director General to report
Iran's dossier to the Security Council.

The Security Council acted on this serious matter
by passing legally binding resolutions 1696 (2006),
1737 (2007) and 1747 (2007) - the latter having been
adopted unanimously today. Slovakia supported them
all because they are proportionate, incremental and
targeted responses to Iran's continued failure to comply
with international requirements as originally expressed
by the IAEA Board of Governors.

Slovakia reaffirms its continuous support for
efforts to find a negotiated long-term solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue. We fully share the view that
every diplomatic effort must be explored and exhausted
to achieve that goal. A proposal for a long-term
comprehensive agreement presented to Iran last June is
still on the table, and the door to negotiations remains
open. We believe that it offers Iran the chance to reach
a negotiated agreement based on cooperation. In that
respect, we welcome the new ministerial declaration of
the E3 + 3 that has been issued today and presented by
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.

In view of the above and our desire for a
comprehensive and peaceful solution to this issue my
delegation calls upon the Iranian leadership to comply
with Security Council requirements and resume
negotiations on terms acceptable to the international
community.

Finally, my country has great respect for the
nation of Iran, its rich history and ancient culture. We
therefore hope that Iran will seize the opportunity to
choose the right path towards a comprehensive long-
term solution to its nuclear programme that will result
in peaceful nuclear cooperation and positive
development of relations with the entire international
community in the future.

