Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would like to join
others in thanking the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing on the developments in the Middle East.

South Africa condemns the rocket attack from
Gaza aimed at Israel. These kinds of rocket attacks not
only place the lives of innocent civilians in danger but
also undermine the legitimate cause of the Palestinian
people. While recognizing Israel's legitimate right to
security, we condemn Israel's disproportionate use
of force.

These recent incidents have not occurred in a
vacuum. The people of Gaza have endured serious
hardship during the Israeli blockade on Gaza, and the
escalation of violence will only worsen their already
dire situation. The Security Council needs to also act
decisively and urgently on the lifting of the illegal
blockade of the Gaza Strip.

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General's written
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
(S/2019/251) and to express our hope that this practice
will continue with future reports. Just as we receive
reports on other matters on the Council's agenda,
written reports on this issue are essential if the Security
Council is to effectively exercise its mandate in terms
of maintaining international peace and security in the
Middle East.

As reported by the Secretary-General, Israel has
continued unabated and with impunity to expand
settlements and to demolish and seize property in
the occupied territories. It is important to reiterate
that the establishment of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is a
flagrant violation of international law.

The continued expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory undermines the prospects
for long-term peace; alters the conditions on the ground,
putting the two-State solution in jeopardy by eroding
the possibility of a contiguous and viable Palestinian
State; and contravenes a decision of the Council. Such
overt violations of a resolution adopted by the Security
Council would usually lead to severe measures against
the party responsible; however, on this issue the Council
remains silent. If the Council does not uphold its own
decisions, it loses its effectiveness and undermines its
core mandate of maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, we once again call on all States
Members of the United Nations to fully implement the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016).

My delegation wishes to express our grave concern
about the continued disregard for the prevailing and
long-standing Middle East peace process and attempts
to prejudge final-status issues, particularly with regard
to the borders and the status of Jerusalem, through
unilateral actions.

I wish to reiterate South Africa's position in support
of a two-State solution. We would also like to emphasize
that the primary responsibility for peace rests with the
Palestinians and Israelis themselves. The guidelines for
negotiations should be based on the already established
international framework, which include General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, to name but a few.

We remain concerned that more than 40 years after
the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), which called for
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the territories that
it occupied after the 1967 war, including the Syrian
Golan Heights, Israel continues to illegally occupy the
Golan Heights and thereby violate Council resolutions.
International law should be upheld in this regard, and
we therefore call on Israel to respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.

As noted by the Secretary-General, the independent
international commission of inquiry on the protests in
the occupied Palestinian territory found reasonable
grounds to believe that in almost all of the cases it had
investigated, the use of live ammunition by the Israeli
security forces against protesters was unlawful. During
the period under investigation, 183 protesters, including
35 children, were killed and more than 6,100 injured
through the use of live ammunition. South Africa
strongly condemns this excessive and disproportionate
use of force by the Israeli security forces and calls
on Israel to refrain from the unwarranted use of live
ammunition in response to protests.

In conclusion, the ongoing protests in Gaza are
evidence of the dire and untenable situation of the
Palestinian people. The upcoming one-year anniversary
of the start of the Great March of Return is expected to
see tens of thousands of Palestinians protesting Israel's
continued illegal occupation of Palestine. In this regard,
we call for all parties to ensure that the protests remain
peaceful and non-violent.

