Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sandra Honore, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and to acknowledge her work and the results that she
has been achieving as she helps to strengthen dialogue
and institutions in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis
Regis, and his active delegation. Likewise, I would like
to reiterate our condolences to the family of Lieutenant
General Jaborandy. I would also like to welcome the
new Force Commander, Lieutenant General, Ajax Porto
Pinheiro, and Commissioner Serge Therriault.

When the Council considered the situation in Haiti
in March this year (see S/PV.7408), we were pleased
because Haiti had taken decisive steps toward the
holding of elections, thanks to the effort, the dialogue
and the joint work carried out by political players and
the Haitian people. Today, with the electoral process
already underway and the first round of elections held
on 9 August, what remains to be done is to encourage
the Haitian authorities and people to continue along
the path to democracy, organizing and carrying out
the general presidential elections on 25 October in a
peaceful and transparent manner, in accordance with
the law.

With respect to the report of the Secretary-General,
we welcome the fact that the Provisional Electoral
Council was able to manage the complex electoral
process last August in an inclusive and transparent
manner, with the support of the Haitian National Police
and MINUSTAH. However, with a view to upcoming
general elections, we would like to call attention to what
the Secretary-General said with respect to the fact that
despite relative calm during the campaign, there was an
increase in incidents of insecurity during the last days,
due to an upsurge in politically motivated killings.

We note the actions by MINUSTAH's personnel.
MINUSTAH continued to work hard, although it had
to prioritize specific areas in order to comply with its
mandate owing to a reduction it personnel in accordance
with resolution 2180 (2014).

In line with what was recommended in the
Secretary-General's report, Argentina supports the
renewal of MINUSTAH's mandate for another year, with
the current number of troops and civilian personnel, so
as to complete the electoral process, which must end in
December by holding the second round of presidential
elections, if necessary, swearing in the new President in
March 2016 and establishing a new Government. That
will be the most appropriate time for the Secretary-
General to assess the general security conditions on
the ground, make recommendations and listen to the
opinion of Haiti's new Government with regard to the
Mission's activities and presence in the country, or to
consider the option of reconfiguring its presence to
reflect the circumstances.

Taking a decision before the end of the electoral
period or thinking about restructuring the Mission
without waiting for the new Haitian authorities to be
elected and assume their functions would be risky
and dangerous. We believe that it is important to
proceed with caution and take decisions on the basis
of conditions on the ground to make it possible to
successfully conclude the only peacekeeping operation
currently deployed in the Americas.

We understand that MINUSTAH cannot remain
in Haiti for longer than is necessary. It must remain
for as long as is required by the democratic Haitian
Government. At the same time, we believe that it is
important to learn lessons from the past and bear in
mind the consequences of a hasty withdrawal, which
in the past caused the Council to retrace the path it had
already taken.

When conditions on the ground allow, Argentina
will be ready to assist the United Nations presence in
Haiti to restructure itself in a way that is more geared
toward strengthening institutions, always working
alongside the Haitian people and Government so that
democracy, human rights, security and peace will be
established in the country once and for all.

