The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America, and I would like to thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.

The fact that the situation in Darfur today is stark
is not news to anyone in the Chamber; we have been
talking about it for over a decade. In 2005, the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court in the face of brutal attacks on
civilians, widespread rape and the destruction of entire
villages. Ten years later, the people of Darfur continue
to suffer. As the Prosecutor said, it should be and is
a source of concern that the situation remains dire.
But the intractability of the problem is not a reason to
accept the situation as it is. We cannot become inured to
impunity and atrocity and we cannot look away simply
because what has transpired, and is transpiring, is not
news. Justice demands more, and so too do the people
of Darfur.

In the face ofthe Sudan's continued non-cooperation,
which has systematically frustrated the Court's
important work, we continue to call on all States
to demand that the Sudan fully cooperate with
the International Criminal Court. It should not be
that President Al-Bashir repeatedly travels across
international borders when the Court has issued two
warrants for his arrest and the victims of his alleged
crimes continue to wait for justice. We should not be
complacent. The United States will continue to urge
Governments, whether or not they are States parties
to the Rome Statute, not to invite, facilitate or support
travel by those who face arrest warrants for alleged
crimes committed in Darfur. The fact that such
individuals, including President Al-Bashir, remain
at large is an affront to the hundreds of thousands of
men, women and children in Darfur who have suffered
immeasurable losses and pain. The United States
strongly believes that the Court's arrest warrants in the
Darfur situation should be carried out. We welcome
the Prosecutor's affirmation that her Office has not
abandoned the victims of alleged Rome Statute crimes
committed in Darfur.

It is not just the people of Darfur who deserve
justice, but also the men and women who have
committed themselves to protecting the civilians. Let
us remember that one of the cases before the Court
involves attacks on African Union peacekeepers in
Darfur. That very case was the subject of the most
recent decision regarding the Sudan's non-compliance
transmitted to the Security Council. Since 2007, when
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) was established, 218 mission
personnel have given their lives in fulfilment of its
mandate. Too many months bring news of one or more
such deaths or other casualties. Just over the past eight
months, UNAMID has seen one person killed in May,
one killed and four injured in September, and one killed
and one injured in October. The slow pattern is deadly
and steady and, at the very least, the Council should be
united in demanding accountability for violence against
peacekeepers, who have put themselves in harm's way
in service to others.

Today, in Darfur, among other tasks, the nearly
21,000 person-strong UNAMID mission has been
working tirelessly to restore security conditions for the
safe provision of humanitarian assistance, facilitate
full humanitarian access throughout Darfur, protect
civilians and promote respect for human rights.
The environment in which UNAMID operates is a
difficult and a dangerous one. Such difficulties are
compounded by a lack of full cooperation on the part
of the Government of the Sudan on issues such as the
timely processing of visas for UNAMID personnel, the
clearance of shipments, including food and specialized
military equipment belonging to troop-contributing
countries destined for the mission, and freedom
of movement of UNAMID personnel in fulfilment
of UNAMID's mandate. We must demand that the
Government of the Sudan comply with its obligations
under the status of forces greement with the United
Nations and the African Union. We have a along way
to go when food for peacekeepers is used as a tool for
leverage.

Those are not distinct phenomena. While the
Government of the Sudan tries to impede UNAMID's
work through obstruction and delay, it also tries to
impede the Court's work by ignoring its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) - all in the name of
avoiding the international scrutiny that is so needed,
such as, for instance, with regard to the reports of sexual
violence in Thabit, where credible investigative work
into alleged mass rapes remains incomplete, stymied
by the Sudan's systematic denial of access to UNAMID
personnel. The stakes are simply too high for the status
quo to be acceptable. The Sudan's compliance with the
Security Council resolutions and the work of the Court
are not just Sudanese issues. We must not forget that it
was the Council that referred the situation in Darfur to
the Court more than 10 years ago.
The need for peace and justice in Darfur is
important not just for the region but well beyond.
The Government of the Sudan must not be allowed to
conclude that it can continue to apply tactics similar
to those that prompted the Council to act on Darfur to
the two areas of Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile.
We must recall that when the Government of the Sudan
conducts offensives, it has often been civilians who
bear the heavy cost.

In conclusion, to be clear, those who commit
heinous acts of violence and brutality in Darfur must
be held to account. Those who have flouted the law
and the Council must know that justice is patient. We
will not be lulled or distracted. The United States will
continue to work with the Security Council and the
international community to seek accountability for the
crimes committed in Darfur. We will not forget the
victims or the survivors nor will we cease to pursue the
justice they so deserve.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

