Mr. Mitropoulos (International Maritime Organization): Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on a
matter of grave concern to the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) and the maritime community at
large, namely the worryingly escalating incidents of
piracy and armed robbery against ships in the waters
off Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.

Since the matter was first brought to the attention
of the Council by the IMO in 2005, the Organization
and the maritime community have appreciated very
much the response of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to our requests for action and support,
as evidenced by the presidential statement issued on
15 March 2006 (S/PRST/2006/11) and resolutions
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008), respectively adopted on
2 June and 7 October 2008.

In spite of the temporary improvement of the
situation following the Council's action, the situation,
as brought to our attention on a daily basis in recent
months, leaves much to be desired in terms of our
common efforts to stem the unlawful acts we are
discussing here today.
We are particularly concerned, not only by the
frequency of the reported attacks against innocent

merchant ships sailing off the coast of Somalia, in the
Gulf of Aden and most recently in the wider area of the
West Indian Ocean while peacefully serving the
international seaborne trade, but also by the ferocity of
the attacks and the risk they pose to seafarers and the
marine environment.

Against a total of some 440 acts of piracy and
armed robbery reported to have taken place off the
coast of Somalia since we started compiling relevant
statistics at IMO, this year alone, more than 120
attacks have been reported, resulting in more than 35
ships having been seized by pirates and more than 600
seafarers having been kidnapped and held for ransom.
Currently, 14 ships and some 280 seafarers are being
held hostage in Somalia. The most disturbing news is
that two seafarers have already lost their lives in
similar incidents.

According to information, the attackers
invariably follow two patterns. They either attack ships
on the high seas, not unusually at considerable
distances from the shore, allegedly making use of
"mother ships", as has been the case with their
audacious hijacking, only last Saturday, of the fully
laden ultra-large crude carrier, Sirius Star, in the Indian
Ocean some 450 nautical miles from the coast of
Kenya; or they attack and hijack them in Somalia's
territorial sea, sometimes under the watchful eyes of
warships outside those waters which, until the adoption
of resolution 1816 (2008), were not empowered to
intervene for fear of breaching international law.

Our concerns in this most unwarranted case are
threefold. First, there is a need to protect seafarers,
fishermen and passengers on ships sailing off the coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.

Secondly, there is a need to ensure the safe
delivery of humanitarian aid to Somalia effected by
ships chartered by the World Food Programme. Let us
not forget that, as the Secretary-General recognizes in
his report, which was just introduced, section V on
humanitarian aid states, "[s]ome 90 per cent of food
shipments to Somalia go by sea" (S/2008/709, para. 72).

Our third concern is to preserve the integrity of
the shipping lane through the Gulf of Aden, given its
strategic importance and significance to shipping and
trade East and West of the Suez Canal.
08-6107]

I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the efforts of members of the international community,
alliances of States and regional organizations,
including in particular NATO and the European Union,
to address the issue by dispatching naval forces and
military aircraft to patrol the vast area off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden and by escorting
vessels used by the World Food Programme to provide
humanitarian relief to the Somali people.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia
for its cooperation, and also to say that I was sorry that
our communication to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia reached him belatedly.

Because of the extensive coastline of Somalia -
2,105 nautical miles or 3,898 kilometres in total, of
which 659 nautical miles or 1,204 kilometres are in the
Gulf of Aden - the need for as many naval vessels and
military aircraft as possible to do the job is more than
obvious, until, of course, political developments
stabilize the situation on land and we succeed in
gradually eradicating piracy at sea.

Notwithstanding IMO's prime concern over the
safety of the lives of seafarers whose ships sail off the
coast of Somalia, the strategic importance of the Gulf
of Aden makes it imperative that this shipping lane,
which serves more than 12 per cent of the total volume
of oil transported by sea, not to mention commodities
carried by bulk carriers and finished goods transported
by container ships, is adequately protected against any
acts that might disrupt the flow of traffic therethrough.

Were this to happen and ships bound for Europe,
or vice versa, were diverted through the Cape of Good
Hope, a series of negative repercussions would ensue.
Among those, I would mention the extra mileage to
run- almost double that for a typical voyage from,
say, Ras Tanura to Gibraltar; the prolongation of the
same voyage by almost 12.5 days at a speed of 15
knots, thus delaying the replenishment of Europe and
the Americas in energy stocks; the additional need for
some 750 tons of fuel per ship and an additional
volume of some 2,335 tons of carbon dioxide emitted
by the additional fuel burnt; a potential increase in
freight rates, which would initially more than double if
all ships were diverted around the Cape, subsequently
settling at about 25 to 30 per cent higher; and, of
course, economies and the consumer would eventually
be hurt to some extent.

To bring the situation under control, safeguard
the lives of seafarers, ensure the uninterrupted flow of
humanitarian aid to Somalia and prevent the negative
repercussions I just mentioned, IMO would appreciate
the Security Council's taking appropriate action to
extend the validity of the mandate in paragraph 7 of
resolution 1816 (2008); to call upon States interested in
the safety and environmentally sound function of
shipping activities, and that have the capacity to do so,
to take part actively in the fight against piracy and
armed robbery against ships, including mother ships,
off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden; to
strengthen and enhance the provisions of resolutions
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008), particularly with respect
to having clear rules of engagement for participating
units to facilitate the disruption of pirate operations;
and to urge States, with due regard to their obligations
under international law, to establish an effective legal
jurisdiction to bring alleged offenders to justice.

For IMO's part, we are doing everything possible
to increase awareness of the problem and, in
cooperation with the shipping industry, to advise ships
to take practicable avoidance, evasion and defensive
measures, while, through our technical cooperation
programme, we assist countries in the region to build
capacity to add their contribution to the overall efforts,
including putting in place any necessary relevant
legislation. We look forward to the high-level meeting
we are organizing to take place in Djibouti in January
in order conclude a regional agreement of cooperation
to combat piracy and armed robbery.

The regrettable developments off the coast of
Somalia clearly indicate that the perpetrators of the
unlawful acts we have heard about frequently in recent
months show a continuing disrespect for the
international community, their operations constituting,
at the same time, a blunt provocation to civil society
and the rule of law. At IMO, we believe that we have to
act - and act fast and with firm determination - to
rid the world of this modern scourge. A coordinated
and coherent response at the international and national
level is therefore necessary for the safety and well-
being of seafarers, for the seamless delivery of
humanitarian aid to Somalia, for the protection of the
marine environment against casualties that may have a
catastrophic impact on it, and for the shipping industry
to continue to serve the seaborne trade and the world
economy efficiently and effectively. The Council's
decisions will be instrumental to achieving these

objectives. IMO stands by to assist in any way that
might be required.

