Mrs. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We endorse the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Cuba supports a genuine and deep reform of the
Security Council that would make it an effective,
transparent, representative and democratic body
reflecting the evolution of international relations and of
the United Nations over the past 70 years.

A key element of Security Council reform is a
change to its working methods. While documents
have been adopted with the aim of improving the
Council's methods of work, including presidential
note S/2010/507, greater efforts are required in order
to find effective formulas that guarantee a genuine
participation of Member States in the Council's work
and in its decision-making.

Often measures are adopted that do not take
into account the views of all Council members and
sometimes not even those of its permanent members.
Lack of transparency and exclusionary practices are a
constant thread running through the dynamics of the
Council's work.

Under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Member States recognize that the Security
Council, in carrying out its functions, acts on their
behalf. Therefore, the work of the Council is the
collective responsibility of all Member States, and
they should be guaranteed genuine participation in the
Council's work and decision-making process.

Cuba reiterates that, at the very least, the following
changes should be made in the Council's working
methods.

The Council should make every effort to achieve
broad consensus through the required consultations
and negotiations before undertaking any action. No
one should be forced to accept a text when considerable
differences remain with regard to its contents.

The number of public meetings of the Council
must be increased. Closed meetings and informal
consultations should be the exception and not the rule.
Dialogue and interaction between the Council and the
wider United Nations membership must improve. In that
regard, we welcome and encourage the continuation of
the practice of holding monthly wrap-up sessions, as
recent Council presidencies have done.

States that are directly involved or especially
affected should always participate in the Council's
deliberations on issues that concern them directly, as
required under Article 31 of the Charter. The Council's
resolutions and presidential statements should reflect
the views that have been expressed by Member States
and in particular by the State directly concerned or
especially affected.

Countries that are non-members of the Council
must have access to subsidiary bodies, including the
right to participate in their deliberations and to receive
sufficient and timely information on their activities.

In order to enhance the transparency and the level
of accountability ofthe Council, a definitive text should
be adopted that regulates its work. It is inconceivable
that the Council's rules of procedure remain provisional
after some 70 years.

The annual reports that the Council is obligated
to submit to the General Assembly must truly be
analytical in nature and should adequately assess its
performance. We reiterate the need for the Council
to submit the special reports required of it under the
Charter in its Articles 15 and 24, unfortunately, have
not yet been issued.

The question of the veto is inextricably linked
to the issue of the Council's working methods, in
particular its decision-making mechanism. The veto
is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that
should be eliminated as soon as possible.
We share the concerns expressed with regard to
the growing trend of the Security Council to consider
issues and assume functions that are outside its remit.
This encroaches increasingly on the role entrusted by
the Charter to other United Nations organs, particularly
the General Assembly.

All too frequently and often prematurely, the
Council has been addressing issues that do not
necessarily pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security, invoking Chapter VII. Indeed, in
accordance with the mandate granted by the Charter
of the United Nations, the Security Council must focus
on addressing the most urgent problems that threaten
international peace and security. Chapter VII should be
invoked, as provided for in the Charter, as a last resort.
Another shared concern is the application of double
standards and the manipulation of the Council when it
comes to the consideration of certain issues under by
this organ.

The central focus of this open debate on working
methods should contribute to the essential reform and
democratization of the Security Council. We aspire to
having a representative, democratic, transparent and
efficient Security Council that takes into account the
views of all Member States, pursuant to the mandate set
out in the Charter of the United Nations and the various
realities in our world.

