Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie and Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun for their informative
and appropriately bleak briefings and for the ongoing
attention that their respective teams give to the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in spite
of persistent obstacles put up by the North Korean
Government.

Today's meeting reflects the growing consensus
among Council members and States Members of the
United Nations that the widespread and systematic
human rights violations being committed by the North
Korean Government are not only deplorable in their
own right, but also pose a threat to international peace
and security. A major impetus for the Security Council
taking up this issue was the comprehensive report issued
in February 2014 by the United Nations Human Rights
Council commission of inquiry in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (S/2014/276, annex). The
commission of inquiry conducted more than 200
confidential interviews with victims, eyewitnesses and
former officials and held public hearings in which more
than 80 witnesses gave testimony. Witness accounts
were corroborated by other forms of evidence, such
as satellite imagery confirming the location of prison
camps.

North Korea denied the commission access to the
country, consistent with its policy of routinely denying
access to independent human rights and humanitarian
groups, including the Red Cross and United Nations
special rapporteurs. Despite repeated requests, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea refused to
cooperate with the inquiry.

The main finding of the commission's thorough
and objective report is that

"[s]ystematic, widespread and gross human rights

violations have been and are being committed

by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea"

(S/2014/276, annex, para. 24).

The commission found that the evidence it gathered
provided reasonable grounds to determine that

"crimes against humanity have been committed
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
pursuant to policies established at the highest level
of the State" (ibid., para. 75).

If you have not watched any of the hours victims'
testimony or read from the hundreds of pages of
transcripts from the commission's public hearings,
Mr. President, I urge you to do so. They show North
Korea for what it is - a living nightmare.

A former prisoner of Political Prison Camp No. 15,
Kim Young-soon said she and other prisoners were so
famished that they picked kernels of corn from the dung
of cattle to eat. She said,

"[I]f there was a day that we were able to have a
mouse, this was a special diet for us. We had to
eat everything alive, every type of meat that
we could find; anything that flew, that crawled
on the ground. Any grass that grew in the field"
(A/HRC/25/CRP.1, para. 770).

Ahn Myong-chol, a former guard at prison camp 22
spoke of guards routinely raping prisoners. In one case
in which a victim became pregnant and gave birth, the
former guard reported, the prison officials cooked her
baby and fed it to their dogs. This sounds unbelievable
and unthinkable, yet this is what a former guard told the
commission ofinquiry at a public hearing. His account
fits a pattern across witness testimonies of sadistic
punishments meted out to prisoners whose crime was
being raped by officials.

The commission estimates that between 80,000
and 120,000 are being held in prison camps like the
ones where so many of these crimes occurred. Many
who testified before the commission were tortured as
punishment for trying to flee North Korea. One man
who was sent back to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea from China described being held in prison
cells that were only around 50 centimetres high -just
over a foot and a half. He said the guards told him that
because the prisoners were animals they would have to
crawl like animals.

A woman from the city of Musan told how her
brother was caught after fleeing to China. When he
was returned, North Korean security officials bound
his hands and chained him to the back ofa truck before
dragging him roughly 45 kilometres, driving three
loops around the city so everyone could see, his sister
testified. "When he fell down, they kept on driving",
she said. Nor are the horrors limited to prison camps, or
those who try to flee. The commission found

"an almost complete denial of the right of freedom
of thought, conscience and religion, as well as
of the rights to freedom of opinion, expression,
information and association" (S/2014/276, annex, para. 26)

in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

On 18 December, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 69/188 expressing grave concern at the
commission's findings and roundly condemning the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's widespread
and gross violations of human rights. One hundred
and sixteen Member States voted in favour, 20 against
and 53 abstained. The resolution also encourages the
Security Council to

"take appropriate action to ensure accountability,
including through consideration of referral of the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
and consideration of the scope for effective targeted
sanctions against those who appear to be most
responsible" (resolution 69/188, para. 8).
The Security Council should demand that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea change its
atrocious practices, which demonstrate a fundamental
disregard for human rights and constitute a threat to
international peace and security. We should take that
on for three reasons.

First, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
response to the commission of inquiry's report, and
even to the prospect of today's meeting, shows that
it is sensitive to criticism of its human rights record.
We need only look at all the different strategies North
Korea has tried in the past several months to distract
attention from the report, to delegitimize its findings
and to avoid scrutiny of its human rights record. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has ramped
up its propaganda machine, publishing its own sham
report on its human rights record and claiming "the
world's most advantageous human rights system". The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea tried to smear
the reputation of hundreds of people who were brave
enough to speak out about the heinous abuses they
suffered, calling them "human scum bereft of even
an iota of conscience". That was in a statement North
Korea sent to the Security Council today. And North
Korea has launched slurs against the commission's
chairman, Justice Kirby. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has deployed threats saying any
effort to hold it more accountable for its atrocities
would be met with "catastrophic consequences". All of
North Korea's responses - the threats, the smears, the
cynical diversions - show that the Government feels
the need to defend its abysmal human rights record.
That is precisely why our attention is so important.

The second argument for exerting additional
pressure is that when regimes warn of deadly reprisals
against countries that condemn their atrocities, as the
North Koreans have done, that is precisely the moment
when we need to stand up, and not back down. Dictators
who see that threats are an effective tool for silencing
the international community tend to be emboldened
and not placated. That holds true not only for the North
Korean regime, but for human rights violators around
the world who are watching how the Security Council
responds to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
threats. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is
already shockingly cavalier about dishing out threats of
staging nuclear attacks, and has routinely flouted the
prohibitions on proliferation imposed by the Security
Council. In July, North Korea's military threatened to
launch nuclear weapons at the White House and the
Pentagon, and in March 2013 it threatened to launch
a pre-emptive strike on the United States of America,
saying, " Everything will be reduced to ashes and
flames".

In the most recent example of its recklessness, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea carried out a
significant cyberattack on the United States in response
to a comedy portraying a farcical assassination plot. The
attack destroyed systems and stole massive quantities
of personal and commercial data from Sony Pictures
Entertainment, not only damaging a private sector
entity, but also affecting countless Americans who
work for the company. The attackers also threatened
Sony's employees, actors in the film, movie theatres
and even people who dared to go to the theatre showing
the movie, warning them to "remember 11 September".

Not content with denying freedom of expression to
its own people, the North Korean regime now seems
intent on suppressing the exercise of that fundamental
freedom in our nation. North Korea has also threatened
the United States with serious consequences if our
country did not conduct a joint investigation with the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea into an attack
that it carried out. That is absurd, yet it is exactly the
kind ofbehaviour we have come to expect from a regime
that has threatened to take "merciless countermeasures"
against the United States over a Hollywood comedy,
and has no qualms about holding tens of thousands
of people in harrowing gulags. We cannot give in to
threats or intimidation of any kind.

Thirdly, the international community does not
need to choose between focusing on North Korea's
proliferation of nuclear weapons and focusing on its
widespread and ongoing abuses against its own people.
That is a false choice. We must do both, as we have
seen throughout history that the way countries treat
their own citizens - particularly those countries that
systematically commit atrocities against their own
people - tends to align closely with the way they
treat other countries and the norms of our shared
international system.

On 23 November, a week after the Third Committee
adopted its draft resolution on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, North Korea's military
said, "All those involved in its adoption deserve a
severe punishment" and warned again of catastrophic
consequences. Now here, presumably, "all" would
imply the more than 100 Member States that voted
for the draft resolution. The military also said that if
Japan "continued behaving as now it will disappear
from the world map". When a country threatens nuclear
annihilation because it receives criticism of how it
treats its own people, can there be any doubt regarding
the connection between North Korea's human rights
and international peace and security?

North Korea did not want us to meet today and
vociferously opposed the country's human rights
situation being added to the Security Council's agenda.
If the Democratic People's Republic of Korea wants to
be taken offthe Security Council's agenda, it can start by
following the commission ofinquiry's recommendations
to acknowledge the systematic violations it continues
to commit, immediately dismantle political prison
camps and release all political prisoners, allow free
and unfettered access by independent human rights
observers, and hold accountable those most responsible
for its systematic Violations. Knowing the utter
improbability of North Korea's making those and the
long list of other necessary changes, it is encumbent
on the Security Council to consider the commission
of inquiry's recommendation that the situation in
North Korea be referred to the International Criminal
Court and to consider other appropriate action on
accountability, as 116 United Nations Member States
have urged the Council to do.

In the meantime, the United States will support
the efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to establish a field-based office to
continue documenting the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's human rights violations, as mandated by the
Human Rights Council, as well as support the work of
the Special Rapporteur. Both should brief the Council
on new developments in future sessions on that issue. It
is also crucial that all of Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's neighbours abide by the principle of
non-refoulement, given the horrific abuses that North
Koreans are subjected to upon return, and provide
unfettered access to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in their countries.
The United States of America will continue to welcome
North Korean refugees to our country and help provide
assistance to North Korean asylum-seekers in other
countries.

It is reasonable to debate the most effective strategy
to end the nightmare of North Korea's human rights
crisis. What is unconscionable in the face of those
widespread abuses and dangerous, given the threat
that the situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea poses to international peace and security, is
to stay silent. Silence will not make the North Korean
Government end its abuses. Silence will not make the
international community safer. Today we have broken
the Council's silence. We have begun to shine the light,
and what it has revealed is terrifying. We must continue
to shine that light for as long as those abuses persist.
Today's meeting is another important step, but far from
the last, towards accountability for the crimes being
perpetrated against the people of North Korea. The
Council must come back to speak regularly about the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's human rights
situation and what we can do to change it for as long as
the crimes that brought us here today persist. That is
the absolute minimum we can and must do.

