Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start
by expressing our gratitude to the Rwandan presidency
of the Security Council for organizing this important
meeting to discuss the ways of addressing the root
causes of conflicts in Africa. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Ambassador
Tekeda Alemu for their statements.

In 1998, the Secretary-General submitted the first
comprehensive report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (S/1998/318). That detailed report provided a
clear and candid analysis of the sources of conflicts in
Africa and put forward important recommendations to
reduce conflict and build a strong and durable peace. At
the heart ofthe report was a call to African countries and
to the international community to demonstrate political
will in order to transform the rhetoric into reality and
to take concrete actions in a number of areas. After 15
years, that call still maintains its relevance.

In the past decade, Africa as a whole has made
significant progress. Many African States have taken
serious steps towards political stability, democratization
and sustainable economic and social development.
However, despite all the efforts and achievements, the
goal of peace and prosperity on the African continent has
yet to be realized. Ongoing old conflicts and emerging
new ones and instability, coupled with political,
security, economic and humanitarian challenges, have
not ceased.

Notwithstanding the diversity among the African
countries in many respects, as well as the differences
in their external and domestic political aspirations,
their economic development dynamics and their social
fabrics, the root causes of conflicts are, on the whole,
similar and interlinked. They are also complex and
multifaceted. It is not possible to define one single
underlying cause or to design a universal solution to all
conflicts in the continent. A comprehensive, integrated
and radical response and consistent engagement of
international, regional and national actors are critical
in that regard.

As a country suffering from the occupation of
a significant part of its territory and the forcible
displacement of hundreds of thousands of its citizens,
Azerbaijan fully understands the threats and challenges
affecting countries with unresolved conflicts, including
those in Africa. We proceed from the firm position that
all efforts aimed at preventing and resolving conflicts
in Africa and elsewhere must be based on the principles
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of States.

Further resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. In particular, ending
impunity is important not only for prosecuting and
bringing to justice those responsible for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, genocide, ethnic cleansing
or other grave violations of international humanitarian
law, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth and
reconciliation. In any event, the conflict prevention
and resolution initiatives considered by the Security
Council and regional arrangements must ensure that
peace and justice work together effectively.

The illegal exploitation of and trade in natural
resources in Africa remain one of the factors conducive
to the emergence and recurrence of conflicts. There is
a need to address that issue through employing a range
of instruments to limit the trade in conflict resources.
International assistance should be enhanced to ensure
the effectiveness of national and regional initiatives
designed to address the negative implications of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources in all its aspects.

In recent years, remarkable efforts have been
displayed by the African Union, as a leading regional
player, and subregional organizations in Africa to
collectively promote peace, security and stability on
the continent. We have also seen significant progress
in developing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.

At the same time, it should be stressed that
responsibility for peace and security in Africa,
including addressing the root causes of conflicts,
lies primarily with African countries, whereas the
international community, including the United Nations,
should support and complement the relevant national
and regional processes.

Enhanced cooperation with the African Union
and its member States is one of the foreign policy
priorities of Azerbaijan. We fully support the approach
that international efforts to prevent conflicts and
consolidate peace in Africa should be channelled
towards sustainable development and human and
institutional capacity-building in African countries in
line with their priorities and the relevant capacities of
African organizations.

My country has implemented various assistance
programmes and provided financial aid to alleviate
humanitarian challenges in some African countries.
We are determined to continue our dialogue with
the African Union and its member States and to
jointly explore further opportunities to deepen our
engagement in many areas critical to establishing peace
and prosperity on the African continent.

