Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I would like to
thank the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
for their informative briefings. My delegation is
pleased to note the improvements with regard to the
coordination of the work of the three Committees and
their respective experts structures, as well as the
greater synergy between the Security Council and the
General Assembly, as called for in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

South Africa, in partnership with the majority of
the members of the Council, has worked tirelessly over
the past few years in an attempt to bring the Al-Qaida
and Taliban sanctions regime in line with basic
standards of procedural fairness and legal due process.
The judgement handed down by the European Court of
Justice in the cases of Qadi and Al Barakaat sent a
clear message that a sanctions regime will fail if the
concerns of Member States regarding the legal rights of
individuals and fair and clear procedures are not taken
into account.

The adoption of resolution 1822 (2008) marks a
positive step towards the reform of the sanctions
regime. The resolution provides for the public
disclosure of narrative summaries of the motivation for
the listing and seeks to enhance the quality of the
information contained on the consolidated list.
However, it is clear that a great deal of work needs to
be done to give effect to the intention of resolution
1822 (2008). Moreover, there remains an urgent need
for an independent and non-political review
mechanism for listing and de-listing.

We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's preliminary implementation assessments
and country visits are proving to be useful tools in
promoting dialogue with Member States. South Africa
was one of the countries that hosted a joint Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)-
1267 Monitoring Team country visit this year and we
found the visit beneficial to our ongoing efforts to
assess and improve our national anti-terrorism systems.
South Africa remains the only country thus far to have
agreed to the inclusion of a human rights expert in a
CTED country visit. It is our hope that other countries
will follow this example, given that the Global

Strategy's holistic and multifaceted approach to
terrorism is premised on the need to respect human
rights and the rule of law.

South Africa shares the international
community's concerns regarding the existence of
networks dealing in the illicit transfer of nuclear-
related technology, materials and equipment. Our own
practical experience as one of the few countries to have
successfully prosecuted suspects in the A.Q. Khan
network case highlighted the value of cooperation with
international partners, and in particular the relevant
multilateral institutions. Unfortunately, the reluctance
of some to seek the prosecution of key suspects within
their own jurisdictions also showed that there remains
a great disparity between rhetoric in support of
resolution 1540 (2004) and concrete steps to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to
work towards their complete elimination.

Consequently, we welcome the Security
Council's acceptance of our proposal to build in a
reference to proliferation networks in resolution 1810
(2008). We look forward to giving practical effect to
that provision in the Committee's next programme of
work.

In conclusion, it is our hope that the United
Nations, including the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies, will continue to play the central role
in the international community's collective effort to
address the threat posed by terrorism. That is best done
under the framework of the Global Strategy, with its
appropriate emphasis on inclusiveness, human rights,
the rule of law and addressing the root causes of
terrorism, such as foreign occupation and oppression.

