Mr. Ramaker (Netherlands): The Netherlands
subscribes wholeheartedly to the statement of the European
Union delivered earlier today by the British Presidency of
the Union. Allow me therefore to make just a few
additional comments.

The Netherlands warmly welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on Africa. The report before us will
remain a source of reference for a long time for the
problems it is addressing. It is comprehensive, thoughtful,
critical where necessary, and practical. It shows for the first
time clearly how a reforming United Nations, a closely
coordinating United Nations system, including the Bretton
Woods institutions, hand in hand with civil society, the
non-governmental organization world and the regional
organizations and Governments in Africa in close
cooperation can turn things around.

The report does not merely assess problems; it
suggests innovative solutions and ways to contribute to
durable peace and economic growth in Africa. Some
recommendations are especially directed at the Security
Council, and the Netherlands would hope that the Council
will give them the attention they deserve. Other suggestions
should be discussed in the relevant United Nations bodies,
and still others by the Member States themselves at the
national level. The Netherlands will not be found wanting
in its active participation in further discussions on how best
to put the Secretary-General's recommendations into effect.

The report notes that the United Nations early warning
capabilities have been significantly improved over the past
few years. But yes, indeed, early warning without early
action remains an empty shell. The report is clearly based
on lessons learned, not only on early warning and conflict
prevention, but on conflict management, peacemaking and
post-conflict peace- building. In doing so, the Secretary-
General was so courageous as not to spare the United
Nations and its institutions the critical scrutiny they should
be given, as the United Nations has itself been an actor in
many conflict situations. We should benefit from reviewing
the successes and failures of these actions. On the basis of
lessons learned, the Netherlands endorses in particular the
report's calls for mediation efforts in conflict situations to
start early and to have special envoys or special
representatives appointed at an early stage.

The report notes that preventive deployment is a
proactive response to the threat of conflict. The
Netherlands feels that one of the lessons learned should
be that conflicts tend to escalate quickly and policies
developed in response may already be outdated by the
time they can be implemented. In peacekeeping, perhaps
even more than in other domains, it is of essential
importance not to be overtaken by events. When the
tragic events unfolded in the Great Lakes region in 1994
before the eyes of the world, the Netherlands pointed to
the necessity that the United Nations be provided with the
instruments to respond rapidly to emerging conflicts. In
the years since, several initiatives have been launched to
this effect, but none of those have, much to the regret of
the Netherlands, materialized in a concrete military
capacity. This clearly shows that we still have a long way
to go to meet this requirement, the principle of which
remains as valid now as before. The Netherlands will
continue to support all efforts aimed at further
strengthening United Nations rapid deployment
capabilities.

The Netherlands shares the Secretary-General's view
that humanitarian assistance is of great importance at
various stages of conflict. In fact, humanitarian assistance
may serve prevention as it reduces the danger of conflicts
emerging from emergency situations. Humanitarian
assistance during an actual conflict is also essential in
order to prevent the population from suffering from strife,
and in the phase of post-conflict reconstruction as well, to
help stabilize the situation and promote sustainable peace.
Another lesson learned points to the enormous importance
to be given to measures to prevent the parties to a conflict
from using humanitarian aid flows as a weapon in their
struggle.

The report notes that a lack of economic
development in itself may constitute an important source
of conflict. The Netherlands shares the Secretary-
General's View that economic reform is needed in many
parts of Africa. Indeed, African countries should strive to
make foreign investment more attractive. On the other
hand, unwanted consequences of economic reform should
be kept in check. The Netherlands especially endorses the
Secretary-General's appeal that while implementing
economic reform programmes the position of the weakest
sections of society should be given special attention and
consideration. In fact, much of the development effort of
the Netherlands is geared to that objective.

The Netherlands welcomes a critical examination of
aid flows. The report cites the example of a huge portion

 

of technical assistance to Africa being spent on foreign
expertise. The Netherlands, as is well known, is strongly in
favour of increasing the effectiveness of development
assistance. We are convinced that assistance meant for
Africa should be spent as much as possible in Africa. In
fiscal year 1996 - we have no more recent figures
available - the Netherlands devoted some $3 billion to
development assistance, almost 30 per cent of which, or
roughly $800 million, was used for projects and
programmes for Africa. It is estimated that of this sum,
substantially more than 50 per cent was spent in Africa
itself.

The Netherlands welcomes the call by the Secretary-
General to help reduce the debt burden for the poorest
countries. This has been part of the Netherlands
development policy for a long time. Over the period from
1991 to 1996, the Netherlands agreed on bilateral debt
alleviation to a total of $648 million, constituting a
significant contribution to debt redemption worldwide.

An important quality of the present report is that it not
only looks at the past, but is forward-looking at the same
time. Indeed, we share the report's guarded optimism.
There are encouraging signs from Africa in areas which
constitute vital preconditions for durable peace and
development, for democratization, good governance and
respect for human rights. For the first time in decades,
African economies are reporting sometimes substantial real
growth. Positive developments in Africa are seen to be
gaining momentum. The Netherlands fully endorses the call
of the Secretary-General to summon the political will to
make a change and to use the momentum which is already
under way. If the political will can be summoned, both by
the international community and by Africa itself, a better
future for Africa, for millions of people who desire to live
in peace and to see their living conditions improving, is
really within reach.

