Ms. Shalev (Israel): Madam President, allow me
to commend you for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month. Let me also thank
Mr. Lynn Pasco, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his informative briefing.

Almost two years ago, I came to New York to
represent the Israel that I know and love: a vibrant,
democratic State that shares the noble values
enumerated in the Charter of the United Nations. That
is precisely why I have sat in this Council time and
again to declare Israel's commitment to peace. For
words are the father of action; declarations of peace are
the precursors of peace.

Hence, Israel calls for direct negotiations
between us and the Palestinians - no preconditions,
no delays. With Jerusalem and Ramallah only 10
minutes apart, direct negotiations are the only path to
bridge the existing gaps. In anticipation of such direct
talks, our partners and our neighbours have an essential
role: to embrace the language of peace and coexistence
and to reject one-sided narratives. And so I ask, how
many times in this Chamber have our neighbours
recognized Israel's right to exist as the homeland for
the Jewish people, or condemned Hamas terrorism and
violence against Israeli civilians, or spoken out against
those who call for us to be wiped off the map? Not
once. The silence is deafening.

As we seek a way forward in our region, we
applaud the important work of Senator George Mitchell
on behalf of United States President Barack Obama.
Senator Mitchell works to achieve our shared vision of
two States living side by side in peace and security, one
Jewish, one Palestinian. Despite this important work
and progress towards direct negotiations, there exists a
dangerous phenomenon in our region. So-called
activists, under the guise of humanitarian aid, support
terrorist forces in our region, particularly in the
Hamas-controlled Gaza Strip. The organizers of such
efforts in Gaza - with the cooperation of Hamas and
others who oppose peace - are fully aware of the
internationally recognized and unimpeded channels for
delivering aid to the Gaza Strip. They are aware of the
good offices available to them if they truly desire to
assist the people of Gaza. Yet these provocateurs seek
nothing but confrontation. They choose violence,
escalation and instant media headlines in an effort to
delegitimize Israel.

As we just heard from Mr. Pascoe, the
phenomenon of flotillas to Gaza is not conducive to
efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East. Indeed, in
this respect I wish to share with the Council Israel's
deep concern regarding new reports of yet another
flotilla departing from Lebanon to the Gaza Strip. We
call upon the international community to exert its
influence on the organizers of this provocative action.
We also call on the Government of Lebanon to
demonstrate its responsibility to prevent this from
happening.

In Lebanon, the terrorist organization Hizbullah
continues to build its military infrastructure and embed
it into the civilian population. Transfers of
sophisticated weapons from Syria and Iran to
Hizbullah systematically violate the arms embargo. At
the same time, this terrorist group continues to place
increasingly sophisticated and deadly weapons within
villages, adjacent to schools, hospitals and civilian
homes. This is a blatant violation of international law
and basic dictates of humanity.

Just as alarming, recent confrontations in
southern Lebanon between the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and so-called Lebanese
civilians reflect Hizbullah's efforts to redeploy its
forces and further harass and assault the critical work
of UNIFIL. These most recent clashes against UNIFIL
are a direct violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and a
challenge to the members of the Security Council. In
this respect, Israel commends the Security Council for
meeting on 9 July to address these most recent
confrontations. Hizbullah's provocations must not go
unanswered by the Council. The Security Council has
repeatedly and clearly stipulated that this terrorist
organization must disarm and disband.

As we seek a way forward, certain basic
principles must emerge. The first is security. Israel's
security will never be compromised by us. We must all
recognize that since the advent of peace talks, the
threats facing Israel have grown more diverse and
dangerous: the rockets of Iranian proxies Hamas and
Hizbullah, global terrorism and the pursuit of nuclear
weapons by Iran.
In direct negotiations, we stand prepared to take
political risks for peace. We have taken a major step
with respect to Israel's policy towards the closure of
Gaza. As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe, all goods that are not weapons or materiel for
warlike purposes are now entering Gaza. Beyond Gaza,
we have worked with the Palestinian Authority to build
a flourishing economy in the West Bank.

The second principle is that we must look
towards a definitive end to the conflict that involves
mutual recognition. A request that Israel recognize a
Palestinian State as the nation-State of the Palestinian
people must be met with an acknowledgement that
Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people. Through
such mutual recognition, we can take tangible steps
towards promoting coexistence, eliminating incitement
and combating terrorism. Through such mutual
recognition, courageous decisions can be made for the
sake of peace. Through such mutual recognition, we
can speak with each other, not past one another or
through intermediaries.

Before concluding, my comments today would be
incomplete without expressing our ongoing deep
concern that Gilad Shalit has remained deprived of his
most basic human rights, including any visit from the
Red Cross, for more than four years. Israel expects the
international community to do all in its power - more
than has been done thus far - to bring about the swift
release of Gilad Shalit.

Peace is not merely a signed document. It is a set
of values that allow us all to live our lives in security
and with hope - Israelis and Palestinian alike.

