Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing.

China has taken note of the presidential election
held in Ukraine on 25 May and respects the choice made
by the people of Ukraine. At present, he continuing
problems and occasional outbreaks of armed conflict
and violence in Ukraine have resulted in heavy
casualties and loss of life, about which China is deeply
concerned.

Regarding the situation in Ukraine in general, I
would like to stress the following points.

First, China adheres consistently to the principle
of non-interference in other countries' internal affairs
and respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries, including Ukraine. We urge all parties
in Ukraine to remain calm and restrained, bring an
immediate halt to the violence, avoid harming innocent
people and prevent the further escalation of tension and
worsening of the situation. China hopes to see stability
return with the early restoration of law and order in the
country.

Secondly, the crisis in Ukraine involves complex
historical factors and ethnic conflicts. A political
solution is the only way to defuse it. We hope all the
parties will continue with dialogue and negotiations
and will push for a settlement of the crisis through
political means, by giving full recognition to the
legitimate rights, interests and aspirations of every
region and ethnic group in the country, accommodating
all parties' legitimate concerns and achieving a balance
of interests among them.
Thirdly, China supports the international
community as it continues to use its good offices to
ease the situation in Ukraine. It is an urgent priority that
all parties refrain from making threats and imposing
sanctions and return to the consensus of the four-party
Geneva talks to ensure full implementation of that
consensus and, on the basis of that agreement, resume
the four-party talks and allow political dialogue to play
the major role in reaching a negotiated settlement to the
crisis, seeking common ground while avoiding conflict
and confrontation.

Fourthly, China has always adopted a fair and
objective approach on the issue of Ukraine and has
advocated a three-principles initiative that we had
proposed for a political solution to the Ukraine crisis.
We have continued, in our own way, working with all
parties. We are in favour of any option that is conducive
to easing tensions and promoting a negotiated political
settlement, and we are willing to continue our
constructive role.

