I would like to thank Germany as President of the Security Council for organizing this high-level open debate, and I thank the Secretary-General for his report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487). Serbia aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25), and I would like to make the following remarks in our national capacity. Serbia strongly supports the activities aimed at preventing all forms of violence, including sexual violence in armed conflicts. Regular consideration of this issue within the United Nations with the full cooperation of all relevant actors, such as States, international organizations and civil society, is a prerequisite for wider and more efficient and effective action. The first steps in that direction were made with the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It was followed by a number of other resolutions and Security Council presidential statements, including resolution 2106 (2013), on the basis of which the Secretary-General's reports on this issue are submitted every year. Serbia supports the efforts of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and other United Nations mechanisms, as evidenced by co-sponsoring, inter alia, General Assembly resolution 69/293 in 2015, by which 19 June was proclaimed the International Day for the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. Serbia also supported the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), once again joining the global efforts aimed at eliminating this grievous type of violence and at punishing those responsible for the crime. We commend the victim-focused approach and deem that the response to sexual violence in conflict should prioritize the rights and needs of victims. However, achieving the common goal at the global level must be supported by appropriate measures at the national level. The measures should be twofold, focused on the establishment of an efficient system of prevention and on the punishment of perpetrators. Serbia is a State party to the Rome Statute and supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court to prosecute crimes of sexual violence in conflict. It also fully cooperated with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in prosecuting crimes of sexual violence committed during conflicts in the territory of former Yugoslavia. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor and the Special Division of the Higher Court for War Crimes are the competent bodies addressing this issue at the national level. Yet prevention measures are not always sufficient. It is therefore necessary to establish a system that ensures that perpetrators of sexual violence are brought to justice. However, victims are often not prepared to report incidents of sexual violence due primarily to stigmatization. The number of victims is therefore established subsequently by way of differing methodologies. Developing a uniform methodology to ascertain and document the number of victims of sexual violence, to be used by Governments, international governmental and non-governmental organizations, expert circles and individuals, would help to create a uniform approach to assessing the number of victims of sexual violence in conflict. Encouraging victims of sexual violence to report the crime is the first step in detecting and punishing perpetrators and, consequently, in preventing the crime. Serbia is advocating for the establishment of a system of prevention through the inclusion of the gender dimension in national security forces and international peacekeeping missions. The protection of witnesses, in general, and the protection of aggrieved parties, in particular, are of paramount importance to the process of establishing responsibility and punishing the perpetrators. It should be borne in mind that, in the absence of written documents, the main source of evidence in proceedings such as these is eyewitness testimony. Serbia's experience in that regard indicates that, following the establishment of witness protection measures, victims of sexual violence in armed conflicts in the former Yugoslavia have been encouraged to testify. All along, the Victim and Witness Assistance and Support Service has been instrumental in encouraging and assisting the aggrieved parties. The manipulation of numbers, however, does not contribute to the pursuit of justice, often leads to politicization, has a negative impact on the reconciliation process in post-conflict societies and, more often than not, brings no justice to, and does not indemnify, individual victims. Particularly problematic are attempts to establish a hierarchy of victims on an ethnic, religious, gender or some other basis. The number of victims of sexual violence in conflict diminishes neither the terrible effect of this type of violence on each individual victim nor the responsibility of States to punish the perpetrators and make it possible for victims to access justice. Serbia's criminal justice protects victims of sexual violence by way of prosecuting two criminal offences: crimes against the civilian population and the organization ofa group and incitement to the perpetration of genocide and war crimes. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor was also established, and it has processed multiple cases related to sexual violence in armed conflicts. Serbia has therefore ensured, institutionally and in practical terms, the highest level of processing of these crimes and the protection of victims of sexual violence. It is exceptionally important that this be done by all parties currently participating, or that previously participated, in armed conflicts, because it is never too late to bring perpetrators to justice and ensure proper punishment. This is exactly what is needed for the process of genuine reconciliation among one-time belligerents. I would like to reaffirm Serbia's strong commitment and continued support to tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflicts.
