Mr. Christian (Ghana): Allow me to thank you,

Mr. President, for organizing this debate, as well as to

express my appreciation to Mr. Ashraf Jehangir Qazi,

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

Iraq, for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Iraq.

We would like to recognize the presence here
today of Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi, Vice-President of Iraq.

My delegation welcomes the initiative of the
Government of Iraq to convene an international
meeting in Baghdad on 10 March 2007, which
deliberated on ways to restore stability in Iraq. At that
constructive meeting, it was decided to set up
committees to discuss issues pertaining to security,
refugees and energy supplies. That should be the
beginning of further coordinated efforts at the regional
and international levels to assist Iraq.

We are encouraged that preparatory activities for
the International Compact with Iraq have continued,
resulting in the finalization of documentation. We look
forward to the meeting to be held on Friday, 16 March,
to review the substantive progress made in the
development of the Compact. We share the Secretary-
General's assessment that positive political progress
and a reduction in violence in Iraq are essential
preconditions for the success of that initiative.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) Office of Constitutional Support should be
commended for its continued assistance to the
Constitutional Review Committee of the Council of
Representatives in its conduct of the comprehensive
review of the Iraqi Constitution. In addition to
facilitating substantive dialogue among members of the
Committee and strengthening the Committee's
outreach capacity to civil society during the
constitutional review process, UNAMI and the
Committee agreed on a defined programme of support.
Beyond those activities, the study tours arranged by the
Office for members of the Constitutional Review
Committee enabled them to profit from the experience
of countries with federal arrangements.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/ 126)
informs us that UNAMI has continued its engagement
with the Independent High Electoral Commission of
Iraq and has undertaken a comprehensive capacity-
building assessment of the institution, which should
form the framework for the planning of activities of the
UNAMI Electoral Assistance Office for the first half of

2007. In that regard, we note UNAMI's pledge to assist
the Independent High Electoral Commission of Iraq to
meet the significant challenges that remain in
preparation for future electoral events in Iraq by
supporting the drafting of legislation, developing a
governorate-level electoral capacity, advising on
electoral systems and developing a credible list of
voters.

The worsening humanitarian and human rights
situation in Iraq should be of serious concern to us.
Two million refugees are reported to be in
neighbouring countries, with a nearly equal number
displaced inside Iraq. Given the dire circumstances of
those unfortunate victims of civil strife and sectarian
violence, the urgency for the international community
to address that crisis cannot be overemphasized. We
urge the international community to support efforts by
the United Nations to assist those in need.

The United Nations presence and activities in
Iraq continue to be severely limited by the prevailing
security situation. It is to the credit of UNAMI that
mitigation measures in place within the international
zone and the security precautions taken during visits to
other parts of Baghdad have reduced the overall risk to
United Nations staff. We acknowledge the contribution
of Member States that provide logistic and protection
support to the United Nations presence in Iraq.
However, the Trust Fund established in 2004 to support
the United Nations distinct entity, in accordance with
resolution 1546 (2004), will be exhausted this month.
We join the Secretary-General in requesting that fresh
financial contributions are made to the Trust Fund to
ensure that the middle-ring force is well-resourced in
the future.

