Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I understand that the last
speaker has until six o'clock to deliver his statement. At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this open debate on the Security Council's
working methods as well as for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2015/793, annex) you have presented
as a guide for this discussion. I would like to also take
this opportunity to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Security Council - Egypt, Senegal,
Japan, Ukraine and Uruguay. My delegation wishes
to highlight the following key aspects that we believe
are of particular importance for the reform and the
improvements of the effectiveness and the transparency
of the Security Council.

In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Member States have conferred upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
while recognizing that the Council acts on behalf of
all Member States when fulfilling its duties. Therefore,
to ensure the accomplishment of that mandate in a
transparent and efficient way, we believe that it is
imperative for the Council to further improve its
openness and its communication with the broader
United Nations membership.

In that context, Tunisia welcomes the progress
made during the past few years, in particular in the
implementation of the presidential note S/2010/507.
Nevertheless, we think that more efforts should be
exerted to fully implement the measures set out in the
note and to ensure greater coordination and dialogue
between the Security Council and non-members of the
Council, particularly countries involved in the decisions
of the Council, and the troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as with relevant regional and
subregional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

We also welcome the commitment made by the
members of Security Council through presidential
note S/2013/515 to make more effective use of public
meetings, interactive dialogues, wrap-up sessions and
Arria Formula meetings. Those practices contribute
to increase the transparency, credibility and ability of
the Security Council in carrying out its mandate and
addressing emerging challenges. Private meetings and
informal consultations should be kept to a minimum
and ought to be the exception rather than the rule.

With regard to the issues you have highlighted in
your concept note (S/2015/793, annex), Mr. President,
my delegation strongly believes that it is crucial to
improve the cooperation and the dialogue between
Security Council and other United Nations bodies,
mainly the General Assembly. A rich dialogue and
collaboration between the two will enhance both
entities and avoid overlap between their activities
and the encroachment of the Security Council on the
functions and prerogatives of the General Assembly.

On the other hand, the adoption ofthe 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) lends new impetus to the relationship
between the Security Council and the United Nations
Economic and Social Council. As stated in presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3, security and development
are closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing and
key to attaining sustainable peace.

Similarly, as rightly pointed out in the concept
note, the fulfilment of the functions entrusted to the
Secretary-General by Articles 98 and 99 of Charter
of the United Nations requires joint efforts and close
collaboration with the Security Council, so as to ease
the task of the Secretariat in undertaking good offices,
promoting political settlement and peacekeeping, and
implementing peace agreements and sanctions regimes.

I would also like to address the process of the
selection and appointment of the next Secretary-
General. My delegation underlines the role of the
General Assembly in the process, which should be
transparent and inclusive and take into consideration
an equal and fair distribution of candidates based on
gender and geographical balance.

On the right of the use of the veto, we are of the
view that the exercise of that right should be restrained
in cases of mass atrocities. We furthermore believe that
the initiative introduced by France and the one launched
by the Accountability Coherence and Transparency
group, led by Switzerland and Liechtenstein, represent
appropriate steps in that direction.

Finally, let me ensure you, Sir, of the commitment
of Tunisia to continue its support for improving
the work of the Security Council as part of a
comprehensive and inclusive approach in the context of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform, in accordance with General Assembly decision
62/557.

