Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin, if I
may, by welcoming Belgium and Germany to the role,
with Kuwait, of humanitarian co-penholders and by
thanking Kuwait and Sweden for their outstanding
efforts, especially the renewal in December of
resolution 2449 (2015), on cross-border aid to Syria, for
another year. Let me also set out the United Kingdom's
full support for Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Pedersen and our ongoing belief that only a political
solution, based on resolution 2254 (2015), can bring
sustainable peace.

Today, I am going to focus my comments on
humanitarian issues. Let me take Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock's four points as a guide.

First, in north-west Syria, the United Kingdom
is concerned about the growing presence of Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham and the implications of any increase
in violence for the ongoing humanitarian response. We
remain highly concerned for the 3 million vulnerable
people in the area - over 2 million of whom are
entirely reliant on cross-border aid. Fifty per cent of the
population of that area have been displaced from their
homes, sometimes multiple times, stretching scarce
resources beyond their limits and putting further strain
on host communities. We must not lose sight of the
risks. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has spoken
of a catastrophic humanitarian impact if a military
intervention takes place. It is vital that the ceasefire
negotiated by Russia and Turkey be maintained.

The situation of the estimated 42,000 people in
Rukban remains of serious concern. Eight children have
died there in the past month. Sustained humanitarian
access is crucial. It is welcome to hear that verbal
approvals have been given and security guarantees
made. This must now be followed through on the
ground and in reality. The second convoy is vital, but
it will not alone solve the problem. Our focus must be
on ensuring quality access for the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners. That means access for the
United Nations to independently assess needs, deliver
assistance and monitor the impact of that assistance.
We urge the Syrian authorities and those with influence
over them to ensure that this happens. In 2018, the United
Nations asked the Syrian authorities to undertake 1,382
missions. Over half were never approved. We should all
be able to agree that this is unacceptable.

Let me say that I agree with the Russian
Ambassador's comment that the politicization of
humanitarian assistance is unacceptable. In that
regard, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about conditions in former opposition-held areas that
the regime now controls. Claims that life there has
returned to normal are false. People there risk arbitrary
detention, conscription and discrimination based on
their perceived attitude towards the Al-Assad regime.
That is clearly not an environment for a safe, dignified
and voluntary refugee return - the conditions set out
by the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

Up to one-third of people living in areas that have
changed control in the past year are in so-called hard-
to-reach areas. They are hard to reach only because
the Syrian authorities do not allow the United Nations
sustained humanitarian presence in those areas and,
thus, humanitarian needs are particularly severe.
Again, this is unacceptable. The Syrian regime should
not politicize humanitarian assistance.

For our part, the United Kingdom will continue
to fund humanitarian assistance according to need,
and not by any other criteria. Those funds from the
United Kingdom have been distributed by the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners all over Syria,
as set out in the various documents and reports of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and others. The Syrian crisis has been the object of the
United Kingdom's biggest-ever humanitarian response.
We have mobilized $3.5 billion in support since 2012,
including a new commitment of over $450 million at
the most recent pledging conference in Brussels.

Let me close by saying I agree entirely with the
French Ambassador's comments about reconstruction.

