Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank
the delegation of Slovakia for having convened this
open debate on an issue that is of great importance to
my country. I should also like to congratulate you in
particular, Mr. President, on your commendable work
as Chairman of the Security Council established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Today's meeting gives countries not members of
the Security Council an opportunity to receive
information on the activities of international agencies
in the field and to offer observations on issues of
general interest, in particular concerning exchanges of
experiences, the preparation of national reports to the
1540 Committee and training in report preparation for
States that so request in their efforts to comply with the
provisions of paragraph 4 of the resolution.

Guatemala also wishes to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, the
Director-General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
representative of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) for their informative reports this
morning.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is particularly important
in fighting terrorism because it establishes a prevention
mechanism aimed at preventing non-State actors, in
particular terrorist groups, from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials. Guatemala's commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
results from our conviction that a clear and committed
policy in that field helps increase security around the
world and in specific regions, while at the same time
increasing the opportunities for growth and
development.

In that context, Guatemala submitted its national
report to the 1540 Committee in October 2004. I wish
to point out that the preparation of the report, although
difficult, was an enriching task because it enabled us
more precisely to identify and understand the
weaknesses and strengths of the Guatemalan system
and also made possible the full and active participation
of all national institutions working in this area.

This exercise not only ensured better inter-
institutional coordination, the creation of awareness in
the public and private sectors and the identification of
legal gaps and shortcomings in the implementation of
legislation; it also underscored the need to update our
legislation to accord with the State's international
obligations.

With regard to experience gained at the national
level, the inter-institutional consultation mechanism
enabled us to identify both administrative and
legislative needs. As a result, our own inter-
institutional committee worked on the preparation of a
draft counter-terrorism law. The draft law is aimed at
ensuring harsh punishment for any terrorist act. It
comprises a body of regulations that will allow us to
prevent terrorist acts and maintain tight security
controls, through the establishment of a national
counter-terrorism security council whose composition
and functions will focus on the prevention and control
of terrorism.

My delegation believes that assistance and
resources, especially for developing countries, are
essential for effective implementation of the relevant
national measures, because the main objectives behind
the adoption of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006) will be very difficult to achieve without
international cooperation and assistance. We commend
the achievements of the 1540 Committee in its
outreach activities at the regional and subregional
levels through the organization of workshops and
seminars, especially in Asia, Africa, Latin America and
the Caribbean, in order to create a space for the
exchange of ideas on the scope of resolution 1540
(2004), to share national experiences in preparing
reports and to become familiar with the degree of
national implementation of international instruments
on weapons of mass destruction. We especially thank
the European Union for its technical and financial
assistance in holding such seminars.

The first regional meeting on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) for countries of Central
America and the Caribbean was held in Antigua,
Guatemala, in June 2005. It was sponsored by the
Governments of Argentina and Spain and specifically
addressed the preparation of reports. Guatemala was
also privileged to participate in the regional seminars
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in
Latin America and the Caribbean which were held in
Buenos Aires, Argentina, in September 2005, and more
recently in Lima, Peru, in November 2006.

Those seminars have helped encourage full
implementation of the resolution and have provided
clear guidelines for future regional cooperation in our
collective efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. They also highlighted the
need to promote technical assistance initiatives to
facilitate the implementation of the resolution and to
strengthen the role of regional and subregional
organizations in activities in this sphere.

In that context, we are happy to see that the
Committee is continuing to strengthen its links to
international and regional organizations such as the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the World
Customs Organization and the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, among others, in
order to benefit from their experience.

We should be aware that national reports are
important for understanding the scope of the
difficulties we face and the best way to approach them.
It will benefit all of us if we are frank and open with
regard to our capacity to respond to the threats of
proliferation. A critical review by each State of its own
laws and regulations will also enable us to identify
shortcomings. However, we must take into account
national capacities, because the increasingly frequent
requests by the Security Council for reports sometimes
leads to overburdening State institutions in their
administrative work, and in the majority of cases, it is
difficult to comply, as the representatives of South
Africa and Indonesia noted this morning.

There is still a great deal to do in order to achieve
a universal system for the submission of reports in
compliance with both resolution 1540 (2004) and with
other Security Council resolutions that also request
reports. However, we are certain that with this type of
broad discussion - and with your efforts,
Mr. President - we will be able to make progress in a
coordinated and effective fashion. Recently, the
Government of Guatemala requested, through the
proper channels, technical and financial assistance
from the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean, in order to complete our national report
and make our due contributions.

We listened with interest to the ideas put forward
during today's debate and will continue to assess them.
Guatemala believes that the outcome of the Council's
deliberation on this matter will help us to harmonize
our counter-terrorism and non-proliferation efforts and
will lead to greater security for our citizens.
