The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of Slovakia.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union.

At the outset, I should like to join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing as well as for his valuable observations and
remarks. We agree with his observation that, despite
the many challenges and problems facing the Middle
East these days, there is a window of opportunity to
reinvigorate the peace process.
The meeting between Israeli Prime Minister Ehud
Olmert and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud
Abbas at the end of last year created a positive
momentum that needs to be seized and further
developed through concrete and immediate action,
including confidence-building measures on both sides.
The views and positions expressed by the parties and
by regional leaders during the latest visit of United
States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to the
region are another positive signal that there is a
growing political will to overcome the existing
stalemate and move towards meaningful negotiations.

We therefore welcome the upcoming trilateral
high-level United States-Israeli-Palestinian meeting
among Secretary of State Rice, Prime Minister Olmert
and President Abbas, to take place on 19 February. We
consider it a crucial step towards the resumption of the
peace process and believe that it will provide vital
impetus to that end.

In that regard, we welcome the latest Quartet
meeting, held on 2 February, and the Quartet telephone
discussion of 9 February, and we support the
statements issued. We look forward to the close and
active engagement of the Quartet with a View to a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict.
We are convinced that the Quartet still represents the
most appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and that the Road Map is the most effective
plan for achieving a lasting peace settlement.

We support the idea of more regular and frequent
Quartet meetings at the principal and envoy levels
according to an agreed calendar, with the next meeting
to be held at the principal level in Berlin on
21 February to further discuss the way ahead.

We also note Israel's recent decision to resume
transfers - albeit partial transfers - of withheld
Palestinian tax and customs revenues. We call once
again on Israel to continue such transfers and
encourage it to consider doing so through the extended
temporary international mechanism, which, in
coordination with the Office of the Palestinian
President, provides essential relief to many
Palestinians.

We note with satisfaction that an agreement was
reached in Mecca last week between the Palestinian
factions to form a national unity Government, and we
commend the initiative of His Majesty King Abdullah
of Saudi Arabia in facilitating that deal. We consider it
to be an important step forward. We hope this
agreement will end the deadly internal strife among
Palestinians. We expect that the new Palestinian
Government will be committed to the Quartet
principles and that its political platform will enable
early engagement as well as the continuation of
dialogue on a solution to the Middle East conflict.

Turning now to the daily developments on the
ground, we express our deep concern over the recent
deterioration in the security situation in the area and
condemn the suicide bombing in Eilat on 29 January.
We reiterate our call for an immediate end to violence
by Palestinian factions as well as to attacks on Israel,
notably the launching of rockets against Israeli
population centres, and for the release of the abducted
Israeli soldier. We support the efforts and leadership of
President Abbas in this regard.

We also hope and expect that Israel and
Palestinians will exercise their utmost restraint and do
everything possible to sustain and further consolidate
the mutually agreed ceasefire in Gaza. We feel that at
this critical time it is of paramount importance not to
jeopardize further possible progress and the promising
prospects for peace in the region. For this reason we
also call for a sensitive and thoughtful approach in
dealing with historical and religious sites in Jerusalem,
so that these do not turn into another unfortunate
source of mutual distrust and even violence. It is
important that both parties engage in a constructive
dialogue and embark on mutual measures aimed at
defusing accumulated tensions.

We expect the Israeli Government, for its part, to
continue its commitment to peace based on the
principles laid out in the Road Map and to refrain from
steps and activities that might run counter to the
principles of international law. In this context, we
repeat our call for immediate release of Palestinian
ministers and legislators in Israeli custody and for a
halt to all settlement activities.

Now I shall turn briefly to Lebanon. Tomorrow is
the second anniversary of a tragic event - the
assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri. In this respect, we believe it is high time to put
an end to politically motivated violence in Lebanon.
We strongly condemn the most recent terrorist attacks
on innocent civilians that took place this morning. We
call for proper investigation of this case and for
bringing the perpetrators of this crime, as well as
perpetrators of other terrorist attacks in Lebanon, to
justice.

We believe that the signing of the agreement
between the United Nations and the Lebanese
Government setting up a special tribunal to prosecute
the suspected killers is a welcome development in this
direction. We hope that the Lebanese Government will
take the necessary measures to complete the
ratification process without delay.

Slovakia has been following with great concern
the recent developments in Lebanon, including the
clashes in the streets that led to civilian casualties. We
deplore attempts to achieve political objectives through
violence, and we would like to encourage the efforts to
stabilize the situation on the ground.

We are convinced that only through the united
efforts of all Lebanese people and through dialogue
and peaceful negotiations will the solution for many
outstanding issues be found. In this respect, we support
the efforts of Prime Minister Siniora and the
legitimately and democratically elected Government
aimed at maintaining dialogue with all political actors
in Lebanon in order to tackle a number of important
challenges the country is facing. We also commend the
mediation efforts of the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States Amr Moussa, as well as all other
constructive international efforts aimed at facilitating a
consensus within the country.

We welcome the results of the International
Conference on Lebanon's Reconstruction held in Paris
on 25 January. We hope the pledges of assistance to
Lebanon will soon be realised in order to support its
reconstruction, economic recovery and reforms, so as
to restore the foundations for sustained development
and life in dignity for all Lebanese people.

We have repeatedly expressed our support for
Lebanon's sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity, which must be respected by
everyone. We believe that resolution 1701 (2006)
provides a good basis for the stabilization of the
situation in Lebanon. However, it is crucial that this
resolution, and all other relevant Security Council
resolutions, be fully respected and implemented by all
relevant actors in all their aspects. The constructive
role and positive contribution of Lebanon's neighbours
and other countries in the region are very important, if
not crucial in this regard.

Finally, we commend UNIFIL for its role in
Lebanon and for its unrelenting efforts to maintain
peace and prevent a return to hostilities, including the
speedy action to address the recent incident on the
Lebanese-Israeli border.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council. I shall now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of Palestine.

