Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Djani for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We commend him for
the efforts he has made since assuming the chairmanship
of the Committee to effectively implement resolution
1540 (2004) and for his dynamism. We appreciate his
delegation and that of the United Kingdom for using
their good offices in order to ensure the timely adoption
of the Committee's programme of work.

We would first like to highlight the primary role of
resolution 1540 (2004) in preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their access by
non-State actors, including terrorists. The threat
they pose today to international peace and security
is real and worrisome. As proof of that, we have the
final report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic, which confirmed the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons containing molecular chlorine
in the attacks in the city of Douma in April 2018,
which left many injured and resulted in the deaths of
43 people, including women and children. That is in
addition to the list of other cases involving the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq, including those
confirmed by the Joint Investigation Mechanism of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
of the use of mustard gas on several occasions by the
terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Another worrying matter is nuclear proliferation
on the Korean peninsula. Of course, we commend the
political and diplomatic progress that has been made.
However, there is evidence that nuclear facilities and
ballistic missiles remain in operation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and continue to be
developed. Efforts continue to disperse storage and test
sites around the country. The situation highlights the
importance of implementing resolution 1540 (2004)
and should be considered a priority. Efforts by the
international community to eradicate the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and prevent their use by
non-State and State actors alike must be strengthened.

The Dominican Republic is committed to its
obligations under international instruments that call
for disarmament, non-proliferation and refraining
from giving support to non-State actors seeking to
develop, acquire, transfer or use any type of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. In that
regard, as part of our commitment to implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), together with Panama, we
agreed to conduct a peer review to share experiences
and good practices in its implementation. The topics to
be evaluated are reviews of national and international
legislation, strategic trade, safe transport and risk
management in chemical, biological, radiological or
nuclear and explosive emergencies. The assessments
will be conducted in the Dominican Republic from
26 to 29 March and in Panama from 9 to 12 April.

Our national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the measures we are
taking to comply with our commitments. It was prepared
in collaboration with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean (UNLIREC) and
presented to the Committee in 2015 ahead of the second
comprehensive review of the status of the resolution's
implementation. In that regard, we would like to
highlight the work of UNLIREC, the Organization of
American States Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism, the Committee's Group of Experts, States
and other regional and international organizations in
providing assistance to our country and others and in
fostering cooperation for the effective implementation of
the resolution's obligations. Cooperation and assistance
are key to meeting those obligations and should be
strengthened in order to better align the needs of the
recipient State and the assistance offered. Incidentally,
we deplore the fact that the professionals who make
up the Group of Experts are having problems with
bureaucratic procedures, which we hope can become
more flexible and enable the situation to improve,
since it is the Experts who ensure that the Committee
functions well and honours its own commitments.

In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and related
subsequent resolutions - as is the case with Mali,
which is preparing its first implementation report - as
well as in the various activities that the Committee has
undertaken to meet its objectives. We must continue
to work unrelentingly to universalize this important
resolution, which is the cornerstone of the regime for
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

