Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
having convened today's debate, which enables us to
address one of the most important items on the Security
Council's agenda - the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Let me also welcome today's briefer, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, who has just painted a grim picture
of the region, including the unfortunate major negative
trends destabilizing the heart of the Middle East
and beyond.

Wars that are now being waged with sophisticated,
but banned, weaponry, such as chemical weapons, have
devastating effects that are felt as far as Africa. At the
same time, sectarianism, intolerance and even religious
discrimination continue to divide national communities
that once lived peaceably together in many countries
of the region. In addition, pernicious acts of terrorism
and violent extremism continue to be perpetrated,
very often by foreign terrorist fighters, throughout the
world, including in North Africa, West Africa, Central
Africa and East Africa. The spread of terrorism could
worsen if terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State, Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front are not defeated
in Iraq and Syria and if they attempt to establish new
strongholds in regions that are more clement. We must
examine those new threats so as to identify possible
solutions to the various conflicts that plague the Middle
East. I will mention but a few of them today.

Such threats have emerged to join the list of
long-standing conflicts addressed by the Security
Council, such as the Israeli-Arab conflict. We all
agree that the Palestinian question remains relevant.
There is no need for the Senegalese delegation to
recap the facts already outlined by Mr. Mladenov. I
would simply like to reaffirm our belief with regard
to the need for a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security,
within safe, internationally recognized borders, and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. The
Senegalese delegation would like to invite Israelis
and Palestinians - who are the only parties capable
giving peace a genuine chance - with the support of
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, the Quartet and the countries of the region,
to make resolute efforts to apply international law and
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016).

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the diplomatic
efforts of several countries, such as France, Egypt,
Jordan and the Russian Federation. It expresses high
hopes for the success of efforts already under way and
led by your country, Madam President. The observer
of Palestine just mentioned that President Mahmoud
Abbas will meet soon with President Trump. We also
have high hopes for that meeting. In the same vein, we
welcome the renewed focus on the Arab Peace Initiative
during the most recent summit of the League of Arab
States. It is an initiative that besides offering a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute based on the two-State
solution, advocates overall peace among Israel and the
countries of the region. It deserves our support.

My delegation encourages the steps being taken by
the United Nations, in conjunction with the competent
Palestinian authorities and the parties concerned, to
find a solution to the recurring problems of supplying
water, sanitation and electricity in Gaza, which
continues to face the most challenging humanitarian
and socioeconomic constraints. I would also like to
welcome the launching on 22 February of the Palestine
National Development Plan 2017-2022, which focuses
on citizens, because the development dimension
of the conflict is as important as the political and
security dimensions.

It is our responsibility, first and foremost, as
members ofthe Security Council, and the responsibility
of the Quartet and of countries in the region, to identify
and step up diplomatic efforts that foster a renewed
spirit of sharing to ensure that, like the Israelis,
Palestinians can have a viable, sovereign State, within
safe and internationally recognized borders, and
with - I repeat - East Jerusalem as its capital.

With regard to the Syrian conflict, which is entering
its seventh year, Senegal reaffirms its solidarity with
the Syrian people, who are broken and are facing
immense destruction and desolation. That is why
Senegal reiterates its unshakeable faith in a negotiated,
comprehensive, political solution that considers all
dimensions of the complex Syrian crisis, in particular
on the basis of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). The return of peace
in Syria should go hand in hand with the need to shed
light on the allegations of the use of banned weapons,
including chemical weapons, against civilians.
Similarly, my delegation encourages the Iraqi
Government, with the support of the international
coalition and other actors, to persevere in its efforts
to defeat Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The
significant military victories won against that
organization, particularly in Fallujah, combined with
the remarkable advances that we are witnessing in
Mosul, demonstrate that terrorism and its underlying
ideology can be defeated.

In our view, the priority is the protection of
civilians and national reconstruction, with particular
attention paid to the specific needs of people who have
suffered through two years of occupation, while also
taking due account of the necessary reconciliation
among the various factions of the country. I have no
doubt that the United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, will continue
to undertake activities that benefit the country with
respect to three dimensions: the political, security and
the humanitarian.

With regard to Yemen, we reaffirm our conviction
that only a negotiated political solution between the
parties, with due regard given to the legitimacy of
the Yemeni Government, and taking into account the
initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
implementation mechanism, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, will lead to peace and
stability in a country experiencing one of the worst
humanitarian disasters. Such a solution would also
help to prevent terrorist organizations, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and the Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula,
from taking root.

It is by taking up those challenges, using a holistic
approach based on justice and human rights, and by
developing a clear political outlook, that we Council
members will contribute to tackling terrorist and
extremist groups and helping the Middle East to become
a haven of stability, peace and security.

