Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like our colleagues, we would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Chad and the Sudan subsequent to his recent trip.
We listened with interest to the statements made by the
Permanent Representative of Chad, too. We support the
activities of Mr. Holmes and the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
in carrying out the tasks that have been entrusted to
them.

We agree with concerns expressed as to the
serious worsening of the humanitarian situation in that
region. Recent events, unfortunately, have caused an
additional rise in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in those countries, and it is

obvious that the stricken population is in need of
humanitarian cooperation on the part of the
international community. We are convinced that
effective, coordinated participation by the United
Nations, especially that of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
other humanitarian agencies, as well as from the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
non-governmental organizations, will help significantly
to alleviate the suffering of civilians.

We believe that ensuring safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian staff and humanitarian supplies
to the stricken areas is a key factor for effective
humanitarian assistance. We are for eliminating
unjustified administrative barriers that make it more
difficult to get supplies to the population. In this
connection, we note the efforts that have been
undertaken in this area by the Governments of the
Sudan and Chad. These should be continued and
developed.

We categorically condemn the attacks of armed
groups and bands on humanitarian workers. They must
be stopped immediately. It is fundamentally important
to ensure the demilitarized status of refugee and IDP
camps. Access of foreign humanitarian staff is only one
of the aspects for carrying out tasks of this effective
assistance. It should not be a goal in and of itself. The
overall coordination of actions, including determining
priorities, rules, resources and itineraries for
transporting assistance, and also the choice of partners,
is the prerogative of the receiving country's
Government. We are certain that the international
community and all humanitarian partners - the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations - must
respect the sovereignty of the host country.

In this context, we would like once again to
emphasize the imperative need of the commitment of
the international humanitarian community to the basic
principles of lending humanitarian emergency
assistance with neutrality, humanitarianism, objectivity
and independence.

We are convinced that an effective improvement
of the humanitarian situation, including in the Sudan
and Chad, will be possible only through the adoption
of a comprehensive approach. This must entail the
creation of the necessary security conditions in the
eastern part of Chad, an internal political settlement in
that country, a solution to the problems of the cross-
border movements of armed groups and the
normalization of the situation in the subregion as a
whole.

In this connection, it is of course important to
maintain positive momentum in the process of
establishing normal inter-State relations between Chad
and the Sudan. We support in this context the efforts of
the African Union, the contact group of African
countries and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
monitoring the implementation of the Dakar
agreements and previous agreements, and we trust that
these efforts will be pursued.

It is important to ensure interaction between the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad, the European Union-led
peacekeeping force and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. All opposition
groups in Darfur, especially armed groups, must join
the peace agreement immediately and constructively
participate in the political process.

I absolutely agree with those colleagues who
emphasized before me the key importance of progress
in the political arena in Chad, in the Sudan and with
regard to relations between them. Such progress would
not only promote the stabilization of the security
situation, but also help in dealing with the
humanitarian situation, in maintaining uninterrupted
humanitarian supplies, in protecting the civilian
population and in promoting the safe and voluntary
return of internally displaced persons to their homes.
That would promote solutions to a whole series of
humanitarian problems in the region through the active
coordinating role of the United Nations.

