Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame and the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador Olof Skoog,
for their briefings. China will continue to support
their work.

Although the security situation in Libya remains
concerning, with localized clashes and terrorist acts
occurring sporadically, Libya has worked arduously
and achieved steady progress in its political transition
thanks to the support of the United Nations, regional
organizations and neighbouring countries. That support
from the international community should be intensified
so as to help Libya get back on its feet swiftly, with
restored stability and effective governance, on the
basis of respect for Libya's sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.

I should like to touch on three points.

First, we should resolutely advance the Libyan-led
and Libyan-owned political process. The Libyan parties
should press on with inclusive dialogue at various
levels, from the national to the local, to build a broader
consensus, narrow their differences and find a solution
that is acceptable to all stakeholders so as to achieve
national reconciliation. Restoring State governance
by amending the Libyan Political Agreement is an
important step that deserves to be taken seriously by all
stakeholders in Libya.

Secondly, a better security environment is needed
for the political process. Countries and regional
organizations that are in a position to influence
the parties should leverage such influence and
encourage the Libyan actors to refrain from resorting
to force on reflex, to achieve reconciliation through
confidence-building measures and to create a unified
State security institution as soon as possible, so as
to put conditions in place that are more conducive to
the implementation of the United Nations action plan.
Libyan actors, for their part, should work closely
together and suppress terrorist activities and organized
crime, among other problems.

Thirdly, the role and capacity of United Nations
good offices should be strengthened through joint
efforts. The international community should welcome
the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salame', aimed at galvanizing the
implementation of the action plan and supporting Libya
in constitution-making, revising the Political Agreement
and holding the presidential and parliamentary elections
successfully. We would like to see Libya's neighbours,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and the
European Union step up their efforts to mediate and
encourage peace talks and lend their support to the
United Nations action plan.

China is of the view that the Security Council
sanctions should be aimed at the political settlement
of hotspot issues. Council sanctions with regard to
Libya should not harm its overall national interests, nor
should they prevent it from satisfying its humanitarian
and livelihood needs. It will be important to address the
continued impairment ofthe frozen assets. We encourage
the Sanctions Committee to expedite its study and
respond to Libya's legitimate concerns appropriately.

China supports any and all efforts that contribute
to the stabilization of the situation in Libya, its political
settlement and the fight against terrorism by all Libyan
actors working together. What we want is for security
and stability in Libya to be restored as soon as possible
so that it can develop and prosper.

