The Secretary-General: Let me begin by
expressing my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
chairing this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Today is a fitting day for such a meeting. On this
day in 1945, the trial of the major war criminals began
at Nuremberg. The Nuremberg trials had a profound
influence on the development of international law.
They had an important bearing on the notion of
individual criminal responsibility for atrocities
committed against civilians in armed conflict. They
underlined that, even in war, certain acts are
unacceptable, and they reflected the world's conviction
that civilians are entitled to protection.

Sixty-two years later, civilians continue to pay a
dreadful toll in today's conflicts - in the Sudan,
Somalia, Afghanistan and Iraq. In those and other
conflicts, large numbers of civilians - women, girls,
boys and men - suffer unimaginable violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. As I state in my report now before the
Council (S/2007/643), some victims are simply in the
wrong place at the wrong time. Others are deliberately
targeted and subjected to appalling human rights
abuses, in an environment of almost total impunity.
Deliberate attacks against civilians are often employed
as an instrument of warfare. That is why the protection
of civilians is, and must remain, an absolute priority -
for me as Secretary-General, for the United Nations,
for the Security Council and, above all, for Member
States, with whom rests the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians.

There has been some progress in recent years
towards strengthening the protection of civilians. We
see increased levels of humanitarian action and more
regular inclusion of protection activities in
07-60503
peacekeeping mandates. Greater attention is also being
placed on humanitarian issues during mediation
processes, and ultimately and on preventing disputes
from degenerating into violence in the first place, so as
to spare civilians from the horrors of war. Around the
world, we see increased momentum towards combating
impunity for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

At the World Summit in 2005, all the world's
Governments agreed in principle to the responsibility
to protect. I will work with Member States and civil
society to translate that concept from word to deed to
ensure timely action when populations face genocide,
ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity.

The Council has taken a number of important
steps, including the adoption, last year, of resolution
1674 (2006), on the protection of civilians. The
resolution establishes an important framework for
action. Here, too, we must now work together to
translate that text into real action. In my report, I have
tried to show ways in which that may be done. The
Emergency Relief Coordinator will elaborate on those
recommendations in greater detail. However, allow me
to mention one of the proposals: the establishment of a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians.

I believe that the establishment of such a group is
an important next step, perhaps even an inevitable next
step, in the evolution of the Council's consideration of
the protection of civilians. It would underline the
Council's commitment to this cause. It would give
practical meaning to the Council's commitment. It
would ensure more timely and systematic consideration
of the protection of civilians in the Council's
deliberations. It would assist the Council to move
decisively towards practical implementation. That
ultimately is where the Council's words must have the
most meaning: on the ground, in support of the affected
civilians who need protection from the shocking
indignities of armed conflict.

The plight of children in armed conflict is
particularly disturbing. Eighteen years ago today, the
General Assembly adopted the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Eleven years later, it adopted the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. Yet these instruments have yet to be
translated into reality. Every year, thousands of
children are killed or wounded as a direct result of
07-60503
fighting, and the number of child soldiers around the
world is estimated at 250,000.

We saw progress in 2005 when the Security
Council adopted resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. Thanks to the resolution's monitoring and
reporting mechanism, the Council is now in a much
better position to take effective measures against
perpetrators of grave violations of the rights of
children in armed conflict.

Another vital tool is the work of my Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms.
Radhika Coomaraswamy. By carrying out field visits
and consulting actively with the concerned parties, she
helps ensure that they fulfil their child protection
responsibilities. My Special Representative, in
collaboration with the entire United Nations system,
also works to support the demobilization of child
combatants and their reintegration into their
communities.

The Council has mandated peacekeeping
operations to assist with the protection of civilians
within the limits of their capabilities and areas of
deployment. It is critical that peacekeeping operations
be empowered with the resources and political support
they need to implement their mandates. I see Darfur as
a test case, where all concerned must collectively meet
the challenges of deploying an effective mission and
achieving a peace agreement.

We must also ensure safe, timely and unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need, wherever
required. Access is the fundamental prerequisite for
humanitarian action and protection. For millions of
vulnerable people caught in conflict, being accessible
to humanitarian workers is often their only hope and
means of survival. I would like to emphasize the
importance of regular reporting to the Council by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator on humanitarian access
concerns. I believe that that is critical.

Also critical is the need for concerted action in
response to particularly grave situations. The Council
must act to ensure that those in need of lifesaving
assistance receive it and that those who provide it do so
in a secure environment. Attacks against humanitarian
workers should never be tolerated. I trust that the
Council will have a fruitful debate on this vital issue,
which is key to achieving sustainable peace around the
world.
