Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, scheduling this important debate on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo today. I
welcome the positive comments made this morning by
the Secretary-General and Minister Raymond
Tshibanda. I also appreciate the participation in this
debate of the World Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union.

This debate is an important opportunity to discuss
the ways in which we can all assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its progress towards
sustainable peace and security. I shall touch first on the
short-term priority of the elections and then say
something about the broader long-term challenges.

The forthcoming presidential and legislative
elections mark a milestone in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and provide an opportunity to build on
progress made during the past decade. It is important
that these elections be based on the principle that every
eligible adult has the right to vote, that they include the
participation of civil society, human rights defenders
and journalists, that they respect the freedom of
expression and opinion and that they allow equitable
access to media for the political parties. These
elements are essential to a credible election process.
We urge all political parties to commit to peaceful
elections and we call on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the
international community to continue to work with the
Congolese Government and the National Independent
Electoral Commission to ensure that the election
process is successful.

Although elections are important, they cannot on
their own provide the long-term stability that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs. Therefore,
we must look beyond the elections to the key
challenges that affect the long-term security, stability
and prosperity of the country. As Minister Tshibanda
said, there have been important strategic successes, but
the challenges remain daunting. In particular, it is vital
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo build confidence in the institutions of
Government and provide the foundations for enhanced
economic activity, including enabling the safe return of
internally displaced persons to lead normal productive
lives.

We urge the Congolese Government to share and
implement its road map for defence reform and to work
with MONUSCO and other international partners to
drive forward the reform of the army and police. This
approach must include strengthening military police
and military justice institutions. I would highlight three
key areas.

First, further efforts must be made to form a
modern, effective national police force. We welcome
the progress already made with support from
MONUSCO towards establishing and training 10
police units in advance of the elections, and encourage
international donors to support the equipping and
training of additional police units. Their deployment
will play a significant role in reassuring communities,
and particularly the most vulnerable in those
communities, such as women, and provide the
foundation for re-establishing the rule of law and State
authority in all territories.

Secondly, security will only be achieved if justice
is seen to be done and lingering issues of impunity
addressed. Some important steps have been taken, but
we call on the Congolese Government to utilize the
experience provided in the United Nations justice
support programme to develop the criminal justice
chain, the judiciary and the prisons and to adopt
legislation to bring about the recommended reforms.

Thirdly, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration are essential to bringing
the conflict to an end and would help improve security
conditions in fragile territories. The United Kingdom is
a major financial contributor to the programme, and we
call for greater support from the international
community for this valuable activity.

Additionally, there are cross-border challenges to
stability that will need to be addressed. MONUSCO
has increased its efforts to protect civilians against
attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army, but we urge
greater coordination of strategies with other United
Nations missions in the region and with regional
security forces.

The international community has an important
role to play in helping to address the challenges that
remain. We urge the United Nations to deliver a
coordinated approach in-country and encourage the
international community to support efforts that will
facilitate the transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to
United Nations agencies in support of building
capacity within the Congolese Government as security
conditions improve.

The United Kingdom remains a committed
partner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
addition to the United Kingdom's contributions
towards the wide-ranging European Union development
assistance programme and our United Nations
contributions, we will provide $1.2 billion in bilateral
funding over the next four years through our
development programme with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Even in the current difficult financial
circumstances, we believe that this investment is worth
making for the long-term future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people.

