Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): First of all, let
me welcome the High Representative, Ambassador
Miroslav Lajcak, and the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Nikola
Spirie. Let me also thank the High Representative for
his detailed report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and commend his tireless and skilful
efforts in a quite complex situation. Italy fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of France on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would like to add just a few remarks drawing on the
Italian national experience.

Ambassador Lajcak's report gives us a good
picture, I believe, of the overall situation in the
country. It emphasizes, in fact, encouraging signs, but,
at the same time, it reveals critical aspects that invite
the ongoing commitment of the international
community to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The signing of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement in June is a landmark achievement. It
demonstrates that the local political leadership can act
constructively and reach compromises. The solution of
the police reform was particularly welcome. Not long
ago, such a result seemed unreachable. The EU
perspective is the tool through which the High
Representative was able to broker a solution. We must
take stock of that success in view of our upcoming
challenges. The Odzak agreement reached by the three
major Bosnian parties provides yet another reason for
us to hope that a virtuous cycle of the political process
may set in.

Nevertheless, the report also notes that

"Nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric challenging the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and constitutional
order of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
authority of the High Representative and the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council, have continued to dominate politics in
Bosnia and Herzegovina" (S/2006/705, Summary, page 3).

Much remains to be done to achieve lasting
democratic stabilization in the country. In order to
stimulate more progress, we should move beyond the
status quo and uphold the principle of ownership. To
achieve these goals, the transition from the Office of
the High Representative to the EU Special
Representative stage should be prepared, bearing in
mind that the EU Representative must be adequately
supported in order to perform his duties effectively.

High Representative Solana and EU Commissioner
Rehn have indicated the need to address the issue of
transition. On 20 November, the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board welcomed the EU's readiness
to assume a greater role in Bosnia and Herzegovina
following the transition from the Office of the High
Representative to the European Union High
Representative.

We must as well promote progress on the
implementation of the five objectives and the two
conditions, trusting that the political forces in the
country will find adequate solutions on the two
objectives that remain to be settled. High
Representative Lajeak could, once again, have a
contribution to make towards achieving this result.

Italy calls on the Bosnian leadership to focus its
efforts in this direction and to refrain from statements
and acts challenging the structures of the State as
defined by the Dayton Agreement. The people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have demonstrated their
strong and undisputed wish to live in a peaceful, stable
and prosperous multiethnic environment, and Bosnian
leaders should act accordingly, without indulging in
confrontational practices that have reaped so much
damage in their country.

If these goals are achieved, the country could
advance significantly along the path of democratic
stabilization and especially towards the EU.

Italy is strongly committed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are present in the country with a large
contingent in the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR-ALTHEA). The
international military presence is now under Italian
command. My country also contributes considerably to
all civilian international presences, and we will
continue to do so in the future.
