Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): 1 would like to thank Under-Secretaries- General Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix for their briefings. I will focus on three aspects: the protection of the most vulnerable, the progress of the peace process and the transition. The establishment of a new mission is a significant moment. It is a matter of translating on the ground the decision taken by the Security Council, in order to concretize the objectives of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) to support the political transition and help the Sudan regain peace and security, with a particular focus on Darfur and the Two Areas. Without going back over the entirety of the tasks expected of the Mission, Belgium wishes to reiterate the importance of supporting the protection of civilians and strengthening respect for human rights. We are appalled by the persistence of serious violations against children in the Sudan, in particular the frequency of sexual attacks, mutilations and murder. These violations are committed by all parties to the conflict. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, chaired by Belgium, is currently discussing that reality. We welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government to integrate the issue of children into its national plan for the protection of civilians. The amendments to the penal code adopted in July are also an encouraging sign; they improve the protection of vulnerable population groups, including children. These concerns should be addressed in a balanced way in planning for UNITAMS, including providing sufficient capacity dedicated to child protection. The peace process in the Sudan has made significant progress in recent weeks, with agreements in Juba and Addis Ababa. Belgium calls on the parties to maintain their commitment through constructive dialogue and to rapidly implement the agreements once they have been concluded. We encourage the groups that have remained absent to return to the negotiating table. This is essential for sustaining peace. Belgium welcomes the fact that the talks do not sidestep such difficult issues as the return of displaced persons, land ownership and transitional justice. These elements are essential to laying the foundations for reconciliation among communities; the current persistence of conflicts among these communities demonstrates their necessity. Supporting reconciliation is one of the strategic priorities of UNITAMS, and we will closely monitor activities in that area. Since we are talking about justice, we have noted the intention of the Sudanese authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, whose work we support. We also commend efforts in cooperation with the authorities and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to defuse tensions in Darfur. Civilians remain vulnerable to attacks, and we are concerned about the recent increase in violence in the region. In addition to the peace process and restoring security inDarfur and in the Two Areas, the Sudan currently faces many other challenges. The socioeconomic situation is fragile and has been exacerbated by the effects of the pandemic and major floods, disproportionately affecting women, children and displaced persons. Such a situation may also lead to political instability; it is a test of the maturity of the political leaders. We note with satisfaction the ambitious programme of political reforms undertaken by the transitional Government and its willingness to address the economic situation. UNITAMS, in collaboration with the country team, will be the Sudan's key partner for the transition period. The Sudan can already count on the support of the international community, as demonstrated by the high- level conference held in June. Belgium, together with the European Union, stands with the Sudanese people.
