Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin my statement by wishing you,
Sir, and your team every success in your duties as
your country presides over the Security Council
during the month of June. I also sincerely thank
Council members for commending us on our recently
concluded presidency.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, for her
comprehensive briefing, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for
being here today.

We take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of Cote d'Ivoire on its recent election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and
we wish the country every success during its mandate.
We also hope that the Security Council can benefit not
only from Cote d'Ivoire's commitment to international
peace and security, but also from its experience in
successfully emerging from conflict with the support
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. Uruguay
would also like to congratulate the Government and the
people of Cote d'Ivoire on their achievements to date,
which are, without a doubt, worthy of recognition.
Just over a year ago, in this very Chamber, we ended
the Cote d'Ivoire sanctions regime (see S/PV.7681).
That step was made possible by the progress that had
paved the way for the country to embark on the path to
peace and stability. There is no doubt that the country
continues to face internal challenges, such as national
reconciliation, the reintegration of former combatants
and sustainable economic recovery, which must all be
addressed and overcome by Ivoirians themselves.

The role of international partners will be key to
assisting the country to address the root causes of
underlying challenges. Nonetheless, we can proudly
declare that Cote d'Ivoire is no longer a threat to
international peace and security and that the Security
Council has transferred all responsibility for achieving
sustained peace in the country to its Government. A
period of learning has begun, which will open up the
possibility for a promising future for all Ivorians. The
situation in Cote d'Ivoire would not have become a
success story without the commitment and political
will of its Government.

