Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
their briefings.

I will focus today on three issues: the situation in
the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the development
of the mission and the way forward.

We appreciate the stabilizing role of UNISFA in
Abyei. The Security Council must therefore focus its
attention on the Abyei region to protect it from any
surrounding events causing instability. We express our
concern about the reference contained in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/319) on the presence
of military elements from outside the region, which
demonstrates the need to accelerate the establishment
of the Abyei police service. We hope that the two
countries will continue to regularly hold meetings
within the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and
implement the benchmarks set out in resolutions 2445
(2018) and 2465 (2019).

We welcome the presence of the Special Envoy,
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, among us today. We stand
ready to cooperate with him in order to consolidate
peace and stability in the entire Horn of Africa,
which is a vital part for our Arab countries and their
strategic neighbourhood.

We also welcome the central role that UNISFA
plays in Abyei, and we take note of the Secretary-
General's recommendations contained in his report
before us. We stress our support for the mission and
its officials and call for facilitating its work. We call as
well for a careful and gradual approach to developing
the mission so that it can maintain security for Abyei
and its population and establish peace there.

We welcome the implementation of resolution 2445
(2018) in reducing the military personnel of the mission
and the selection of Jordan as a police-contributing
country to provide a formed police unit. We hope that
the unit will begin its work in Abyei as soon as possible.

We also reaffirm the need for Council members
to agree on addressing the recommendations in the
report before including them in a draft resolution on the
mission mandate. We are grateful to the United States
delegation as a penholder for engaging with all parties
and seeking consensus on the mandate renewal.

We are well aware of the current critical phase, the
specific circumstances and the time frames facing the
Sudan and South Sudan. We therefore believe that the
Council should not rush either country. We welcome the
progress made by both countries in implementing the
border-demarcation benchmark. We look forward to the
implementation of the remaining bilateral agreements
in order to establish all the relevant institutions in Abyei
and support its people, while mitigating any conflict
and defusing any tensions.

We reiterate our position that any future steps
should be taken in consultation with the parties to
secure their consent before the steps are taken, which
is one of the three peacekeeping principles. We must
consider the internal situations in both countries
through the adoption of a draft resolution that defines
an applicable mandate amid the current circumstances.

In conclusion, Kuwait stands ready to cooperate
with the Sudan, South Sudan, members of the Council
and the Secretariat to reach a final settlement in Abyei.

