Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
organizing this debate and for preparing the concept
note (S/2014/74, annex) that guides it. I would also like
to thank Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; and Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their presentations.

Colombia values the opening of this forum
for consideration, which enables us to address the
importance of the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict through peacekeeping operations
and other relevant activities. Colombia believes it
appropriate to recall that the success of peacekeeping
operations is evident when, having laid the foundations
for lasting peace, empowered the national authorities
and integrated the protection of civilians as an
international duty and obligation, such operations are
no longer required.

We share the concern over the situation that
the civilian population faces in situations of armed
conflict in some parts of the world and over the
repeated non-compliance by parties to conflicts with
their obligation to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with international law. We agree that all
parties to a conflict should respect international law,
that the protection of civilians must be ensured and that
there must be accountability when the law is violated.

In that context, Colombia, as a troop-contributing
country, supports the role of peacekeeping operations
in such tasks and is convinced of the need for clarity
both in the concept and the operability when carrying
out protection of civilian activities. The Secretariat has
been working tirelessly on such tasks.

In order to ensure successful implementation, we
believe that it is essential to pay particular attention to
the planning and mandate-development phases, to the
allocation of adequate resources and to ensuring the
training of troops to the necessary standard.

In that regard, the Security Council should
strengthen its ability to gather accurate information
on the situation of civilians before a mandate is
prepared and to monitor progress in the field during
its implementation. To that end, The Security Council
will need to use indicators on the situation of civilians
in places where it plans to undertake peacekeeping
operations, request reports on developments in civilian
protection work and utilize tools such as the Arria
Formula and interactive dialogue for a more in-depth
analysis and the sharing of lessons learned.

My Government is aware of the positive role
that the various accountability mechanisms play in
strengthening the protection of civilians during armed
conflicts. Without closing the door to negotiation that
provides combatants with incentives to demobilize and
return to civilian life, for Colombia, the pursuit of peace
and reconciliation includes justice, reparation for the
victims, reconstruction of the truth and the guarantee
on non-recurrence. The implementation of United
Nations mandates with a protection-of-civilians aspect
must be accompanied by the political will of States and
their ability to meet their responsibilities towards the
civilian population.

The Colombian State notes the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict of 22 November 2013 (S/2013/689),
whose recommendations my country will consider in
line with their relevance.

Mydelegationalsowishes toreiteratethe importance
that United Nations agencies fully understand the work
of national Governments in the area of the protection
of civilians in prioritizing their work and informing
the Organization of specific situations. Verified,
objective, balanced and unbiased information includes
not only identifying the gaps and challenges but also
acknowledging the progress in each country.

The United Nations should promote compliance
with international humanitarian law by non-State
armed groups and carefully determine the mechanisms
to achieve that goal. In our view, each situation
is different and should be addressed by taking its
particular circumstances into account.

Finally, my Government understands and shares
the concern about humanitarian access. It believes
that international assistance in that area must follow
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence enshrined in General Assembly
resolution 46/182. Following those principles, while
guiding collective efforts to support national authorities,
acquire much greater significance when cooperation is
directed at countries that enjoy democratic institutions
and lawfully established Governments.

