The Secretary-General: The Council is meeting
today to hear a formal briefing from my Special
Adviser, Lakhdar Brahimi, on the process leading to
the announcement of the Iraqi interim Government on
1 June 2004. I know that his assessment carries great
weight with all Security Council members. But before
he addresses the Council, I wanted to say a few words.

Since the outbreak of the Iraq crisis, the role of
the United Nations has been difficult, often dangerous,
hedged about with constraints and controversy. In order
to understand the role played over the last few weeks
by my Special Adviser, Lakhdar Brahimi, and his team,
and by Carina Perelli and hers, it is important to set
their efforts in a wider and longer perspective.

It is no secret that the events leading up to the
war on Iraq, and developments since then, have been
among the most divisive that the Council has had to
deal with since the end of the Cold War. For many
around the world, what was at stake was the way in
which the international order and our system of
collective security were being defined at the beginning
of the new millennium.

Against that background of strongly held views
on both sides of the argument, and sometimes bitter
disagreement over the course of action that was chosen,
it was inevitable that agreement on the role to be
played by the United Nations in the aftermath of the
war, especially in the political process, would also be
elusive. Member States were able to agree that the
Organization should play a vital or central role. But
that role was never specifically defined. Moreover, the
deadly attack on United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad greatly reduced our capacity to act inside
Iraq, and I was insistent that there must be some
symmetry between the risks the United Nations was
asked to accept and the substance of the role we were
being called upon to play.

I find it extremely poignant that Lakhdar Brahimi
and his team left Baghdad on 2 June, one year to the
day after Sergio Vieira de Mello and his team arrived
in Baghdad, on 2 June 2003. We all remember, so
vividly and painfully, the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters at the Canal Hotel in Baghdad, on
19 August 2003, which claimed the lives of some of
our most talented and beloved staff, our wonderful
friends, including Sergio himself, who was not only my
Special Representative for Iraq but also the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. That day brought to
a virtual halt the on-the-ground - I emphasize on-the-
ground - involvement of the United Nations in the
political process in Iraq. It has remained clear since
then that any United Nations role in Iraq, political or
otherwise, would face serious security constraints.

The Council should know that Iraqis of all
persuasions fondly remember Sergio and the role he
played, repeatedly calling him a true friend of their
country. Not surprisingly, given the example he set
during such a brief period, Iraqis were sincerely hoping
that appropriate security conditions could be
established soon, so that the United Nations could
quickly resume, on the ground, a meaningful role in the
political process.

The temporary relocation of our international
staff from the country did not mean, however, that the
United Nations had disengaged from Iraq's political
process. On the contrary, from here at United Nations
Headquarters, we intensified contacts with
Governments around the world. Iraq was a constant
agenda item in virtually all my meetings with Heads of
State or Government, and Foreign Ministers. The
primary message I gave them was the need for the
occupation to be brought to an end as soon as possible
and for Iraqis to regain control of their sovereignty,
political destiny and natural resources. I therefore
welcomed, as a critical first step, the setting of a
date - 30 June 2004 - for the end of the occupation
and the restoration of Iraqi sovereignty, as prescribed
in the Political Agreement reached between the
Coalition Provisional Authority and the Iraqi
Governing Council on 15 November 2003.

Most Iraqis warmly welcomed the fact that a date
had finally been set for the formation of a sovereign
Iraqi Government, even if many felt that it was still not
soon enough. At the same time, prominent figures
representing key constituencies in Iraq were
threatening to reject the outcome of the caucus-style
method prescribed in the 15 November Agreement for
selecting that Government. It looked as if there was a
real risk that the political transition process might
collapse only a few weeks after it was to have entered a
new phase. A political crisis was looming.

Against that background, the President of the
Iraqi Governing Council wrote to me at the end of
December 2003. He asked the United Nations to help
answer two specific questions: whether elections were
feasible by 30 June 2004; and, if not, by what
alternative means an interim government could be
formed, to which sovereignty would be restored. At my
invitation, a delegation of the Iraqi Governing Council,
led by Mr. Adnan Pachachi, travelled to New York in
January 2004 in order to reiterate and clarify that
request in person.

Ambassador Paul Bremer, the Administrator of
the Coalition Provisional Authority, as well as Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, Prime Minister Blair's Personal
Representative to Iraq, joined them to express their
support for the re-engagement of the United Nations.
Soon after that meeting at United Nations Headquarters
in New York, on 19 January, I responded positively to
the request for assistance, having been given strong
assurances that, first , there was a clear role for the
United Nations to play, and, secondly, everything
possible would be done to provide security for the
United Nations personnel engaged in the effort. My
position then and now has remained, as I have
indicated, that whatever role the United Nations
undertakes should be proportionate to the risks we ask
our staff to assume.

It is within that context that I asked my Special
Adviser, Lakhdar Brahimi, to play a role in the political
transition process. I was conscious that, while much of
the work was technical in form, it was intensely
political in nature. This meant that in addition to a
technical assessment from the electoral experts, there
was a need for skilful management of the complex
political factors surrounding it.

I therefore asked Mr. Brahimi to visit Iraq from 6
to 13 February 2004, joined by a small political
team - two of them are seated behind him today -
and a group of electoral experts headed by Carina
Perelli, Director of the Election Assistance Division in
the Department of Political Affairs. During their trip,
they met with hundreds of Iraqi groups and citizens, of
all persuasions, from around the country, including
prominent figures such as Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani.
On 23 February, I presented a report of that fact-
finding visit to the Security Council (S/2004/ 140, annex), with my full support for its observations and
recommendations. Thus began the process leading to
the formation of the interim Government, as well as to
the preparation of elections to be held by January 2005.

I have asked Mr. Brahimi to recall for the Council
the recommendations of the February fact-finding visit.
For my part, I would like to state that the process that
began on the basis of the fact-finding team's report has
been completed on time and in full.

The role of the United Nations, through the good
offices of Mr. Brahimi, was to help facilitate a process
of national dialogue and consensus-building among
Iraqis, leading to the formation of an Iraqi interim
Government. Though its members are not elected, we
have in place a capable and reasonably balanced
interim Government, poised to take power by 30 June
2004. The United Nations was fully involved in
facilitating consensus on its structure and composition.

This interim Government will now have the task
of bringing the country together and of leading it
effectively during the next seven months. The Iraqi
people will judge it by its actions and results,
particularly in helping stem the violence that continues
to plague the country.

Iraq is not a failed State. I am confident that,
through the talent of its people and the natural
resources it enjoys, Iraq will soon be able to resume its
rightful place among the family of nations. I appeal to
the Security Council and to the international
community at large, Iraq's neighbours in particular, to
respond favourably and generously to the interim
Government's request for assistance and support.

Mr. Brahimi and his team have also helped forge
consensus on a Chairman for the committee that will
prepare the national conference in early July. The
Chairman is now in the process of finalizing the
composition of the committee on the basis of
recommendations he has received from the United
Nations.

Finally, our electoral experts have worked
diligently to help Iraqis lay the essential groundwork
for elections. I am pleased to report that the
establishment of the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq is complete, following a country-
wide nomination process. Close to 2,000 nominations
were received from all 18 governorates. Seven Iraqi
commissioners and a National Electoral Director have
been selected by the United Nations. Agreement has
been reached on the legislative framework needed for
elections, including the electoral system, political
parties and representation, and criteria for voter
registration.

All of us know that security remains the primary
obstacle and constraint. I hope that, through our
combined efforts, we can help promote a political
process with credibility that has a positive impact on
the overall security environment and reverses the logic
of violence on all sides.

I should like to seize this opportunity to pay
special and heartfelt tribute to my Special Adviser,
Lakhdar Brahimi, to Ms. Carina Perelli, who is on her
way back, and to each and every member of their
respective teams, for working with such dedication to
complete their mission, under exceptionally difficult
and dangerous conditions. Their determination to help
the people of Iraq is eloquent testimony to the idealism
that continues to motivate so many of our staff around
the world. I am grateful to the Iraqi and Coalition
authorities for providing them with the necessary
security during their stay in Iraq, both in Baghdad and
on their travels inside the country.

The mission that has just been accomplished by
Mr. Brahimi was a specific task that I had accepted at
the request of both the Coalition Provisional Authority
and the Governing Council. Also at their request, the
United Nations is now engaged in supporting the
preparation for the elections to be held by January
2005.

The draft resolution the Council is discussing
addresses, among other things, the future role of the
United Nations in Iraq. Let me reaffirm our readiness
to do our utmost, as circumstances permit, to contribute
to the restoration of peace and stability in a unified,
sovereign and democratic Iraq. To that end, we look
forward to a clear definition of our role and to the
creation of all the conditions, including the provision
of security for our staff and adequate resources, which
would allow us to implement the mandate given us to
the satisfaction of the Iraqi people and to the
satisfaction of the Council and the United Nations
membership.

