Ms. Soderberg (United States): Thank you very
much, Madam President. It is a special pleasure to say
"Madam President", which does not happen very often.
Thank you very much for today's meeting.

Sierra Leone has weighed heavily on the world's
conscience for the past two years. We have all watched
in horror as the civilian population endured
unimaginable suffering and hardship. The brutal tactics
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of
indiscriminately cutting off the limbs of hundreds of
men, women and children have shocked us all. We
have a responsibility to help the people of Sierra Leone
return to the quiet, peaceful and productive lives they
all deserve.

Today the Council takes an important step
forward toward that goal. In banning the sale of illicit
diamonds, we take a strong stand against war and for
peace. Diamonds and their illicit procurement and sale
by the RUF rebels fuel the conflict in Sierra Leone.
The rebels have used the sale of diamonds to fund their
operations and to procure weapons, as well as to enrich
their leaders.

I commend the leadership of Sir Jeremy
Greenstock and the United Kingdom in putting forward
this draft resolution. The United States, Canada and
others have also been in the forefront of the efforts to
find ways to prevent the illicit transfer of diamonds
from fuelling conflicts, particularly in Africa.

The illicit trade in diamonds is closely linked to
illicit trade in small arms. We remind all States of
existing sanctions on arm shipments to the RUF. We
believe the resolution is a necessary and critical step to
assist the Government of Sierra Leone in re-
establishing authority over its diamond-producing
regions. Efforts are already under way to help the
Government of Sierra Leone establish a certification
system. We are working in cooperation with the United
Kingdom and others to support this endeavour.

We will vote to adopt this resolution, but we do
so with reservations on the time-frame. We are
concerned about the negative implications of putting in
place time-limited sanctions. Sanctions are difficult for
Member States to impose within their own national
legal systems. They become more difficult to
implement if turned off and on.

We believe the diamond boycott should stay in
place until the control of the Government of Sierra
Leone over the diamond regions has been fully
established. We favour the establishment of benchmark
criteria to be met before sanctions can be lifted. This
draft resolution links the removal of sanctions to the
arbitrary passage of time, rather than to fair and
reasonable compliance with requirements established
by the Council. We do not agree with time limits, but
we have accepted the consensus View of other Council
members on this issue, given the critical importance of
imposing sanctions to end the illicit trade in diamonds
for arms carried on by the RUF.

The United States strongly believes its sanctions,
to have meaning and force, must be tied to a change in
the behaviour that prompts imposition of the sanctions
in the first place, not to an arbitrary date on the
calendar. In this case the change in behaviour is the end
of the RUF's use of diamonds to fuel its war machine
and human rights abuses, and the full control of the
Government over its resources. The use of time limits
in this resolution or in any others undermines the
incentive for sanctioned States or entities to comply
with the demands of the Security Council, unhelpfully
encouraging them to believe that if they can simply
outlast the patience of the Council or somehow divide
its members, sanctions will be lifted without
compliance or will simply expire.

It is up to the Council to review, consider and
modify its own sanctions. This resolution calls for an
18-month period of sanctions. Eighteen months is an
arbitrary political compromise; it has no basis in fact or
anything related to the situation on the ground in Sierra
Leone. In the end, time limits provide comfort only to
those under sanctions and to those who, contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations, believe that sanctions
are not an appropriate tool of Security Council policy.

We should target sanctions to protect civilian
populations, but not to give rogues and criminals time
off for bad behaviour when sanctions run out. By
placing time limits on Sierra Leone's sanctions we are
undermining the effectiveness of this important
resolution and damaging the Council's ability to
impose credible sanctions in the future.

The only permissible criteria for ending sanctions
must be compliance with Security Council resolutions.
Otherwise, the security of the Council is undermined.
If there had been time limits on the Libyan sanctions,
for instance, the suspects would never have been
handed over to the Scottish court in the Netherlands.

Finally, let me underscore the importance of the
step the Council takes today. It places the Security
Council firmly on the side of peace in Sierra Leone.
We will vote for this resolution, and we urge those who
continue to thwart peace in Sierra Leone to take due
notice.

