Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to see you preside over the Security Council, Mr. President, and we are grateful to Ms. Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings. Ms. Mueller has done a great deal in her position, especially with regard to managing so-called forgotten crises. In general, she has demonstrated talent and a principled approach as a humanitarian and I thank her for her work. Since Council meetings take place regularly - perhaps too regularly - I imagine that many members of the Council can write each other's statements. We, for example, knew in advance what our colleagues from the troika, the humanitarian penholders, would say. We have heard those ideas more than once. Our colleagues can also probably imagine our remarks although they prefer to ignore them. That is more convenient. But I propose that today we do something a little different and focus on two recent reports of the Secretary-General - on alternatives to the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139), closed earlier by a decision of the Security Council, and on the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2020/141). They contain quite a few disturbing points, over which, together with United Nations colleagues, we express our concern.Among those issues is the humanitarian situation in Idlib. We are convinced that it is not a normal situation when, in an area of a large-scale humanitarian operation with a budget of hundreds of millions of dollars, for several days, or even weeks, people have to spend the night in the open air. We believe that such a situation could have been predicted and prepared for in advance, particularly given the risks associated with the winter period. The Turkish side is not impeding the delivery of humanitarian assistance to Idlib and humanitarian workers have plenty of resources so why has this problem still not been resolved? Moreover, from the reports of humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs), we know that among the displaced persons there are people who died as a result of heaters in tents catching fire. Those reasons, not the cold, as many colleagues try to portray, account for the majority of the victims. We believe that humanitarian workers and companies supplying such devices must address such incidents and prevent their recurrence. Let us now return to the reports of the Secretary- General. During previous meetings, colleagues from other delegations have repeatedly criticized us for the fact that the Russian position, as they put it, is never supported by facts and that we stand alone in the Council. Today is an opportunity to provide some facts. First, as we have noted, the only long-term solution to the issue of Idlib, and frankly of Syria as a whole, is the definitive and irreversible expulsion of terrorists from the country. We urge members not to say that we are exaggerating the problem and not to try to whitewash Hayat Tahrir al-Sham. The report of the Secretary General (S/2020/141) clearly describes those with whom some Council members are trying to flirt. They are guilty of killings, abductions, arbitrary detention, torture and public executions of civilians, journalists, public figures and health service providers, bans on peaceful assembly and preventing civilians from entering safe zones. That is in paragraph 15. As for the issue of the ratio of civilians to fighters, even if, as members claim, there are not many fighters, they are nevertheless capable of carrying out their atrocities across the entire province. The number of them therefore does not really matter, so we do not accept that argument. Secondly, at every meeting we are told that Damascus does not cooperate. The purpose is clear - to create the illusion that there is no progress on humanitarian access, from which can be drawn the well-worn conclusion, namely, that it is not possible to reach an agreement with the Government. Even today we have heard similar statements. In the meantime, the Syrian Government has increased the number of approvals for humanitarian operations to 600 a month. All United Nations agencies and 28 international NGOs are registered and working in the country. That is in paragraph 38 of the report. Furthermore, the vast majority ofthe aforementioned approvals - 95 per cent, to be exact - are so-called "blanket" approvals, which gives humanitarian actors flexibility compared to other kinds of approvals. In principle, they do not limit the number of humanitarian operations in authorized areas and are therefore particularly valued by the humanitarian community. I repeat, in the past two months the Syrian side has issued 1,193 such approvals, as stated in paragraph 32. The number of people receiving such assistance is 4.4 million in just two months. I would also like to recall that, according to paragraph 31 of the report, there are 1,700 United Nations staff members in the country, and these are only the United Nations staff members, not including local personnel and staff of humanitarian partners, who are even more numerous. They are all somehow in Syria, which means they have been granted visas; they are all working there. That was almost entirely ignored today. We have the impression that some of our colleagues simply do not read the reports of the Secretary-General. We are not trying to say that there are no problems. There are, and the report highlights that. We are simply asking members not to describe the world in black and white, not to disregard the other side of the issue, not to increase political pressure and not to rush to bury the Astana format. Like many other countries, we are working with the Syrian side to resolve existing difficulties. The country is at war with terrorists. A number of natural resources have been cut off. Production chains have been disrupted and illegal unilateral sanctions seek precisely to undermine the effectiveness of State governance. There are active terrorist cells in the country that do not hesitate to use the humanitarian element in their grim media and armed struggle. That applies to the reports of bombings of schools and hospitals. There is no United Nations presence in Idlib. To affirm suchbombardments, it is enough just to make two telephone calls. We have often identified such fake reports based on supposedly reliable information. Today, our American colleagues spoke of bombardments of internally displaced persons camps. As Ms. Mueller said in her briefing, in this period there has been only one example of shelling of an internally displaced persons camp, the Dana camp. It was not a bombardment but artillery shelling. I would ask that our colleagues be more exact when speaking about such issues. Thirdly, since the Secretary General's report on alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah has been issued, letus be clearhere and give an alternative point of view, with references, of course, to the text. I would recall that the entire information campaign in support of that border crossing served one purpose - to prevent any changes in the cross-border mechanism. Since it has always been presented as a legal precedent in the context of international humanitarian law, year after year colleagues have insisted that it remain unchanged. We understood such considerations but did not share them. I would recall that the arguments regarding Al-Yarubiyah were based on two points: there are no alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah and the only way to reach north-east Syria from Damascus 1s through Iraq. All other points of view were considered nonsense, including the Russian and Syrian proposals. Let us now turn to the report contained in document S/2020/139. The first fact is that, except for some medical supplies, all deliveries - I repeat, everything, that is, food, equipment and sanitary supplies - were delivered to the region beyond the Euphrates from within Syria, not from Iraq, as set out in paragraphs 12, 13 and 41 of the report. They are still being delivered. On 18 February, a convoy of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) travelled from Damascus to Qamishli. That is in paragraph 40. Earlier, a World Food Programme convoy passed through the same route. Next, with regard to there being no alternatives to Al-Yarubiyah, the whole final part of the report outlines those very alternatives, the main and most feasible of which is to obtain approval from Damascus for the only kind of humanitarian aid that is not covered by regular deliveries from within Syria, namely, medical supplies. At the last meeting on this issue (see S/PV.8727), I cited a Syrian note addressed to the United Nations Resident Coordinator, approving the delivery of a shipment that had been delayed in Iraq. Damascus issued that approval in one day, although it proved impossible to execute the delivery for security reasons, which we understand. Yesterday, the Government approved the delivery of medical supplies from warehouses in Damascus to the north-east of the country. The February UNFPA convoy, which I mentioned earlier, covered that route in four and a half days. It is therefore acceptable from a security standpoint, since the United Nations Department for Safety and Security agreed to it. Syrian troops are clearing the key Damascus-Aleppo route to make that possible. I believe that if my colleagues were to allow the Syrian Permanent Representative Bashar Ja'afari to speak without a time limit and not ignore his words, he would lay out in detail the humanitarian efforts being made by the legitimate Syrian Government, at a time when the Western countries are basically choking his country with sanctions. The report also refutes the complaints of some Security Council members about the acute lack of medical supplies in the provinces of north-eastern Syria. Paragraph 5 of the report notes the opposite - the fact that hospitals have stocks that will last until May. The only sphere in which a shortage may be felt is reproductive health, but even there we still have a month, as noted in the report. I recall that the Syrian side has already agreed to a one-time air delivery of supplies from Erbil, in Iraq. That approval is also contained in the aforementioned note. No matter how certain members of the Security Council seek to dramatize the situation, substantial progress has been made, as the Secretary-General has acknowledged. He has also called on the sides to provide support until all medical supplies have been successfully delivered to the hospitals. For our part, we are ready to continue to assist this process and call on everyone to do the same. We reiterate that the more we approach this issue with calm and professionalism, the better will be the chances for its successful resolution.
