Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for their statements.

We join others in condemning today's terrorist
attack and would like to fully support the draft press
statement presented by the Spanish delegation. The
Security Council must present a unified front on the
issue of terrorism.

We welcome the fact that the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan has launched a new phase in its political
process aimed at overcoming the instability caused by
the successive foreign interventions of the end of last
century, the consequences of which are still making
themselves known.

We welcome the firm commitment by the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to meet
the challenges facing the country with a View to
strengthening peace and stability. The formation of
the National Unity Government under the leadership
of President Ashraf Ghani, who has made national
reconciliation his goal, is a highly positive development,
as it will allow the country to strengthen its institutions.
In that regard, the dialogue initiated with the armed
insurgents in order to reach a political agreement for
peace is encouraging.

Achieving peace and strengthening the political
process will require the full participation of the Afghan
people, including women. We therefore welcome the
fact that the President has appointed four women to
senior positions within the central Administration. We
support the participation of women in decision-making
in various Government areas to decisively combat the
exclusion of women and the Violence committed against
them in Afghan society.

The holding ofparliamentary elections is a pending
issue of particular importance for the strengthening of
the State. While awaiting the electoral reforms agreed
to on 21 September 2014, we encourage the Afghan
Government to undertake the necessary efforts to hold
those elections.

One of the most important challenges facing the
current Government is the economic situation, which
presents great challenges, given the devastating effects
of war. We therefore urge the international community to
provide all necessary assistance to promote sustainable
economic and social development in Afghanistan.
We want to highlight the work carried out by
UNAMA in terms of peacebuilding. Meetings between
Afghan society and various levels of Government
aimed at strengthening the people's leadership in
the peacebuilding process is a major breakthrough.
While recognizing their contributions, we believe that
UNAMA should continue its work in full coordination
with the Government.

The reintegration of former combatants is one of the
most important elements for efforts to build peace and
political and social stability and an objective that our
country warmly welcomes. In that regard, we recognize
the efforts of Afghanistan to reintegrate into society
more than 10,000 former combatants, who handed over
approximately 7,000 weapons that they had in their
possession. Despite that progress, the terrorist threat
remains in the form of the presence of foreign terrorist
fighters, who, filled with hatred and intolerance, are
trying to take Afghanistan back to an earlier time.

The security situation remains fragile, as noted
in the report (S/2015/422) of the Secretary-General.
Terrorist groups operating in Central Asia persist
in their plans to destabilize the region, including
Afghanistan. The presence of groups affiliated with
cells of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria is another
demonstration of the growing threat to regional stability
posed by the advance of Violent non-State actors. The
reports indicate a considerable increase in the number of
extremist armed groups in various parts of the country
as a result of military operations in neighbouring
countries, which represents a new challenge to the
stability of Afghanistan. We would like to underscore
the importance of the cooperation of neighbouring
countries, including Pakistan and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, which have played an crucial role in providing
shelter to Afghan refugees affected by armed violence.
We welcome the voluntary repatriation programmes for
refugees that those Governments have promoted, with
the assistance of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

We are convinced that strengthening the country's
armed forces is essential to building the State so that
it can effectively combat the various groups linked to
terrorism and transnational organized crime operating
in the country. It is vital that Afghanistan recovers all
its capacites so that it can address all of its issues in a
sovereign and independent way.

We also welcome the efforts made by the Afghan
authorities to combat the scourge of drugs, although
there has been an increase in poppy cultivation.
Eradication is one area where there has been considerable
progress, despite the resistance of insurgent groups.
The cultivation of and trafficking in drugs continues to
be a key source of financing for the Taliban and other
criminal and terrorist groups.

We are concerned about the increase in the number
of attacks on the civilian population as a result of
internal conflict. The infant mortality rate has risen as
a result of armed clashes, with a high number of cases
involving explosives and landmines. We therefore
believe that there should be an increase in assistance
provided by the international community to help
remove such devices, which cause so much harm to
civilians, particularly children.

In conclusion, we hope that through a broad and
inclusive political process, peace and stability will
ultimately take root in Afghanistan. That will require
the joint efforts of the Afghan Government and people,
with the assistance and support of the international
community, in order to overcome the economic and
social conditions that fuel extremism and violence.

