Mr. Motoc (Romania): As Romania aligns itself
with the statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union, I would like here to make only a few
specific comments.

We welcome the decision of the Brazilian
presidency to convene a wrap-up meeting as a modality
for assessing the work of the Security Council for this
month, keeping the focus on a matter of primary
importance. Indeed, the programme of work for this
month has epitomized the African dimension in the
Security Council's discharge of its responsibility for
preserving international peace and security.

Almost 2,000 years ago, the Roman savant Pliny
the Elder wrote that "There is always something new
out of Africa". Mainly since the end of the cold war,
what has come out of Africa has continually put the
continent in a new and complex light from the
standpoint of the Council. The existence of failed or
failing States, and of ethnic and religious strife linked
to disputes over land and water sharing and nurtured by
extreme poverty, have all led to internal decay and the
erosion of social fabric. As an African proverb says,
"The drums of war are the drums of starvation".

A large array of transborder issues have further
complicated the African conflict matrix. Armed groups
easily trespass across borders in West Africa or in the
Great Lakes region as sui generis mercenary armies.
The insidious presence of weapons illegally trafficked
in many parts of Africa, such as in the two areas just
mentioned or in the Horn of Africa, has become both a
symbol and an instrument of power, frequently filling
the void left by collapsed State structures and
institutions.

On the other hand, in our global world, the
critical mass of conflict situations accumulated in
Africa carries with it serious perils for international
peace and security. Faced with an extensive African
conflict agenda, the Security Council has not failed to
react and to act. The Council has thus generated a
massive investment, in political and material terms, by
the international community in Africa, as well as for
the sake of international peace and security. Romania
has brought its share to this endeavour as an elected
member of the Security Council and also in the light of
its good bilateral relationship with many African
States, founded, among other things, on a strong human
component, given the fact that thousands of Africans
have studied throughout the years at Romanian
universities.

In the "tool box" with which African issues have
been dealt with by the Council, the instruments
available have increased in number and diversified
qualitatively. Some in particular have generated a
capital of lessons learned with regard to increasing the
effectiveness of the political and diplomatic energy
invested in conflict prevention, conflict management
and post-conflict reconstruction on the continent.

First, Africa is the main host of United Nations
peacekeeping operations - presently eight in number.
The surge in peacekeeping activities in Africa
continued in 2004, with the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations
Operation in Burundi (UNOB), and in 2005, with the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan as the latest
addition. The concentration in Africa of the bulk of the
peacekeeping troops deployed today in the world is
proof that the continent has become the destination of
choice for that crucial kind of United Nations
involvement in maintaining peace and security around
the globe.

The Council has authorized more
multidimensional mandates for United Nations
operations, with a three-fold component: civilian,
military and civilian police. Romania, which
contributes troops and police personnel to a number of
United Nations missions in Africa - including the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, ONUB, UNOCI
and the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea - supports that approach as a practical way of
making peacekeeping successful in Africa.

On the other hand, as the missions in Cote
d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have shown, repeated adjustments of both mandate and
strength have been necessary to increase their efficacy.
What we have here is the capacity of the Council to
adapt and to respond to developments on the ground. It
is no less true that a better prediction of needs from the
inception stage would help the missions to reach their
objectives more rapidly.

The need for complementarity between
peacekeeping and some specific tools provided by the
United Nations Charter is manifest. As a more recent
example, the Security Council has supported the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a Special
Envoy for Ethiopia and Eritrea, who is thus
multitasked.

Secondly, more than in other areas, the Security
Council's missions to Africa have been a clear
demonstration of continuing interest in and
engagement with solving crises and conflicts on the
continent. The Council intends to organize several
missions to Africa this year. They should carry a
powerful message that the Council remains focused on
African issues. What such missions accomplish on the
ground with regard to conflict prevention, conflict
management and conflict resolution is one of the most
critical questions that should be addressed in their
preparation.

Thirdly, my delegation would like to point to a
specific internal tool of the Security Council with great
potential to consolidate our in-depth tackling of critical
African matters: the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. We hope
that the Council will soon adopt the Group's
programme for the year, based on the draft presented
by our colleagues from Benin, who are currently
chairing the Group. We have every confidence that
they will be able to boost the Group back into action.

Meanwhile, Romania considers that value could
be added to the Council's decision-making on African
issues by increased use of the capacities provided by
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for
Special Assignments in Africa, the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Africa, or the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa.

Conflicts in Africa cannot be resolved without
taking their regional dimension fully into account.
Both preventive measures and effective conflict
management must be designed and implemented
through active cooperation with and support from
regional and subregional organizations. The Economic
Community of West African States, mainly through its
involvement in Liberia and Sierra Leone, has generated
notable success stories. Sudan is the latest case in point
reflecting participation of the regional organizations -
the African Union and other regional organizations, in
particular the European Union - as well as the
cooperation with the United Nations. As an elected
member of the Council, Romania has been a strong
advocate of the comprehensive approach of the
multifaceted Sudan dossier.

We welcome developments within the African
Union to enhance its capacities for crisis management
and to strengthen coordination with the United
Nations, with subregional organizations and with non-
African partners, such as the European Union and the
G-8. African ownership and international partnership
could be the synergetic platform for making the most
of the investment directed to peace and security in
Africa.

The thematic debate initiated by the Romanian
presidency of the Council in July 2004 provided the
opportunity to shed more light on the specific African
experience in cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in post-conflict
stabilization. We intend to follow on this theme on the
occasion of our second Council presidency, in October
this year. Against this backdrop, Romania took note
with special interest of the pragmatic recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report "In larger
freedom" (A/59/2005). We stand ready to work with
Council members, as well as with other Members of
the Organization, to put those proposals into a
decisional framework forged by consensus.

Finally, it is clear that there is a risk that the
impact of each of these instruments, if taken separately,
will remain weak. Therefore the Romanian delegation
welcomes the approach advanced by the Brazilian
delegation in the non-paper prepared for this meeting.
We should indeed seek to increase the overall
effectiveness of peace and security resources directed
to Africa, and that implies a holistic approach. As
another African proverb says, "It is not possible for
one foot to create a footpath".

