Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
join other speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate. We are grateful to
Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz, author ofthe report
on improving security of United Nations peacekeepers.
We also particularly welcome the presence of the
African Union Commission Chairperson, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, at today's debate.

Building on the outcome of the 2015 High-level
Panel to review peace operations, the Santos-Cruz
report contains important recommendations aimed
at improving the effectiveness, safety and security of
current and future missions. Switzerland notes with
satisfaction that the Secretariat has already started
implementing key recommendations of the report. We
also welcome the envisaged creation of a single plan
of action to improve peacekeeping operations. I would
like to focus today on three priority issues.

First, let me underline the strategic importance of
securing sustainable and predictable funding for peace
operations, including in settings where the United
Nations is working in partnership with others. Further
enhancing cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations will contribute to designing more context-
specific and tailor-made mandates, which is one of the
key recommendations of the peace operations review
and the Santos-Cruz report.

Secondly, Switzerland would like to emphasize the
role of equipment in enhancing the safety and security
of United Nations peacekeepers. The equipment of
peacekeepers must be in line with the threat environment
and allow troops to prevent attacks, identify perpetrators
and eliminate threats accordingly. Access to up-to-date
and quality medical care capabilities is crucial to limit
the victims of attacks.

Thirdly, regarding the duty of care, some of our
personnel in the field are active in highly volatile,
hazardous or even intensely hostile areas. Member
States and the Organization itself are therefore
morally and legally bound to ensure that duty-of-care
obligations are fulfilled. In order to mitigate the risks to
all deployed personnel, those obligations - including
certified predeployment training and other preparatory
work - must be met by all parties involved.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
numerous Blue Helmets who have lost their lives or
been injured recently. They are a tragic reminder
that the issue of safety and security remains vital and
begs our continued attention and action. While there
is increasing pressure to save costs in United Nations
peacekeeping, that must not come at the expense of
the courageous men and women who risk their lives in
fulfilling the mandates of the Council.

