Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to begin by
welcoming Serbia's Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dacic', in
his first appearance at the Council in that capacity, and
to wish him the best in his high duties. I also welcome
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo and thank
both Prime Ministers for their statements. I also thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his very comprehensive briefing
and for his work as Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

On a general note, I would like to highlight the
restraint and constructive pragmatism of the relevant
political actors on all sides in the context of the holding
in Kosovo of Serbian parliamentary and presidential
elections. Together with the outstanding job done by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), they contributed decisively to the successful
conduct of the voting.

The situation in Kosovo over the past few months
has already been addressed in detail by both Prime
Ministers in their statements and by the briefing of the
Special Representative. I shall focus my statement on
three specific aspects.
First, the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, facilitated by
the European Union, should be resumed in the shortest
possible term. Portugal calls upon the parties to
constructively re-engage in the dialogue that constitutes
the fundamental tool that brings the two sides together
to work for the common good of all those involved in,
and affected by, the situation in Kosovo. The Belgrade-
Pristina dialogue must not be allowed to wither on the
basis of transient political circumstances. The progress
achieved so far has had an impact on the everyday lives
of thousands of people regardless of their ethnicity or
their political stance on the status of Kosovo, showing
that the basis and the need for dialogue continue to exist.
In that context, the implementation of the agreements
reached should proceed swiftly, and differences over
their interpretation should be resolved.

Secondly, the potential for instability in Kosovo
remains, and the political and security situations must
continue to be addressed by all involved in a balanced
and cautious way. The incidents and breaches of public
order mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/603) and in Mr. Zarif's briefing have resulted
in the wounding of civilians, including children, as well
as of soldiers of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). Portugal
vigorously condemns those incidents. We believe that
they indicate that there are reasons for the international
community to pay particular attention to the nature
of, and motives for, those incidents and to be actively
engaged both in preventing future violence and in
reacting swiftly to similar occurrences.

Changes are coming to Kosovo at a fast pace. The
next few months will be of great importance at both the
political and institutional levels, as well as with respect
to the security environment. In that regard, we take
very seriously the Secretary-General's warning about
the near future. There is indeed a need to genuinely
reach out to the population in the northern part of
Kosovo. Precipitous action may spark a sequence of
events, the result of which may be unforeseen in scope
and seriousness. Portugal calls upon all stakeholders to
refrain from any actions that may increase tension, and
to exert maximum restraint in reacting to provocations
that serve only very limited interests at the expense
of stability and of a commonly acceptable solution for
the situation in the north of Kosovo. In that regard, the
United Nations, the OSCE, KFOR and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission, among other international
actors on the ground, will be required to carry out their
mandates in a changing and demanding environment.
We are confident that they will continue to fulfil what
the international community and the Council expect of
them.

Thirdly, with respect to human rights and the rule of
law, Portugal is encouraged to see that significant and
constructive activity took place in Kosovo during the
reporting period, and on very diverse aspects of human
rights issues. It is a positive sign that the "Dialogue
between women in Kosovo" initiative was able to bring
to the same table Kosovars, Albanians and Serbs, as
well as representatives from neighbouring countries
In the same regard, we welcome the positive work
being done on an action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which is to be finalized by the
end of the year.

We also note the establishment of the
Interministerial Working Group on Dealing with the
Past and Reconciliation, whose results we are sure will
be followed closely within and outside Kosovo. We are
concerned, however, about the challenges that minority
communities still face. It is vital for public institutions
in Kosovo, namely, the police, to be perceived by all
communities as neutral guardians and enforcers of
the rule of law. The security situation, and the way
it is perceived among minorities, is essential to their
integration into Kosovo society and to the returnee
process.

Finally, I should like to say a word about the
work of the European Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We consider any attempts to obstruct
the work of EULEX and any threats to the security
of its personnel, or indeed to the security of any
international organization on the ground in Kosovo, to
be totally unacceptable. It is imperative that EULEX
find the necessary support and cooperation from all
stakeholders to assist in the institutional reform needed
in Kosovo, in addition to the ongoing successful fight
against corruption and organized crime.

Portugal also reiterates its support for the Special
Investigative Task Force concerning allegations of
trafficking in human organs. We are encouraged by the
degree of cooperation pledged by regional Governments
and partners. We hope that that will translate into
results in the foreseeable future.

The month between today and the next debate
of the Security Council on UNMIK will prove to be
very important not only for the future of Kosovo but
also for Kosovo's neighbours, and indeed the entire
region. The anticipated closure of the International
Civilian Office entails political and institutional
developments that are bound to have an impact on the
ground, posing new challenges. We expect Kosovo
to remain strongly committed to a peaceful, stable,
democratic and multi-ethnic State. Portugal believes
that, under the dutiful and insightful leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif,
the United Nations will continue to thoroughly fulfil its
mandate and uphold international peace and security.

