Mr. Wetland (Norway): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his important presentation here
today and for the work he is doing under difficult
circumstances. I am also pleased to see my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Somalia, participating
in our meeting, and I listened carefully to his important
statement as well.

Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden continue to threaten
the people of Somalia, the whole region and a series of
protected interests. Those interests include innocent
lives, humanitarian supplies and international
commerce and navigation. Some 1,000 Norwegian-
owned ships pass through the Gulf of Aden every year.
We, too, are directly affected, and we are acting
accordingly.

The root of piracy and armed robbery is
instability and the weakening of Government
institutions in Somalia. Consequently, in order to
restore order on the seas we must work to restore order
on land in Somalia. Bringing peace and stability to
Somalia and re-establishing effective Government
institutions in the country is essential to a long-term
solution to piracy as well. Humanitarian, development
and security assistance is therefore needed. Norway is
conscious of this and we are shouldering our part.
Norway will also be chairing the next meeting of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
which will take place here in New York in January.

We are beginning to see the effects of preventive
measures taken by the shipping industry itself. The best
management practices adopted by the Contact Group
on piracy are thus serving their purpose, and
implementation by all needs to be further encouraged.
Moreover, the naval operations in the waters outside
Somalia have prevented new captures even if we have
not prevented them all. Those operations are well

coordinated and may set a good example on how
nations and international organizations can cooperate
in order to solve an international security problem.
Norway has experienced this first-hand through our
participation with a frigate in the European Union's
Operation Atalanta. We appreciate the contributions of
a great number of countries and organizations.

Now, we must make sure that pirates captured are
brought to justice. We greatly appreciate the
contributions of countries in the region, in particular
Kenya and Seychelles. We recognize that there is a
need for increased capacity in those, the most affected
countries. That is why Norway has decided to
contribute €500,000 to the trust fund established under
the auspices of the Contact Group on piracy.

Public perceptions are also important. We know
that many Somalis consider piracy to be a criminal
activity. We know less about how the entire
international engagement is perceived in Somalia. We
therefore believe that the Contact Group should
implement a communication and information strategy
for Somalia. We must be able to convince the Somalis
that this operation is also serving their interests and to
counter any notion that piracy is seen as ajust cause by
parts of Somali society.

In conclusion, Norway will continue to support
the Security Council in its efforts to address piracy of
the coast of Somalia.

