Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate on the Middle
East. It is only natural that Member States be given a
chance to voice their views on such a crucial issue on
the international peace and security agenda. I would
also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Riad Al-Malki
among us today. Moreover, I express my appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
informative briefing.

We gather at a moment of renewed hope, but also
of heightened tensions, in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. On the one hand, the efforts of the Obama
Administration led by Mr. George Mitchell and the
intra-Palestinian negotiations mediated by Egypt make
it possible to believe that significant progress may be
achieved. On the other hand, continued difficulties in
resuming direct negotiations between the parties and
serious incidents on the ground, including in key holy
sites, further strain the peace process.

Under these circumstances, the immediate
priority must be to sustain the hope among people in
the region that a peaceful solution is possible and that
negotiations can and will produce concrete results.

This must be obtained through deeds. The
measures needed are well known. Israel must cease all
settlement activity, further ease restrictions on the
movement of people and goods in the occupied
Palestinian territories, abandon policies that artificially
alter the demographics of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, prevent and stop violence and provocation
from extremists and immediately lift the blockade on
Gaza. Just as important, it must accept that there will
be no true and lasting peace until there is an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security
within internationally recognized borders. For their
part, the Palestinians must prevent and stop all
violence against Israel, including rocket-launching,
enhance democratic governance and overcome their
divisions.

Also relevant to sustaining hope in a peaceful
solution are confidence-building measures. Although
they are no substitute for effective negotiations, such
measures ease the state of mind, reduce mistrust and
facilitate mutual understanding. Enhancing dialogue
between Israeli and Palestinian civil societies, in
particular journalists and political analysts, is a
promising avenue. Their capacity to contribute to peace
09-55901
is strong and was evident to the International Media
Seminar on Peace in the Middle East, held last July in
Rio de Janeiro.

All this would certainly allow for the prompt
resumption of negotiations on the final status. But
restarting the negotiating process, although in itself
key to sustaining hope, is not enough. In order to
generate the popular support that both parties will need
for the difficult decisions they will eventually have to
make, the talks must deliver visible gains to the
ordinary citizen in the short term. Support for dialogue
and compromise will be eroded if daily life conditions
are not rapidly improved in the Palestinian territories
or if people in southern Israel feel seriously threatened.

As soon as conditions allow, an international
conference on the Middle East peace process would
also serve as a powerful tool to make the negotiating
process move forward. All actors in the region that are
prepared to engage constructively should be given a
chance to participate in such an effort. Involving other
countries from outside the region in the discussions
would also bring significant momentum to the talks.

The fact-finding mission headed by Justice
Richard Goldstone has discharged its mandate in an
effective and professional manner. It addressed
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed by all sides
in the context of the military operations conducted in
Gaza.

The findings presented by the mission are
extremely disturbing. The Human Rights Council must
review them and adopt decisions that are just and
effective. Its focus must be full respect for
humanitarian legislation and human rights law on the
ground. Its aim should be the quest for justice. That is
the indispensable basis for achieving peace and
reconciliation among Israelis and Palestinians.

Before concluding, I wish to say a few words
about Lebanon, a country with which Brazil has strong
ties. We are concerned that violations of resolution
1701 (2006) continue to take place. It is imperative that
all parties involved fully and immediately comply with
all the provisions of that resolution. Brazil also calls
upon all parties to cooperate fully in the prompt
formation of a government of national unity able to
successfully address the challenges facing the country.
The Lebanese people deserve no less.
09-55901
