The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.

I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
the information she shared with the Security Council
on the issue of Venezuela.

The Dominican Republic has very closely
followed the development of events in Venezuela - a
country with which we have lasting historic ties. Juan
Pablo Duarte, our founding father, lived and died in
Venezuela. Countless Dominicans found political
asylum in Venezuela. And the country hosted thousands
of migrants at the height of its oil boom. Those are facts
that have left the Dominican Republic with an eternal
debt of gratitude to the Venezuelan people. For those
and many other reasons, we have a special bond with
that South American country, and we therefore wish it
the brightest future.

I must remind the Council that the Dominican
Republic hosted a dialogue between the opposition
and the Venezuelan Government, which took place in
2017 and 2018 and was attended by various countries
of the region. For several months, representatives of
the two sides sought to forge an agreement to resolve
the Venezuelan political crisis. That dialogue did not
achieve its desired goal, due to the fragmentation
of the opposition and because its leaders prioritized
their personal interests. It also failed because the
Government was inflexible in providing space for the
holding of competitive and credible elections, while
refusing to allow any opposition leader wishing to take
part from doing so.

The bloody-mindedness of both the Government
and the opposition meant that a valuable opportunity
provided by the Dominican Republic to achieve a
peaceful, democratic and stable exit to the crisis
was wasted. There was a lack of political will and
extreme inflexibility from both sides. The Venezuelan
Government and the opposition are both well aware
that the Dominican Government did its utmost to try
to ensure that that dialogue would lead to a lasting
solution. We were advocates for elections that would
guarantee the participation of all political actors, with
international support, in a climate of respect for human
rights, which would have allowed for the true voice of
the Venezuelan people to have been heard. It is obvious
that holding elections in Venezuela on the fringes of
even the minimum standards required for a democratic
process could not lead to the election of a legitimate
Government. A growing global consensus has emerged
that disregards those electoral results and, in turn, the
Government that ensued.

During the deliberations of the Organization of
American States (OAS), we once again underlined what
has been a core principle ofour foreign policy- dialogue
as an acceptable mechanism for the peaceful resolution
of conflicts. Indeed, that was reiterated in the form of
a second instrument - a Dominican proposal for a
resolution ofthe OAS Permanent Council on 10 January,
which stated:

"only through dialogue with the participation
of all Venezuelan political actors can national
reconciliation be achieved and the necessary
conditions agreed upon for holding a new electoral
process that truly reflects the will of the citizens
and peacefully resolves the current crisis in
that country."

In order to prepare for that process of transition and
hold credible and competitive elections, the support of
the international community will be needed to help
political stakeholders in Venezuela convene a dialogue
that will ensure free and competitive elections as soon
as possible. In that regard, we advocate the support
of the United Nations and other international bodies,
which must be accepted by both sides in the process.

There is no doubt that the situation in Venezuela has
deteriorated and reached a point of serious concern. The
crisis is threatening stability and has forced millions of
Venezuelans to emigrate, creating serious problems for
many Latin American countries. Most important, those
who are suffering most are the Venezuelan people,
who are the victims of a worrisome shortage of basic
goods and medicine and a general climate of insecurity.
Venezuelan human rights are being threatened, which
has compelled the international community to become
involved in this unwelcome drama.

The Dominican Republic hopes for a democratic,
peaceful and consensual outcome in Venezuela.
However, it is vital that the rules of the game that are
the hallmark of genuine democracy be respected. In
that regard, new elections need to take place as soon
as possible, with the participation of all political
parties and leaders, to make the institutional changes
necessary and ensure the impartiality of the electoral
council and the independence of the judicial system.
It is also important that conditions be fostered to
ensure the adequate flow of medicine, food and other
basic goods in order to mitigate the negative impact of
the shortages and the critical economic situation. We
maintain the same concern for the Government and the
opposition that we did during the dialogue we hosted
in Santa Domingo. However, above all, we are most
concerned for the Venezuelan people, who are caught
up in a seriously difficult situation.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

