Mr. Lacroix: I will be very brief because I think it
is very important that the Security Council listen to the
responses by the Force Commanders. I would like to
thank members for their support and their commitment
to our peacekeepers and for the tribute that was paid to
our colleagues in the field.

I would also like to reiterate the importance of
the continuous engagement of the Security Council in
support of the collective efforts aimed at improving
the effectiveness of peacekeeping. That is very much
the spirit of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
which is about candidly sharing the challenges that
peacekeeping faces, explaining what we are trying to
do to address those challenges and highlighting the
importance of strong support from Member States
to effectively address the challenges. We need the
support of Member States as political actors, as troop-
and police-contributing countries and as financial
contributors and partners.

Turning briefly to the action plan, let me say
that we are determined to continue very actively to
implement it. Although it does not take on board all of
the recommendations of the Santos Cruz report, it is
based thereon. I think it is important to highlight that the
action plan is not the overall strategy for peacekeeping,
because the overall strategy for peacekeeping places
primacy on politics. It is very important to highlight the
importance of Member State support to further advance
political solutions in the many situations where political
processes are not moving fast enough. The action plan
is essentially a set of very practical recommendations
and measures aimed at making the important tool of
peacekeeping more effective and more apt to address
the current challenges. The implementation of the plan
is a collective undertaking. I would again like to express
my gratitude to our colleagues in the field, particularly
the Force Commanders, for what they are doing.

As I said, we are very determined to move forward.
One of the key priorities of the plan is to make sure
that we implement our rules and procedures at every
level. Another priority is to place emphasis on training.
We have a specific plan of action for training, which
we have shared with Member States. We work on
performance assessment, for which we have a new
methodology that we are mainstreaming throughout
missions. We are also candidly sharing performance
issues with the troop- and police-contributing countries,
whenever appropriate, in a spirit of partnership and
with the goal of remedying these issues. We are also
working on other very important priorities, such as
identifying the key shortages in equipment and how to
use modern technologies, as well as the importance of
further improving the way in which we handle fatalities
and casualties.

Against that backdrop, I would like to underline
the key principles of peacekeeping, which have been
recalled by a number of Council members. Those
principles remain the cornerstone of our action. I think
it is absolutely critical to highlight the importance of
working in close partnership with host Governments
and to make sure that there is consent from them. I
think impartiality is also a key principle. Our mandates
dictate that we support political solutions. The reality
is that in many situations we face forces that oppose
the advancement of political solutions, and that do
that quite often by going after peacekeepers and our
colleagues on the humanitarian and the development
side. The issue of the use of force is also very relevant
to that. Peacekeeping is not war. The use of force is
determined either by self-defence or by the importance
of defending the mandate. In some cases, defending the
mandate includes making good on our protection-of-
civilian mandate, but also making sure that we defend
ourselves and the mission against those who are in the
business of derailing a political solution.

Turning to the strategic review, I wish to say that
we will continue to conduct and to implement strategic
reviews. We need the support of the Security Council
for that. At the same time, it is probably too early to
assess what the impact of strategic reviews will be
on missions will be. It will be important for Member
States to take a look at the impact in order to judge for
themselves whether such reviews make a difference or
not. We intend to continue along those lines.

Let me conclude by saying that I agree with the
comments made on the issue of capability shortfalls. In
spite of the fact that we have more potential contributors
to peacekeeping and more pledges for our missions,
we still have a critical capacity shortfall in a number
of areas. It is important to further work on creative
solutions to remedy the situation. Smart pledges
represent an important avenue in that regard, whereby
pledges and contributions rotate on a yearly basis in
order to make sure that the contributors of critical
assets do not see their assets committed for too long to
a particular mission. It is equally important, as some
Member States recalled, to highlight the importance of
an integrated approach. Some of the Force Commanders
made that point very accurately.

Finally, on the issue of complementarity, it entails
making sure that we enable other organizations,
particularly regional and subregional organizations,
to respond to the situation with their own operations,
adequately supported with predictable and sustainable
support and funding.

