Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on this important topic. By the same token, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Ambassador Patriota
and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Leymah Gbowee for
the statements they made today. Let me also welcome
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3
earlier today.

I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of Estonia and Latvia. Our two countries align
themselves with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.

We welcome the topic of today's debate, which very
accurately links together the three pillars of the United
Nations system: peace and security, development and
human rights. There can be no development without
peace and security, and clearly there can be no lasting
peace and security without respect for human rights.
Furthermore, development is not true development
without the realization of human rights.

It is true that there are fewer conflicts, less violence
and greater peace in democratic countries and regions
where the rule of law is a firm basis of society and all
people fully enjoy human rights. Also, average poverty
rates are significantly lower in those countries. It is also
true that violent conflict has been the largest obstacle
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
I would like to stress the importance of conflict
prevention. As today's world illustrates, it is very
hard to end ongoing crises, which often even turn
into armed conflicts. However, it is easier and less
costly in every sense to prevent violent conflicts from
escalating. Good governance, respect for human rights
and economic development are the best prevention for
violent conflicts.

As outlined in the concept note (S/2015/6, annex) by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, inclusion,
be it national, territorial, social, gender, tribal or
cultural - and thereby also inclusive development - are
the most relevant factors for preserving peace and
security and preventing conflicts. Inclusion means that
no-one should be discriminated against on any basis. As
stated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

"It is essential, ifman is not to be compelled to
have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against
tyranny and oppression, that human rights should
be protected by the rule of law" (General Assembly resolution 217 (111) A, preamble).

That leads me to the second point - the need
to actively shape inclusive societies as guarantees
for peace and security, namely through the rule of
law, if necessary, by designing particular policies
and programmes that advance the inclusiveness of
all. Strong adherence to the rule of law encourages
sustainable development, as progress is best guaranteed
by good governance, transparency in decision-making
processes and the minimization of corruption. Effective
and accountable institutions are powerful enablers of
inclusive and sustainable development.

The rule of law accords predictability and legitimacy
to the actions of States, forming a fundamental
framework for the conduct of relations between them,
which, on its own, helps to prevent conflicts among
States. The rule of law is also a tool to improve the
fundamental human right of access to justice, which
is inherently linked to the promotion of a culture of
accountability over impunity.

In that context, peacebuilding efforts are extremely
important, as peacebuilding is about reducing the
risk of relapsing into violence. That risk needs to be
reduced by addressing the root causes of violence and
building resilient institutions and peaceful societies.
A broad approach to development focusing on justice,
human rights, inequalities, jobs and inclusive politics
will reduce violence and contribute to peacebuilding.
Therefore, the Security Council should address
peacebuilding as early as possible in conflicts or crises.
As to the concept of inclusive societies, I would
like to stress, among other things, the importance
of involving both halves of humankind, namely by
including women and girls in the decision-making
processes. It is a fact that peace is more sustainable if
women are included at all stages and all times as equal
members of society, be it in time of peace or conflict or
a period of transition.

This year we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
twentieth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action. Several reviews are under way,
including the global study of the resolution on women
and peace and security and reviews of the peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations. We must ensure that all those reviews
support and complement each other's aims and that the
recommendations emerging from them are in line with
each other, leading us to tangible results in terms of
gender equality, women's empowerment and human
rights in general.

Sustainable peace and development can only be
ensured if economic development and social benefits
are closely interlinked with good governance, strong
and accountable institutions and the realization of
human rights. Freedom of expression and association
and access to independent media, including social
media and the Internet, are integral parts of good
governance and the rule of law. There can be no real
inclusiveness in societies if restrictions are placed on
the realization of those freedoms.

Achieving inclusive and sustainable development
is essential in order to achieve long-term stability and
sustainable peace. We must take care of the future of
the planet and work towards a world in which everyone
can live a dignified life, free from poverty, violence
and exclusion. That cannot be achieved without peace
and stability. Development, human rights and peace
and security are inextricably intertwined and need to
be addressed comprehensively. Therefore peaceful
societies, good governance and the rule of law should
have a central place in the post-2015 development
agenda.

