The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to start by warmly thanking
Mr. Miroslav Lajcak for his insightful briefing on the
priorities of the Slovak chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We are
delighted to have him here with us today. Slovakia can
count on France's full support in the implementation
of its programme of work, in which the issues of the
effectiveness of multilateralism and the protection of
civilian populations in conflict zones - two themes
that are at the heart of the joint presidencies of France
and Germany - are given priority. Two points deserve
particular attention in the context of the Security
Council's cooperation with the OSCE. I will be brief.

First, with respect to the decisive role of the
OSCE in resolving the Ukrainian crisis, the crisis is
clearly one of the most serious and deadly violations
of the founding principles of the OSCE, which were
agreed in Helsinki more than 40 years ago. From the
very beginning of the crisis, the OSCE has risen to
the challenge. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine therefore contributes on a daily basis to
reducing tensions in the east of the country, on the
line of contact and throughout the conflict zone, and
has made progress towards the implementation of the
Minsk agreements by the parties.

We commend the courage of the women and
men who are engaged on the ground in that regard
and condemn in the strongest terms all actions that
undermine their security or seek to obstruct their
mission and destroy their equipment, as observed in
recent months, especially in the separatist zone.

The OSCE also facilitates dialogue between
the parties within the framework of the Trilateral
Contact Group. It can count on the political support
of the Normandy format, as my Germany colleague
mentioned. However, we must note that those
discussions are now at an impasse. More than ever, they
require a re-engagement of all parties, in particular
Russia and the separatist groups that it supports. That
re-engagement can be demonstrated only by through
strong political resolve to support those talks, which
is both urgent and essential. The parties must assume
their responsibilities and meet the expectations of the
civilian populations trapped in the conflict. That more
constructive attitude should be observed in both the
Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy format.

We cannot talk about the Ukrainian crisis without
going back to the illegal annexation of Crimea by
Russia five years ago. That violation of Ukraine's
internationally recognized borders is the cause of
growing tensions in the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea.
In that regard, we reiterate our call for the unconditional
release of the Ukrainian sailors who have been detained
since the serious naval incident last November, as well
as for the return of the seized boats.

Secondly, with regard to the conflict in Ukraine,
we call on all actors in the protracted conflicts
and all Member States to support the OSCE's
mediation efforts. The OSCE is contributing to the
peaceful and political resolution of the protracted
conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Abkhazia, South
Ossetia and Transnistria, but in that regard, too, only
the political will of the parties can bring negotiations
to a successful conclusion, leading to the settlement of
those crises. France will continue to be fully involved
in the mediation of the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh
in its capacity as co-Chair of the Minsk Group, together
with the United States and Russia. The commitments
undertaken by participating States and the dialogue
facilitation activities led by the OSCE demand respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
States. The vision of peace and security in Europe,
as envisaged at the signing of the Helsinki Final Act,
rests on that pillar. France reiterates its commitment to
the OSCE as a platform for dialogue with regard to all
security issues affecting the European continent and its
multidimensional approach to security.

In conclusion, I will recall, on the one hand, the
priority that must be given to cooperation between the
United Nations and regional agencies in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and, on the other, the large overlap between the work
of the OSCE and that of the United Nations. At a
time when divisions at the international level were
seemingly insurmountable, the Helsinki Final Act,
the cornerstone of the OSCE, opened a new chapter
in the history of multilateralism. We must now let that
example inspire us as a renewed and revitalized form of
multilateralism seems to us more necessary than ever
to meet today's great challenges. Let us never forget
that the two secret weapons of such multilateralism are
respect and dialogue. The two organizations foster a
shared approach that combines security, development
and human rights. It is our duty to continue to support
the work of the OSCE to strengthen security at the
regional level, in particular in all crises in which that
organization is called upon to act. France's commitment
in that direction is firm.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Lajcak to respond to the
comments and questions raised.

