Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting on a subject to which we
attach the highest importance.

(spoke in English)

Liechtenstein welcomes action by the Security
Council on the issue of children and armed conflict
and, in particular, the open debates, the products of
which have been instrumental in creating a normative
framework for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. Much to our satisfaction, the special
session on children last year also placed strong
emphasis on this topic.

As far as standard-setting is concerned, the year
2002 was a good one for children. Two new legal
instruments entered into force: the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography
and the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. Liechtenstein has signed
both of these Protocols and is preparing to ratify them.
Another step forward - an historic step indeed - was
the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The Statute, among other
things, provides for the better protection of children,
especially but not exclusively in times of armed
conflict. The inclusion of the recruitment and use by all
parties to a conflict of children under the age of 15 in
conflicts of both an international and non-international
character as a war crime is of special importance in this
respect.

Success in standard-setting must not give us
cause for complacency - quite to the contrary. While
the existing standards are high, the picture continues to
be very grim when it comes to their application. The
rights of millions of children around the world continue
to be violated in numerous and brutal ways. Children
affected by armed conflict, with all its manifold and
devastating consequences, are in the worst situation.
We therefore agree with the Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict that we must move with
resolve into an era of application, which was also one
of the lessons we drew from last year's special session
on children.

In the implementation of these existing norms,
the Security Council can play a central role. The
creation of a list of parties to conflicts on the Council's
agenda that continue to recruit or use child soldiers is
one measure through which to make progress in
assuring compliance with international obligations. The
list should be expanded to cover parties to conflicts in
a global manner, not only in situations on the agenda of
the Council. We welcome such practical steps and hope
that the Council will again agree on a strong response
to the report before us and thus ensure a follow-up
based on the recommendations contained in the report.

We welcome the report before the Council and its
emphasis on systematically integrating child protection
objectives into the mandates of peace operations,
including through the deployment of child protection
advisers and special training for peacekeeping
personnel. Given the importance of the participation of
children in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, children must
be given a voice, in particular in the process of post-
conflict peace-building, rather than merely having their
best interests represented by others.

Liechtenstein has supported the work of the
Special Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, right from
the inception of his mandate. His advocacy on behalf
of children in armed conflict over the past six years has
been heard widely and proven effective. Worldwide
awareness of children and the ways in which they are
affected by armed conflict is increasing. In order to
enhance the application of the legal instruments I
referred to at the outset of my statement, more needs to
be done to make these achievements better known.

Advocacy and creating awareness help to broaden
the base of support and to get more stakeholders
involved. In this context, the work and involvement of
non-governmental organizations and civil society
groups can be instrumental, especially in highlighting
different aspects of the plight of children affected by
armed conflict. In this context, we have taken note with
great interest of two reports: first, the "1379 Report" of
the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers and,
secondly, the study on the voices of girl child soldiers
presented by the Quaker United Nations Office.

The situation of the girl child is one aspect that
requires our special attention in order to effectively
protect the rights and well-being of children affected
by armed conflicts. Those conflicts have manifold and
complex consequences for all children, but specific
forms of victimization are often added to the plight of
girls and women. Rape, abduction, sexual enslavement
and trafficking are some of the crimes perpetrated
against female victims in particular. What is
characteristic of such crimes is their traumatic nature
and long-term effects. One figure may illustrate this
point: two out of three women and girls raped during
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda have reportedly tested
positive for HIV/AIDS. It is therefore no exaggeration
to say that the genocide continues in a silent way. True
stability and security cannot be re-established for long
after an armed conflict has subsided, because of the
specific crimes inflicted especially upon women and
girls.

All of that is to say that the international
community would be well advised to address very
specific issues and details regarding children affected
by armed conflict. As I indicated at the outset, it does
not suffice to adopt broad norms and standards. The
effects of armed conflicts on children, the different
forms of child labour and sexual exploitation and the
resulting special vulnerability of children to the
HIV/AIDS pandemic stand out as areas where
concerted national and international action is a
prerequisite for successful and durable solutions. All
these issues constitute large-scale crises that can be
addressed only through specific and coordinated action
by all of us.

Nobody must be allowed to deprive children of
both their childhood and their future. By permitting
this we would be violating a moral imperative we all
hold dear. But, moreover, we would not only be
destroying the future of individual children but also the
collective future of the countries concerned.

