Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): My delegation
congratulates you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May and for
arranging this open debate. Before I continue, let me
thank the Secretary-General for his report contained in
document S/2005/310.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi, for his
comprehensive briefing and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his dedication to his
assignment and his leadership in the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) since last year. We thank
him for bringing that mandate to a successful
conclusion.

Indonesia acknowledges the work that UNMISET
has done over the past two years, particularly in
helping to provide the young nation with the assistance
required to meet the goals of political stability, security
and self-reliance. We have always underlined that the
objective of UNMISET's mandate was to contribute
significantly to the efforts to guide Timor-Leste to self-
reliance and self-sufficiency. The core administrative
structures critical to the viability and political stability
of Timor-Leste now function well, and we are pleased
that, by and large, the basic objectives of UNMISET's
mandate have been met.

Remarkable progress has been made by the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste under their
forward-looking leaders in building their own country
in the short period since it obtained full sovereignty in

May 2002. The new State has become a peaceful,
politically dynamic and stable nation. It also continues
to make progress in economic and social development,
the strengthening of law and order and the
consolidation of democracy. However, the challenges
ahead are daunting for Timor-Leste. The country still
has the lowest levels of human development in Asia,
and continued efforts will be needed to strengthen its
national capacity to consolidate political stability,
strengthen the fabric of social harmony and create
sustainable economic development. Despite the
successful completion of UNMISET'S mandate in
helping Timor-Leste towards self-reliance, continued
international assistance is still needed.

In that regard, my delegation is pleased to note
that the Security Council has established a special
political mission, the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL), for a period of one year. The
objectives of the mission will include further support
of the development of critical State institutions, the
development of the police and the Border Patrol Unit
and the provision of training. It is our hope that
UNOTIL will strengthen the consolidation phase that
UNMISET began one year ago and, during its one-year
mandate, will plan assiduously for a smooth transition
to the development assistance framework that is
envisaged by the Council in resolution 1599 (2005).

UNOTIL has a very important assignment ahead
of it. In order to ensure its success, and in the best
interests of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, UNOTIL should be able to deliver the needed
assistance in an effective and efficient manner. That is
particularly important as Timor-Leste constructs and
consolidates efficient and effective State structures,
which are crucial to democracy and development. It is
also vital to the mission that it recognize the
importance in every aspect of its work of giving the
Timorese a sense of ownership and participation.
Indonesia would warmly support that approach and
would do its best as a friendly neighbour to provide
whatever assistance it can. In that regard, permit me to
mention that our training of 100 Timorese police
officers, who are already in Indonesia, will begin soon.

As the Council well knows, Indonesia and Timor-
Leste have continued to enjoy excellent bilateral ties
marked by the exchange of visits at the highest levels
of leadership, extensive cooperation in many fields and
progress in addressing residual issues. Following the
joint declaration issued by the leaders of the two
countries in Bali on 14 December 2004, in which they
affirmed their desire and determination to enhance the
stable and mutually beneficial relationship between
their two countries, the exchange of visits among the
leaders of the two countries continues. The latest was
the visit of President Yudhoyono to Dili last month.
That visit laid a firmer foundation for bilateral
relations and contributed to reconciliation between the
peoples of the two countries.

In that connection, we note that bilateral
cooperation has not only deepened but expanded. The
Joint Commission at the level of Foreign Ministers
remains instrumental in furthering bilateral cooperation
in the economic, social, cultural, security and
educational fields. Its subsidiary bodies, which deal
with a variety of cooperation issues, are active
throughout the year, and their work is reviewed at the
annual meeting of the Commission. I would also like to
mention that last month, President Xanana Gusmao of
Timor-Leste was invited to attend the Asian-African
Summit and he did so, thereby bringing Timor-Leste
into the wider cooperation context.

Let me now turn to the issue of the Commission
on Truth and Friendship. As a joint effort of the
Governments of Indonesia and Timor-Leste to address
some of the issues of our common past, in particular
that of reported human rights violations in 1999, it is
our conviction that it is our responsibility and our
unique role to address that period of our history in a
way that will appeal to the peoples of both nations. We
continue to believe that the Commission remains the
best mechanism to provide an acceptable solution to
heal the wounds and unload the burden of the past in
order to continue to foster bilateral relations and
friendship among our peoples.

The terms of reference of the Commission on
Truth and Friendship were announced in a joint
declaration by the Presidents of both countries on
9 March 2005, and various stakeholders in both
countries, including their parliaments, were consulted.
The Commission enjoys the support of a wide
spectrum of society and meets the domestic
requirements and constitutional provisions of both of
our countries. The recruitment of its members will be
completed very soon. The process is being conducted
very carefully in order to ensure that only candidates of
high credibility who meet the required qualifications
become members.

In this regard, my Government is also aware that
Security Council resolution 1599 (2005) adopted last
month requested the Secretary-General's Commission
of Experts to explore possible ways of assisting the
work of the Commission on Truth and Friendship. As a
token of my Government's cooperation, in particular in
facilitating the work of the Commission of Experts in
this regard, my Government has invited members of
the Commission of Experts to visit Indonesia from
18 to 20 May. We look forward to the positive
contributions of the Commission of Experts to the
work of the Commission on Truth and Friendship in
bringing closure to that residual issue.

I would also like to say a few words about the
boundary issue. As reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) and as mentioned in
the statements of other colleagues, during the course of
the visit of President Yudhoyono to Timor-Leste last
month the Foreign Ministers of both nations signed the
Provisional Agreement on the Borderline. The
Agreement established a provisional borderline
covering approximately 96 per cent of the land border
and came into effect on 8 May 2005. Regarding the
remaining 4 per cent, which is located along the
Oecussi enclave border, the Technical Subcommittee
has continued to hold discussions and met again this
month following the signing of the Agreement. Next
month, the job of placing border markers along the
agreed sections will commence.

Let me point out that the agreement by both sides
on most of the land border will substantially facilitate
border management and cooperation in the field of
border security. Therefore, both countries are now in a
better position to deal with any issues relating to the
border within a bilateral framework.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
confidence that, given the cooperation and assistance
of the international community, within both bilateral
and multilateral frameworks, Timor-Leste will quickly
become self-reliant.

