Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We are pleased to
see His Excellency President Cavaco Silva preside
over this debate. My delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to Portugal for facilitating the discussion
on the crucial topic of the protection of civilians.

We thank the Secretary-General, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
Catherine Bragg, and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their statements.

South Africa remains unwavering in its
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In this regard, we welcome this debate, with a
particular focus on strengthening accountability
mechanisms for violations of international
humanitarian law. The protection of the lives of
ordinary civilians, who are all too often the innocent
victims of instability and strife in conflict zones, is
paramount. International law clearly provides that the
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with the
State. In this regard, we fully support the
recommendations contained in the 2010 report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/5 79) regarding the
strengthening of accountability measures such as
national judicial institutions, and the signing and
ratification of the Rome Statute. These actions should
be encouraged.

Additionally, resolution 1894 (2009) offers
practical recommendations and actions that the Council
could employ to ensure accountability. These include
the possibility of using the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission to investigate allegations of
grave breaches and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, and of the Secretary-General
including in his reports comprehensive and detailed
information relating to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

We fully support international efforts to ensure
that the normative and legal framework developed to
defend the weak and vulnerable trapped in armed
conflict is strengthened and further enhanced. The
protection of civilians is, by its very nature, politically
sensitive yet a critical and vital task. We must ensure at
the same time that such efforts are not abused to
further objectives that fall outside the scope of this
noble and moral endeavour and sensitive responsibility.
The prevention of conflict and, by extension, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict embody the
very objective for which the United Nations was
established. Preventing conflict and protecting civilians
constitute important commitments that we should all
make and collectively endeavour to achieve. Recent
positive developments in the Security Council have, in
some ways, advanced that goal. We wish to highlight in
particular the recent advances in fostering the principle

of accountability in two important areas of the
Council's work, notably in protecting women and
children. Here, we wish to reference the adoption on
28 October of a presidential statement in which the
Council noted

"that the fight against impunity for the most
serious crimes of international concern
committed against women and girls has been
strengthened through the work of the
International Criminal Court, ad hoc and mixed
tribunals, as well as specialized chambers in
national tribunals" and reiterated "its intention to
enhance its efforts to fight impunity and uphold
accountability for serious crimes against women
and girls" (S/PRST/2011/20, p. 2).

With regard to children and armed conflict, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011), in
which the Council expanded the listing criteria for the
Secretary-General's reports to include parties to
conflict that attack or threaten schools and hospitals.

As we celebrate these important achievements,
South Africa wishes to express publicly its concerns
with the manner in which efforts employed by the
Security Council to protect civilians have been
exploited in the recent past. In particular, my
delegation has expressed its condemnation of recent
NATO activities in Libya, which went far beyond the
letter and spirit of resolution 1973 (2011). Abusing the
authorization granted by the Council to advance a
political regime-change agenda does not bode well for
the future action of the Council in advancing the
protection of civilians agenda. That could lead to a
permanent state of paralysis within the Council in
addressing similar situations in the future. Such actions
could undermine the Council's credibility in protecting
civilians.

Regime change and the arming and harming of
civilians cannot be justified in the name of protecting
civilians, and those entrusted with such responsibilities
must uphold them while protecting civilians, as clearly
stated by the representative of Brazil. Those who
deliberately go beyond Council decisions and
international legality must bear the full responsibility
for this impasse. In that regard, we have taken note of
the progress report delivered by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court on 2 November (see S/PV.6647), in which he expressed the willingness of
his Office to conduct comprehensive investigations
into further alleged possible crimes, committed by
whomsoever, in Libya. Ensuring justice will go a long
way towards ensuring accountability.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly tasked with mandates for protecting
civilians under imminent threat. Mandated protection
of civilians peacekeeping tasks are to be implemented
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the guiding principles of peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping missions with such a
mandate must carry out their tasks without prejudice to
the sovereignty of host Governments and their primary
responsibility in that regard. The implementation of
such mandates should be supported by a
comprehensive peace process involving all
stakeholders, underpinned by national ownership and
the support of the international community.

My delegation expresses its concern over the
impartiality of United Nations forces being
compromised when the Organization is seen as taking
sides in a conflict. United Nations peacekeeping
operations are increasingly tasked with mandates for
protecting civilians under imminent threat. However,
that role could be compromised if the United Nations
were perceived to be biased and were found to be
unable to carry out its protection mandate due to a lack
of the requisite resources and capabilities.

The protection of civilians as an important
objective will only be sustainable if States emerging
from conflict have the capacity to do so in the long-
run. The objective of peacekeeping should always be to
assist countries to end conflicts by empowering them
through security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the training of
effective and professional national security forces so
that they can assume eventual responsibility over their
territory, including for the protection of civilians. Such
a process would enable peacekeepers to have a clear
exit strategy while national institutional mechanisms
for protecting civilians are put in place.

Progress in advancing the protection of civilians
will also depend upon the consistency with which the
Council pursues that goal. Selectivity gravely limits the
credibility of the Council in advancing protection of
civilians mandates and seeking accountability. The
Council cannot be seen as placing the value of some
civilians above that of others. The proactive action we
witnessed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Cote d'Ivoire also has to be applied in other places
on the Council's agenda, such as in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Palestine and Western Sahara, where the plight of
civilians is being ignored without accountability.

We wish to underline that it remains the
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
borders. Armed opposition groups also bear
responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected. Failure by both State and non-State actors to
uphold that responsibility should not go unpunished.
Accountability must, first and foremost, be sought at
the national level. It remains the sovereign
responsibility of States to determine what their judicial
mechanisms are in ensuring accountability. Failing
that, the international community has a collective
responsibility to act with the utmost adherence to
international law, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and as prescribed in the 2005
outcome document and the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.

