Mr. Nfifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his presentation
to us today. We would like to join others in offering our
condolences to the people and Government of the
People's Republic of China on the earthquake that just
occurred there. The Cuban people express their
solidarity with the people of China.

Cuba associates itself with the statement by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Security Council periodically reviews the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine. However, little progress has been achieved.
The situation in the region, particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, is marked by
instability and insecurity.

Israel's ongoing illegal occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories remains the major obstacle to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region. In flagrant violation of international law
and counter to the objectives of the peace process,
Israel, the occupying Power, continues its illegal
construction of the wall along the West Ban and, in
particular, in and around East Jerusalem, among other
things.

The settlement activities, even after the partial
and temporary moratorium proclaimed in November
2009, have continued uninterrupted. At present, over
3,700 housing units are under construction and more
than 200 Palestinian homes have been demolished to
carry out these illegal activities.

Cuba expresses great concern at the ongoing
demolition by Israel of Palestinian homes and the
eviction of Palestinian families in East Jerusalem, as
well as other illegal acts of incitement, provocation and
aggression by extremist settlers against the Palestinian
population and sacred places. This makes the current
situation very volatile and dangerous.

The great physical, economic and social
devastation caused by these illegal and destructive
colonization practices have a profound effect on the
peace process and may prejudice the outcome of an
agreement on the final status of Jerusalem.

Such measures and policies carried out by Israel
constitute serious and flagrant violations of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations,
the numerous General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must urgently act in response to
these dangerous illegal measures adopted by Israel,
which are aimed at hindering and putting an end to the
peace initiatives, even before they begin, with the
objective of continuing to consolidate its unlawful
occupation of Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and carrying out a de facto annexation of
more Palestinian land.

Israel cannot be allowed to continue to perpetrate
serious and flagrant breaches of international law with
impunity. The international community must demand
that Israel comply with its obligations, including those
arising from the Fourth Geneva Convention, and put an
end to all its illegal policies and practices in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

The situation in the Gaza Strip, after the brutal
attack perpetrated by Israel a year ago, is
unsustainable. The imposition by Israel of closings and
restrictions on the free circulation and access of people
and goods, including humanitarian and medical
supplies, has made the recovery and reconstruction of
the area virtually impossible and has further affected
the already precarious living conditions of the
population.

The international community cannot remain
indifferent. It must take all possible practical measures
to ensure that Israel puts an end to these inhuman and
illegal policies, which heighten the tensions in the
Palestinian population. Once again, Cuba calls for
Israel to lift the cruel and illegal blockade and allow
the free entry of supplies into the Gaza Strip.

Cuba reaffirms that all measures or actions taken
or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, aimed at
changing the legal, physical and demographic
composition of the occupied Syrian Golan and its
institutional structure, as well as the Israeli measures to
exercise jurisdiction and administrative power there,
are null and void and have no legal effect.

We also reaffirm that all those measures and
actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations, including Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), and of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as well as a challenge to the international
community. Cuba demands that Israel withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of4 June 1967.

Cuba once again reiterates its position in support
of a just and lasting peace for all peoples of the Middle
East that would put an end to the occupation of all Arab
territories by Israel since 1967 and guarantee the
Palestinian people's exercise of their self-determination
by establishing an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

