The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer
for his briefing, which is both encouraging and very
farsighted. I am also very pleased that we were able to
hear Ms. Angelina Jial, whose testimony from the field
and exceptional personal commitment are extremely
valuable. Her briefing in particular was very relevant
today, on International Women's Day.

I also took note with interest of the historical
explanations provided by the Permanent Representative
of Russia on the subject of 8 March and his encouraging
comments on the efforts made by Russia in the area
of the empowerment of women and the promotion of
their rights. This is also an important national cause
in France.

The statements made by my colleagues were most
enlightening. My own will be limited and focused on
four priorities.

First, we should not lose the historic opportunity
offered by the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. As
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
made clear, South Sudan has experienced significant
developments since the signing of the Agreement. The
fighting has decreased, the ceasefire is generally being
respected, mutual trust among the parties is increasing

and their commitment is stronger than in 2015, and the
opposition is starting to return to Juba.

The Revitalized Agreement now represents
the only option for ending the conflict. France has
welcomed it since its signing and we continue to fully
support it. However, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General eloquently said, much remains
to be done and the implementation of the Agreement's
pre-transitional phase is lagging behind. But this historic
opportunity must not be missed. The more the parties
delay in addressing difficult issues, the more likely it is
that the process will run out of steam, especially as the
combatants on the ground become impatient.

There are three elements essential to speeding up
these efforts. First, the parties must focus on core issues
in the negotiations, particularly security arrangements
and the drawing of internal borders. Secondly, it is also
crucial to respect the quotas for women outlined in the
Agreement and to enable them to participate actively
and meaningfully in the peace process, at every level
and on every issue. We know that peace processes that
involve women are stronger, as the representative of
the United Kingdom pointed out just now. The Council
must also assess their success against that criterion.
Thirdly, the regional efforts aimed at convincing the
parties to make concessions must continue. The efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) remain crucial. The United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has a role to play in supporting
those efforts, including, as Mr. Shearer suggested, by
providing expertise and advice and working in synergy
with and in support of IGAD's efforts.

The second priority that I would like to underscore
is that the current level of violence, including sexual
violence, is unacceptable, and we must do everything we
can to end it. Despite the drop in the number of conflict-
related clashes, the intercommunal and sexual violence
has not diminished. In that regard, I want to remind
the Council that the Commission on Human Rights in
South Sudan mandated by the Human Rights Council
indicated in a very recent report (A/HRC/40/69) that
the nature and level of that violence could constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We call for an
end to all forms of violence and for those responsible
to be brought to justice. The Special Representative
spoke about mobile courts, which we believe are very
useful, and we encourage him to continue to support
this kind of project. The too-long-awaited Hybrid
Court for South Sudan should be established as soon
as possible with the support of the African Union. We
believe, lastly, that the Security Council should make
systematic use of sanctions to punish and deter those
who perpetrate sexual violence, especially as it is now
an autonomous criterion for the imposition of sanctions
and an effective deterrent.

Thirdly, we must intensify our efforts to meet the
people's humanitarian needs as food security continues
to deteriorate. We must do everything possible to
meet the growing humanitarian needs and ensure
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
the country. The reduction in the number of criminal
incidents is an encouraging development. We must
continue to stress the obligation to protect humanitarian
personnel and to reiterate that there is no alternative to
combating impunity.

Lastly, we should facilitate the return of displaced
persons, while taking all the necessary precautions. As
the Special Representative indicated, more and more
displaced people want to return home and the numbers
in the protection-of-civilians sites are beginning to
decline. That is obviously an encouraging development,
and we support his proposal to encourage UNMISS
to facilitate the return of the internally displaced, but
with precautions. We must ensure that people's returns
are safe, well-informed, voluntary and dignified, and
that humanitarian actors and the displaced people
themselves are also closely involved in the process. In
that spirit, France encourages UNMISS to continue to
organize visits for displaced persons to their areas of
origin to enable them to decide in full understanding
whether it is safe for them to return.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

