Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Representative Shearer and President Mogae for their
sobering reports on the situation in South Sudan. Like
others, we are deeply concerned about this level of
continued fighting. After four years of conflict, the
civilian population continues to suffer from a lack on
the part of the stakeholders of the political commitment
and will needed to find a peaceful solution. But
momentum is now building around regional efforts to
end the conflict. We welcome the strong leadership
shown by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU) and
fully support the process for revitalizing the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, as was discussed at the IGAD Plus Plus
meeting last week. We call for the swift convening of
IGAD's high-level revitalization forum on South Sudan
and urge that it be substantive. It represents a unique
opportunity to bring all the stakeholders together, and
we urge all parties to engage in the process in good
faith. The steps outlined in the African Union Peace
and Security Council communique of 20 September
provide a road map for the way forward. We welcome
the proposal to convene regular tripartite meetings
between the United Nations Special Envoy, the AU
High Representative and the IGAD Special Envoy as a
way to ensure better coordination and impact.

As we discussed in detail during our recent visit
to Addis Ababa and with the African Union, only a
political solution will end the crisis. To that end, an
immediate cessation of hostilities by all parties - the
Government and armed groups alike - is paramount,
not only to alleviate the suffering of civilians but to
enable a meaningful and inclusive political process.
Under the current circumstances, with massive
displacement, elections cannot be held in a free, fair
and inclusive manner.

The Security Council must remain united in its
support for intensified regional efforts. We must strive
to bring the international community together so as to
speak with one voice, as many have said here today
and as the African Union Peace and Security Council
communique calls for. As Council members, we must
also live up to our own responsibilities by being
prepared to follow through on our decisions. That
means standing by the provisions of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) that we adopted six months
ago, including preparing for further measures if
needed, in lockstep with the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

As we heard at last week's high-level meeting
on the humanitarian situation in South Sudan, the
situation for the people there continues to worsen, with
more than half of the population in need of assistance.
We call on the Government to facilitate the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
humanitarian organizations, and to ensure that relief
workers are protected. In that regard, we welcome
the deployment of the first company of the Regional
Protection Force and expect that the outstanding issues
regarding its full deployment will be resolved swiftly.

We commend UNMISS for its continuing efforts
to protect civilians, but we are still very concerned
about the allegations of violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
regret the fact that UNMISS's ability to monitor and
verify such violations and abuses, including sexual
violence, is hindered by insecurity and restrictions on
its freedom of movement. We stress the importance of
establishing a Hybrid Court without delay and welcome
the African Union efforts to finalize a memorandum of
understanding with the Government towards that goal.
It will be an important step towards combating impunity
and hopefully a strong deterrent to atrocity crimes.

With initiatives for peace in South Sudan moving
forward, we should consider ways to strengthen the
participation of women in the process. We encourage
UNMISS to support women's full and active
participation of in those processes and encourage
the Secretary-General to continue to highlight both
violence against women and the participation ofwomen
in his reports.

The suffering of South Sudan has gone on far too
long, and we call on all stakeholders to end the conflict.
The current efforts of IGAD and the African Union
need our full support. The momentum must not be lost.

