Mr. Shin: I thank you, Sir, for this unprecedented
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
highlight the importance of countries taking urgent
action to implement the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) standards to counter terrorist financing and
help defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL).

Terrorism needs money. ISIL operates as a State and
provides all the services a State is expected to provide.
Therefore, ISIL needs more money than other terrorist
groups. Money is its biggest vulnerability. Preventing
and disrupting financial flows must be at the centre of
any successful strategy to defeat ISIL. Disrupting the
finances of ISIL damages its ability to recruit fighters.
ISIL needs access to the financial system to move
money and pay for supplies. ISIL misuses charities and
money-remitters and needs to physically move large
quantities of cash. Financial intelligence can reveal the
structure of terrorist groups, the activities of individual
terrorists, and their logistics and facilitation networks.

How does the FATF help and what has it achieved?
It has put in place a global framework of standards to
combat the financing of terrorism, based on Security
Council resolutions. Almost all jurisdictions have
committed to implementing the FATF standards and
are being assessed by their peers. We publicly name
those that fail to take action. That serves to warn
other jurisdictions and banks of the risks, and deters
foreign investment. So far, the FATF has put more than
80 jurisdictions through that process and has publicly
identified 58 of them. Of those, 43 have since made the
necessary reforms.

Our aim is to protect the integrity of the financial
system and to make sure that there are no safe havens
for terrorist financing. During the past six months, the
FATF has reviewed the implementation of counter-
terrorist financing measures in 196 jurisdictions.
Almost all have criminalized terrorist financing and
can apply targeted financial sanctions. In the past
two months alone, half of those jurisdictions where
we found serious problems have introduced urgent
laws to address them. But that is not enough. Only
33 jurisdictions have secured convictions for terrorist
financing, and most implement United Nations asset
freezes too slowly, with delays of between two days
and one month. It is now urgent that every jurisdiction
focus on effectively implementing the FATF standards,
not just on passing laws and regulations.

The value of those measures is clear. On Saturday,
the FATF convened a meeting of operational experts
from financial intelligence units, law enforcement and
security and intelligence agencies. They explained how
financial intelligence from the private sector has helped
to track down the terrorists behind recent attacks,
thereby preventing further attacks. We also heard
about cases where disrupting terrorist financing has
undermined terrorist groups' ability to prepare attacks.

On Sunday, members of the FATF, the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and others came together to learn lessons from
the recent attacks, focusing on members' operational
capability to counter terrorist financing. Our most
important conclusion is that there is a need for better
and more timely information-sharing among agencies
within and among jurisdictions and with the private
sector.

In the next six weeks we will gather information
from FATF members on the terrorist financing
risks that they are facing, the challenges of sharing
financial intelligence and how they are responding to
those challenges. That will help us work together to
overcome obstacles to information sharing. We know,
for example, that different data-protection laws mean
that banks, one of our largest sources of intelligence,
are often prevented from sharing information across
borders even within their own organizations, let alone
with other banks or the authorities. We will also identify
and share red flags, indicators of terrorist financing, so
as to help the private sector detect and report suspicious
activity.

The FATF has always worked closely with the
United Nations. In October we updated our standards
to reflect resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist
fighters. With a strong mandate from the Security
Council today, we will take further action to strengthen
those measures throughout the FATF global network,
and we will continue to promote faster, more effective
implementation of targeted financial sanctions. The
visible support of the United Nations helps us put
pressure on members to implement FATF standards
effectively.

Finally, the FATF is a task force with a time-limited
mandate. That focuses our work and can make us
responsive and flexible. But it also means that we
depend on the goodwill and support of members to
implement and assess the FATF standards and to share
their knowledge of the changing threats. As finance
ministers, we need the Council's strong support in
order to carry out our work. I will therefore end by
thanking the members of the Security Council, and all
of our members, for their help with our essential work.

