Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Three
years ago, the Security Council decided to attach
greater importance to the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict with a view to the
maintenance of international and regional peace and
security. One presidential statement and two
resolutions bear witness to that.

On the ground, unfortunately, the reality is
entirely different. As the Secretary-General has noted,
the fate of civilians at risk has not improved at all.
Clearly, there is a need to pursue our efforts, in
particular by adopting more specific measures
effectively to improve the lot of civilians in armed
conflict. Against this background, I wish to make a few
comments on the basis of the very useful
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
this and last year's reports.

I will first address the question of access to
civilians. Humanitarian assistance to meet the most
urgent and immediate basic needs of civilians has the
greatest possible impact on them. Thus, the
international community must maintain its efforts in
the area of the access of civilians to such assistance
and of access with adequate security for international
humanitarian personnel.

Accordingly, we agree with the Secretary-
General's assessment and directions concerning a
greater role for humanitarian assistance agencies. We
must define clear conditions for the engagement of
these agencies, prepare a common strategy for
negotiation between them and the parties involved, and
adopt a coordinated approach in their policies and
activities. We encourage the immediate implementation
of these measures. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative, laid out in paragraph 26 of his
current report, on developing a manual on criteria for
the engagement and disengagement of aid agencies.
Given its responsibilities, the Security Council is
also involved in the question of facilitating access to
civilians. In last year's report, the Secretary-General
offered some important recommendations in this
respect. He provides new ones in the most recent
report. We support them because they encourage the
Council to undertake an active dialogue with the
parties to a conflict and because they call for fact-
finding missions to conflict areas in order to identify
precisely the needs in humanitarian assistance,
including access to civilian populations.

Secondly, I wish to address the issue of the
separation of civilians and armed elements. This is a
crucial issue that we must tackle resolutely. The report
identifies the many problems created because of
infiltration by armed elements into camps and
regrouping areas for refugees and displaced persons.
These problems can reach such a level that they
destabilize some countries and regions, in addition to
the many risks they pose for the lives and safety of
civilians, as described in great detail by the Secretary-
General.

We welcome the measures outlined in paragraphs
35 and 36 of the report, in particular the agreement
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. However, this is also an
area where the Security Council clearly has a
responsibility that it must shoulder. The Secretary-
General has made interesting recommendations in this
respect, and my delegation endorses them.
Recommendation number 35 contained in the 1999
report (S/1999/957) of the Secretary-General, on the
deployment of international military observers to
monitor the situation in refugee camps, is very
relevant, and the Council should accord it full
attention.

Thirdly, I should like to refer to the media and
information. The importance of this sector in conflict
situations cannot be ignored. In resolution 1296 (2000),
the Council provided for the possibility of taking
action to deal with media broadcasts inciting hatred,
crime and genocide. In the current report, the
Secretary-General has made a new recommendation
urging the media to play a role in encouraging
reconciliation and respect for others. Here, I am
pleased to support the comments made by Mrs. Mary
Robinson, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, in her outstanding statement.

Fourthly, I should like to refer to the actors
involved in the protection of civilians. We share the
views of the Secretary-General on the complementary
role that can be played by different actors in the
international community, including regional
organizations, civil society, the private sector, women
and young people, with the encouragement and
coordination of the United Nations.

Fifthly, we agree on the need to combat
effectively all forms of impunity with regard to
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law of which civilians in armed conflict are the
victims. The recommendations of the Secretary-
General aimed at strengthening international action in
this respect are very relevant.

The Security Council must now change into a
higher gear, focusing more on specific, concrete
measures on the ground to improve protection for
civilians in accordance with the principles of
international humanitarian law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

As today's debate is thematic and, therefore, of a
general nature, I shall not go into detail about the harsh
realities facing Palestinian civilians in their day-to-day
life in the occupied territories, in particular since last
fall. However, it is my duty to stress that, in all
respects, the situation of the Palestinian civilians is a
clear example of a situation in which the international
community must take urgent, resolute and effective
action to come to the aid of a civilian population. The
duty to provide international humanitarian aid and the
requirements of international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as of United Nations resolutions,
require the international community to provide
Palestinian civilians with the urgent protection that
they need to ensure their safety. The Security Council
must bear these requirements in mind. Our Council
cannot apply a double standard, rushing to help
civilians in some parts of the world while disregarding
the fate of other civilians in other regions.

We must take a balanced and fair approach to
international realities when considering all of the
measures that have been proposed. All that is now
required is political will.

Finally, I should like to say that my delegation
has no objection to the idea of setting up a Security
Council working group to study the implementation of
recommendations and decisions relating to the
protection of civilians with a View to providing the
Council with information for decision-making on
actions to be taken in the future. We are very happy to
support that suggestion.

