Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Special CoordinatorNickolay Mladenov
and Commissioner-General Pierre Krahenbiihl for their
insightful briefings.

The recent escalation of violence in Gaza has
been the most intense of any in recent years, bringing
both sides to the brink of a new conflict. This kind of
escalation comes with considerable human cost and
jeopardizes any prospects for peace. We firmly condemn
the firing of rockets into Israeli territory and reaffirm
our support for the mediation efforts undertaken by
the United Nations and Egypt to reduce tensions. We
call on all the parties to exercise restraint and remind
them of the vital importance of protecting civilians and
respecting international humanitarian law, including its
principles of proportionality and distinction.

The humanitarian and socioeconomic situation
in Gaza is a continuing concern for us. Free access
to humanitarian actors and unconditional access to
medical care are essential. In that regard, we would
like to commend the role of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), whose mandate and action we fully
support. Despite a precarious financial situation and
a difficult working environment, UNRWA is doing a
remarkable job, thanks in part to the tireless efforts and
professionalism of its staff. Its efforts in the areas of
education, health and protection, to mention just a few,
enable Palestinian refugees to exercise their human
rights and see their dignity respected. And frankly, I do
not believe that closing schools in Gaza is the best way
to combat radicalization and violent extremism.

Resolving the crisis in Gaza demands fundamental
change, including lifting the blockade and fully
opening the crossing points, while taking Israel's
legitimate security concerns into account. A political
solution to the crisis also requires returning full
control of the territory to the Palestinian Authority. We
therefore call on all the parties to engage constructively
in intra-Palestinian talks on reconciliation. Unity is in
the interest of the Palestinian people and of peace in
the region.

In the month of April alone, 63 houses and other
structures were demolished in East Jerusalem, reflecting
the ever-increasing pressure on the Palestinian
population of the city. The demolitions and subsequent

displacement of people are an integral part of a policy
of colonization that is illegal under international law
and constitutes a serious obstacle to just and lasting
peace. Belgium firmly condemns the colonization
policy and its related measures and demands respect
for resolution 2334 (2016). The settlement policy
undermines the viability of a two-State solution, with
two States living side by side in peace and within
secure and internationally recognized borders. That is
why any credible initiative to revive a peace process
must be accompanied by measures to halt colonization,
reverse the current trend and allow Palestinians full
and free access to their resources and rights.

Bridging the gap between the parties is a matter
of urgency. It can be achieved only by respecting
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. There is no alternative to a negotiated
two-State solution, based on the coexistence of two
States, with the city of Jerusalem as their future
capital, in accordance with internationally agreed
parameters. Those parameters must be the basis for
any comprehensive, just and lasting peace plan that
addresses both Israel's concerns for its security and
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians for a
sovereign, democratic and viable State. The Council has
a key role to play in helping to create an atmosphere that
is conducive to dialogue, while ensuring compliance
with its previous resolutions and international law. It
is in that spirit that we will continue to oppose any
unilateral initiative that is at variance with those values
and principles.

