Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their comprehensive and insightful briefings. Let me also thank Ambassador Rhonda King for her work and her report as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). I wish to say a few words on the situation in Yemen in general. We strongly condemn the resurgence of violence in the north by all parties. We are deeply concerned about the continual fighting, especially in the region north- east of Sana'a, around Ma'rib and in Abyan. We call on all actors to break the cycle of violence and instead engage constructively and without delay in efforts to de-escalate the situation. In this regard, we welcome the recent agreement on a prisoner exchange between the parties, under United Nations auspices. Such confidence-building measures, as well as mercy flights, and, equally, the invaluable work of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, are critical elements on the path to political talks. We encourage Houthis as well as the Yemeni Government and the coalition to continue to follow this path. The Special Envoy has our full support in his tireless efforts to encourage the parties in that regard. First and foremost, all parties must strictly adhere to international humanitarian and human rights law and protect civilians as well as civilian infrastructure. Women and children are the ones suffering most from the dire military and humanitarian situation. All actors should alleviate their suffering and put their needs first.We are particularly appalled by reports of systematic sexual violence against women, especially in Houthi-controlled areas. This is unacceptable and should not go unpunished. As with all human rights violations in Yemen, accountability remains crucial. Political leaders and their visions for a future Yemen must be judged on their ability to provide a safe, prosperous and healthy environment for the Yemeni people that takes into account the diverse interests and groups in the country. However, what we see now is the contrary. There is no time to spare to work together with the Special Envoy towards a political solution that allows Yemenis to live in peace. I would now like to make a few comments on the once again sobering report that Mark Lowcock has provided us this morning. We all know that Yemen and its people are in dire need of large-scale humanitarian assistance. Yet in some parts of the country, in particular in Houthi- controlled territories, humanitarian personnel are subject to inhumane treatment and humanitarian operations are systematically restricted, thereby depriving men, women and children of the desperately needed assistance. That is cruel and deplorable. We have witnessed these increasing restrictions for far too long. As aresult, 8 million people in need cannot be reached. This is unacceptable. We must not wait any longer to send clear and hard messages to the authorities in Sana'a. Without respect for the humanitarian principles and the safety of humanitarian staff, as Mark Lowcock reminded us once again of this morning, life-saving assistance cannot and will not get in. We therefore once more call all parties, but especially the Houthis, to uphold their responsibility to cease any harassment of humanitarian staff; facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access; lift bureaucratic restrictions; and enable project agreements without further delay.
