Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to
express our gratitude for the convening of this meeting
and for the important briefings by Mr. Alexandre
Zouev, the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and
Ms. Tuesday Reitano. We also wish to highlight the
important functions performed by Security Council-
mandated police forces, as well as the great potential that
their participation in United Nations peace operations
represents for the maintenance, consolidation and
sustainment of peace in the countries where they
are deployed.

We underscore the importance that peacekeeping
operations, as appropriate, have in place guidelines
for action, specialized administration, recruitment
and training systems, capacity-building on human
rights-especiallyonthoseofwomenandchildren-and
mechanisms for performance assessment. We also
believe that support is often required in countries
affected by conflict in order to build and strengthen
national and local institutions and capacities that
are called upon to restore and maintain security and
public order. We therefore underscore the importance
of developing close coordination and cooperation with
national authorities and local communities, as well
as with United Nations country teams. That is so that
United Nations policing in peace operations responds
to national needs, circumstances and priorities and
contributes to local capacity-building, which, in
many cases, involves a high level of specialization
where required.

That is of the utmost importance - for example,
in combating organized crime, as has been pointed
out today, which erodes the institutional framework
required to sustain peace, is often transnational in
scope and, in many cases, favours the development of
conflicts and establishes links with terrorism.

In that regard, we would like to highlight the
work done by United Nations police and the need to
prioritize its action to establish and train local police.
We stress that United Nations police have the capacity
to build a close relationship with the local population,
thereby contributing to conflict prevention, including
mediation efforts such as those carried out by UNMISS
in South Sudan, as its Police Commissioner mentioned.

We also believe that it is important that law
enforcement agencies, as well as the judicial and
correctional systems, be trained on the principles
and values of justice, including the rule of law and
due process. Also, its action must be inclusive and its
composition must reflect the country's ethnic, religious
and cultural diversity, as appropriate. We stress the
need for the police to have the trust of the citizenry and
to invest in its relationship with local communities, in
particular with the youth. As Mr. Zouev rightly pointed
out, that trust is augmented by the presence of women
as part of United Nations policing. That trust is also
essential for the proper functioning of the rule of law,
early-warning systems, close monitoring and police
intelligence. We therefore emphasize the importance of
recruiting and training more women as police officers.
In that connection, we highlight the efforts made by
MINUJUSTH to that end and would like to know
whether the expected levels of female participation in
that process have been attained.

We underscore the importance that, in order to
effectively protect civilians, United Nations police
guidelines also define police responsibilities to include
preventing and responding to threats of physical
violence, as well as the need for adequate training.
That means recognizing that the police components
of a mission are also responsible for fulfilling their
mandates under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
thousands of police personnel who carry out complex
and important work for peace and security in various
missions mandated by the Council in conflict-ridden
countries. They have our full support.

