Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.

To be honest, we have a feeling of deja vu all over
again. We frequently heard these kinds of appeals and
lamentations during the pacification of eastern Aleppo
and Ghouta. But I want to ask why the humanitarian
troika was in no hurry to call for a Security Council
meeting when the so-called coalition was razing
Baghouz and Hajin to the ground. Civilians were
dying then, and air strikes were destroying civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and schools. And
what about Raqqa? Almost no one cared about the fate
of that city, which was basically obliterated.

Let us recall what happened in Raqqa. It is always
useful, especially because people do not like hearing
about it and would prefer to forget it. We recommend
reading a publication put out by the international
human rights organization Amnesty International on
the events of two years ago. Its careful, painstaking
work established that as a result of the thousands of
indiscriminate air and artillery strikes by the so-called
coalition and its allies, more than 1,500 civilians died
and more than 11,000 buildings and infrastructure
facilities were destroyed. I recall that at the time our
Western partners described the Raqqa operation as
possibly the most precise military aerial campaign
in history, acknowledging responsibility for only
159 deaths.

In general, it is time to stop using double standards
for what is happening in Syria. For instance, we are
hearing a lot of lectures about Rukban, even though
all of the problems there are related to the fact that
militants belonging to Maghawir Al-Thawra, with
the connivance of the United States, are preventing
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from leaving the
camp voluntarily and are restricting their rights. Despite
that, as of 15 May 12,000 people had left Rukban. We
hope that our United States colleagues will change their
unconstructive approach, or better yet, end their illegal
occupation of that part of Syria's sovereign territory
as quickly as possible. In any event, the occupying
State is responsible for the population of the occupied
territories under the terms of the Geneva Conventions.
That is not a politicization of the Rukban issue, because
the Geneva Conventions are the very foundation of
international humanitarian law. In anticipation of
possible comments on this, I should say that there is no
fight against terrorism that justifies occupation.

In contrast to Rukban, we have heard none of the
breast-beating and anxiety about the dire humanitarian
situation in the IDP camp at Al-Hol in north-eastern
Syria, which is not under the Syrian authorities'
control. The camp is overcrowded, its residents are
mainly women and children whose rights are being
violated, and there is a disastrous lack of humanitarian
assistance. Instead of working to establish a steady
flow of humanitarian convoys from the areas
controlled by Damascus, attempts are being made to
consolidate deliveries through a non-transparent cross-
border mechanism.

We categorically reject the accusations ofviolations
of international humanitarian law. Neither the Syrian
army nor the Russian aerospace forces is conducting
hostilities against civilians or civilian infrastructure.
Our target is the terrorists, which some of my colleagues
prefer not to mention. We once again call on the
Secretariat and the specialized United Nations agencies,
including the World Health Organization, not to hasten
to publicly spread unverified information about civilian
casualties or damage to civilian infrastructure. The
information should come from reliable, non-politicized
sources and must be thoroughly checked, including by
ascertaining whether infrastructure that has supposedly
been hit has been through a deconfliction process.
While we are being fed information from so-called
reliable sources, when we ask about those sources they
categorically refuse to name them. Or is this once again
about those heroic White Helmets?

The Syrian Government and Russia's representatives
have always tried to prevent violence and resolve
situations peacefully, when appropriate, even when
illegal armed groups are involved. Peace has been
restored in most of the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic through this type of negotiation. However,
there is one obstructive factor in Idlib - the continuing
aggressive actions of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists,
which have provoked a serious escalation of tensions in
the area. The militants continue to attack Government-
held positions and shell nearby settlements, where
the victims are both civilian and military Syrians.
When we were told today about people being killed
by rockets, for some reason those speakers were too
embarrassed to mention that civilians in Aleppo and
Hama are being killed by rockets fired by the terrorists
of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. By the way, the Russian
Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in
the Syrian Arab Republic has received actionable
information confirmed by independent sources that the
Al-Nusra Front terrorists are preparing yet another act
of chemical provocation in the town of Saraqib with a
view to subsequently blaming Damascus for it.

On 27 April, around 130 terrorists attacked
a defensive position of Government forces near
Al-Suqaylabiyah, in north-western Hama governorate.
The Syrian army retaliated, but sustained losses of 26
killed and more than 40 injured. As a result of attacks
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists, 22 Syrian soldiers
and four civilians were killed and about 100 wounded
in the first half of May alone. Provocative actions by
jihadists are also a serious threat to the security of the
Russian air base at Hmeimim and the lives of our troops.
The militants are actively using multiple-launch rocket
systems and attack drones. At the end of April and
beginning of May, for example, terrorists repeatedly
shelled the air base with rockets, and 18 attack drones
were destroyed on their approach to Hmeimim.

From 6 to 11 May, in response to such aggressive
attacks and provocations by terrorists from Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, including their use of multiple-launch
rocket systems and attack drones, Government forces,
supported by the Russian military, were obliged to
undertake countermeasures to drive the terrorists out
of the areas they were using to shell Hmeimim air base
and the Syrian army positions. The strikes were aimed
only at terrorist targets confirmed by intelligence.
As a result, we were able to clear the areas with the
highest concentration of terrorists in the southern part
of the Idlib de-escalation zone. However, even after
the Syrian army had stopped the militants' active
hostilities, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists continued
their acts of aggression. On 13 May, for instance, two
detachments of illegal armed groups totalling about
650 fighters, with artillery support, 10 tanks and four
armoured vehicles, attacked Syrian army positions in
the area of Kafr Zita and Al-Suqaylabiyah, killing two
Syrians and injuring nine.

Russia affirms its continuing commitment to the
agreements on stabilization in Idlib, including the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding of
17 September 2018. Negotiations through our defence
ministries are currently continuing between Russia and
Turkey with a view to firmly stabilizing north-western
Syria and neutralizing the terrorist threat coming from
it. We want to emphasize specifically for the benefit of
those who from time to time raise the alarm about what
is going on in Idlib and about the actions of the Syrian
army and its supporters that the memorandum makes
no suggestion whatever that the terrorists should be
protected. On the contrary, it affirms the memorandum
participants' determination to fight them. We refuse
to consider terrorists untouchable and will continue
to fight them despite the complaints of some of our
partners. In general, we are getting the impression that
the terrorists in Idlib are simply being covered for and
reserved for some nefarious purpose. The argument is
based on the issue of the protection of civilians, whom
we are just as concerned about as the rest of the Council
and who have become hostage to the terrorists in Idlib.

Rather than pushing a narrow, self-serving agenda
in Syria with the goal of regime change, we should
unite our efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria and
together eradicate terrorism, work on post-conflict
restoration and assist in the return of refugees. Here I
would like to push back on my American colleagues'
accusation that Russia has destabilized the region. We
have different views as to who destabilized the region
and continues to do so. What is truly important right
now is preventing any escalation in the Persian Gulf
as a result of the growing disputes between America
and Iran. That would enable us to seriously advance a
political settlement throughout the region. Without it,
the region threatens to devolve into chaos.

Russia will continue to put its efforts into
restoring peace to Syria, in its national capacity and
as a permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Astana troika. More has been done in
the framework of the troika than in any other format to
ensure de-escalation, reduce the terrorist threat, provide
humanitarian assistance and prepare for the political
process, which is especially important at this stage.

