Mr. Sami (Bangladesh): I thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his candid presentation on the developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We consider his briefing
timely, in particular as a new scenario in the Balkans
has been unfolding with the change in political
leadership in the region.

Progress in the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accord has been painfully slow until now. This
was largely due to the existing political climate of the
region. We believe that a propitious moment is now in
the offing for speedier implementation. Mr. Kostunica
himself declared during his visit to Sarajevo that he
would defend Dayton and expressed his desire to
normalize relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
encourage the High Representative to establish a
dialogue with Belgrade for advancing the peace
process. It is high time to restart negotiations, which
had stopped with the former Yugoslav President.

We are appreciative of the Office of the High
Representative's constant pursuit of its three strategic
priorities: economic reform, the acceleration of the
return of refugees and displaced persons, and the
consolidation of institutions, especially at the State
level.

It is ofimmediate importance to inject vigour into
the fragile economy of Bosnia. Only a secure economic
future can provide an effective antidote to the
devastation caused by the 1992-95 war. What is needed
is to facilitate a climate for investment, both domestic
and international. This will require major reform in the
administrative structure. It is commonly believed that
the Bosnian workforce is well-suited to small- and
medium-sized enterprises. Bosnian entrepreneurship
has to be nurtured. Numerous bottlenecks from the past
still stifle free enterprise. These must be dismantled.

The status of refugees and internally displaced
persons has also remained a major concern. The Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other United Nations agencies have been playing
laudable roles in accelerating the refugee return
process. But five years after the war there are still a
quarter of a million people outside the borders, and
three quarters of a million remain internally displaced.
We believe that facilitating their return is a priority
undertaking. We welcome, however, the current trend
of increasing numbers of refugees returning to their
pre-war homes.

We are appreciative of the steps taken by the
High Representative in reforming the legislation
regarding property return and in taking stern action
against public officials who have a record of
obstructionism. We would be interested to know the
results of the steps taken by the High Representative
earlier this year.

The High Representative's Office is also seized of
the formidable job of assisting in State-building. The
consolidation of the State structure starts with a fully
functional and independent judiciary to establish the
rule of law, and a responsive and professional police
force. Inter-ethnic cooperation has often been blocked
by radical nationalist forces. We believe the tide has
turned against these forces. We strongly urge the Joint
Presidency to honour the commitments they made
under the New York Declaration and to work in close
concert to promote inter-ethnic cooperation.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
optimism that with the change of the leadership in the
Balkans, the efforts of the High Representative will
now be rewarded with quicker results. Dayton should
be working at a faster pace. From the Council we are
prepared to extend our continued support to the goals
ofthe High Representative.

