Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2018/804), and
Special Representative Yamamoto and Afghan youth
representative Bakthiar for their briefings. I also thank
our good friend Ambassador Saikal for his statement.

The political and security landscape has witnessed
many changes since President Ghani's unprecedented
peace offer at the meeting of the Kabul process in
February. The European Union has wholeheartedly
welcomed the Kabul initiative, which has greatly
increased the chance of the holding of talks led by
the Afghan Government on a genuine peace process.
President Ghani's offer of a ceasefire in mid-June
generated additional momentum for peace and
showed every Afghan and the entire world that peace
is possible. Grassroots movements for peace were
another manifestation of the Afghan desire for peace
and stability.

Unfortunately, in recent weeks we have observed
an increase in violence, including the Taliban's attack
on Ghazni. That resulted in further suffering for
the Afghan population. The Taliban also registered
substantial numbers of casualties in different provinces,
underlining the tremendous costs of a strategy that
seeks advantage in the battlefield rather than entering
peace talks. Reckless spoilers of peace also remain
active, in particular the Islamic State.

The European Union remains a steadfast supporter
and promoter ofpeace. We will continue to help broaden
the political consensus for peace by cooperating
closely with the United Nations, whose assistance and
facilitation remain essential. The European Union
reiterates its willingness to actively accompany that
process, while underlining in particular the regional
dimension of any successful peace process. A stable
and prosperous Afghanistan is in the interests of all its
neighbours. The EU will consider all available incentives
and constraints to help foster such a development.

We are now looking forward to the Geneva
ministerial conference on Afghanistan. In the spirit
of the Brussels Conference of 2016, we expect Geneva
to be another key moment in support for the Afghan
Government's reform agenda and to send a strong
message on peace. The Afghan Government must
demonstrate progress on the implementation of the
reform package it committed to during the Brussels
Conference. We also look forward to the Geneva
mutual accountability framework, which should set
concrete and measurable indicators for further reforms.
All those reforms are consubstantial with peace efforts.

Peace, self-reliance and regional cooperation
and connectivity should be our guiding principles
at Geneva. We see in particular the need to agree on
lasting anti-corruption measures, for which we look
forward to an updated set of concrete and measurable
indicators. In the same vein, we will emphasize credible
implementing measures on human rights, reinforcing
relevant legislation.

In July, the EU disbursed the second tranche of
the State Building Contract for Afghanistan - in the
amount of €98 million. We hope that will contribute
to further advancing economic growth and job creation
for the benefit of the Afghan people.

On 20 October, Afghanistan will organize
parliamentary elections. It is an important event, long-
awaited by the Afghan population. Those elections must
take place in a democratic, transparent and credible
way. It will also be a test case for the presidential
elections in 2019. We encourage the Afghan authorities
to continue improving the electoral governance system.
Much remains to be done, both at the technical level
and in the political sphere. With regard to the latter, the
EU calls on all parties and political representatives to
respect the electoral process and its institutions.

The EU and its member States will continue to work
together in support of the Afghan electoral process.
We have committed €15.5 million to assist with the
parliamentary elections under the coordination of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The EU will also deploy an election experts
mission for the parliamentary elections.

We applaud the readiness of the Afghan Government
to engage on all youth-related matters, including in the
light of the implementation of resolution 2419 (2018),
on youth and peace and security. Considering the needs
of that most sizeable age group, the youth perspective
deserves the fullest attention, including in terms of
political participation.

The European Union continues its structured
dialogue with Afghanistan under the Cooperation
Agreement on Partnership and Development. We
are following up on the results of the meeting of the
EU-Afghanistan Special Working Group on Human
Rights, Good Governance and Migration held on
5 May in Kabul. We encourage the Afghan authorities
to continue to implement the relevant legislation, with
particular focus on areas such as the elimination of
violence against women, the use of the national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the protection of children and the prevention of torture
and ill treatment.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the high level of civilian casualties and the
increasing number of displaced people. The EU calls on
all parties to protect the civilian population, especially
women and children. In that regard, we support efforts
by the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission to provide
further training, advice and assistance for the Afghan

security forces and institutions. We need to continue
to protect the vital role of humanitarian agencies and
respect their impartiality and humanitarian space in
addressing the most urgent needs ofthe most vulnerable.

In conclusion, this is a very important moment for
Afghanistan. We should not lose the positive momentum
for peace generated in June. The three-month conditional
ceasefire proposed by President Ghani in August is still
valid. We encourage all parties to the conflict, starting
with the Taliban, to respond positively.

Lastly, the European Union strongly acknowledges
the crucial role played by UNAMA and all United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people.
The European Union remains committed to working
alongside UNAMA and international partners to
achieve a democratic and self-sustainable Afghanistan.

