Mr. Sen (India): As we are speaking in the
Council for the first time this year, I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the presence of the new
members of the Security Council - Argentina,
Denmark, Greece, Japan and Tanzania - and to extend
our good wishes to them.
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate of the Security
Council on small arms, although we would like to
reiterate our view that thematic debates should have no
place in the Security Council and that they are best left
to the General Assembly.

We are particularly aware of the complexity and
lethality of the proliferation of the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons. Over the past two decades,
thousands of innocent civilians in India have fallen
victim to the acts of terrorists, who use such illicitly
obtained weapons for their nefarious activities. Since
1990, the Government of India has seized close to
40,000 such weapons whose markings indicate,
unmistakably, external origin.

We remain deeply concerned that small arms and
light weapons continue to pose a grave danger to the
security of States. Such weapons have disrupted
political stability and social harmony, derailed
pluralism and democracy and hampered growth and
development. They have also fuelled international
terrorism and internal conflicts. In some regions, there
is a clear linkage with the trade in narcotic drugs and
the illicit exploitation of natural and strategic
resources. In others, they have fuelled civil strife and
civil war. Their indiscriminate and irresponsible use,
particularly by non-State actors, has caused enormous
humanitarian concern that is evident in its most potent
form in Africa, particularly in some of the countries of
Central and Western Africa.

India welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2005/69, on ways
and means by which the Security Council could
contribute to this issue. We have been closely
following this issue in both the General Assembly and
the Security Council and remain committed to
supporting all international endeavours to curb and
eradicate the illicit traffic in such weapons.

India has had the privilege to chair the Group of
Governmental Experts on small arms and light
weapons. We are also actively participating in the
Open-ended Working Group currently negotiating an
international instrument to enable States to identify and
trace in a timely and reliable manner illicit small arms
and light weapons. We accord a high priority to that
exercise.

Efforts towards evolving an instrument on the
marking and tracing of illicit small arms and light
weapons should be seen in the context of the overall
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action adopted in 2001. An important underlying
theme of our collective effort is to help in the
international effort to combat terrorism. Indeed, the
Programme of Action highlighted the fact that the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons fuels
crime and terrorism. We believe that such an
instrument would contribute substantially to the efforts
to combat terrorism.

We are happy to note the reference to the report
of the Monitoring Group in paragraph 12 of the
Secretary-General's report, which states that
"combating weapons smuggling must definitely be an
active part of the fight against terrorism", and adds that
all States should be encouraged to adopt the measures
incorporated in the United Nations Programme of
Action.

Illicit trade occurs because of illicit production,
or because licit production or licit stocks enter the grey
and black markets, thus swelling the illicit weapons
market. These weapons end up in the possession of
criminals, exacerbating problems for law enforcement
agencies and - worse - get into the hands of
unscrupulous arms brokers, ending up in areas of
conflict and in the hands of extremists and terrorists.
The Programme of Action recognizes that stringent
measures are needed to ensure that there are effective
controls over legal transfers of small arms and light
weapons.

India follows a strict policy with regard to the
export of small arms and light weapons that includes
the requirement for end-user certificates on a
Government-to-Government basis and a ban on exports
to countries that are under a United Nations arms
embargo. It is our hope that all other States will also
undertake the obligation not to supply such weapons to
non-State actors, insist on authenticated end-user
certificates to ensure effective control over the export
and transit of such weapons, and not seek exemptions
for State-to-State transactions or for transactions
related to national security priorities. The international
community, for its part, must also ensure that the trade
in arms flows only through channels authorized by
both the exporting and the importing Governments.

India remains committed to seeking stronger and
more binding mechanisms to ensure cooperation for
our collective security. The final instrument that
emerges from the Open-ended Working Group on
marking and tracing should reflect not only the
concerns and priorities of all Member States but also
the expectations of the wider international community.
While States are committed to the eradication of the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, that commitment can be effectively translated
into concrete action and tangible results only if it is
backed by a legal obligation.

We also believe that arms are only the means of
delivery and that it is the availability of illicit
ammunition that allows them to be used as instruments
for spreading violence and committing terrorist acts.
India, therefore, ideally favours a legally binding
instrument and the inclusion of ammunition and
explosives within the scope of the instrument in order
to tackle the issue in a comprehensive manner.

In conclusion, the boundaries between crime,
conflict and terrorism are blurred in the context of
illicit small arms and light weapons. Trafficking in
illicit arms straddles not only organized crime, but
conflicts and the activities of terrorist and insurgent
groups who may be aided and abetted either directly by
States or indirectly through individuals who are part of
State structures. We therefore believe that obligations
undertaken by Member States under the instrument
must include all small arms and light weapons, whether
they are manufactured for Government or private use
or for export on a State-to-State basis.

