Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association member of the European Economic
Area Norway have aligned themselves with this
statement.

The European Union welcomes this new
opportunity to hold an open debate on the issue of
terrorism and to review the important task undertaken
by the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

The crime of terrorism is one of the most serious
common challenges facing the international community
today. Terrorism constitutes an acute threat to internal
and external security, to peaceful relations between
States and to the development and functioning of
democratic institutions and principles. The European
Union categorically condemns all acts of terrorism as
criminal and unjustifiable, irrespective of their
motivation, form and manifestation, and firmly
believes that those who perpetrate, organize and
sponsor terrorist acts must be brought to justice and
duly punished.

The horrific terrorist attacks of 11 September
2001 made it clear that terrorism is a global challenge
and that the fight against it requires concerted global
action. The fight against terrorism has been, and
continues to be, a top priority for the European Union
and its member States. The Union believes, however,
that the fight against this scourge must be carried out in
accordance with the rule of law and international law,
including human rights law and, in the case of an
armed conflict, humanitarian law.

The European Union recognizes the central role
of the United Nations in this respect and remains
committed to support the Organization in its
endeavours in this field. Universal implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and other Security Council
resolutions on counter-terrorism is a matter of
continuing priority and urgency to the Union and to its
member States.

The European Union wishes to congratulate the
CTC on carrying out its work with determination,
dedication and transparency, and to offer to it its full
support and cooperation. The Committee represents a
milestone in the fight against terrorism, as it provides
the Security Council with an effective follow-up
mechanism to thoroughly monitor the universal
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We would
also like to pay tribute to the Chairman of the CTC, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, for the excellent job he has done.
Under his guidance and advice the Committee has
found its way to successfully deal with the many
challenges it has faced and to chart a sure course for
the future.

The European Union supports the confidential
dialogue that the Committee has established with
interested States, as well as the advice and guidance
that it offers them with a View to implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). That dialogue also allows the
Committee to identify the need for technical assistance
to those States and to communicate to donor States the
needs for such assistance. As Sir Jeremy Greenstock
pointed out at the Security Council ministerial meeting
of 20 January, the majority of Member States
throughout the world have begun to respond to the
challenge laid down in resolution 1373 (2001). The
European Union would like to urge Member States that
have not yet submitted a report to the CTC to fulfil
their obligation within the allocated time frame.

In that connection, the European Union welcomes
the declaration annexed to resolution 1456 (2003),
which was adopted by the Security Council at its
ministerial meeting of 20 January and which reaffirms
the severity of the threat posed by terrorist acts and
calls on all States to take urgent action to prevent and
suppress such acts. The declaration also calls upon the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to intensify its efforts to
promote the implementation by Member States of all
aspects of resolution 1373 (2001).

The European Union also recognizes the role of
the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the Centre for
International Crime Prevention to strengthen the
capabilities of the United Nations in the prevention of
terrorism and to offer advice on the implementation of
both the pertinent Security Council resolutions and
United Nations legal instruments against terrorism.

The European Union, for its part, is playing an
important role in providing assistance to third countries
in their efforts to better implement resolution
1373 (2001). In that respect, it has identified a number
of pilot countries for the purpose of launching new
assistance projects in the field of counter-terrorism.
The criteria applied in the identification of those
countries are relevance to the fight against terrorism,
significance to European Union foreign policy,
technical assistance needs, readiness to cooperate and
the existence of European Union comparative
advantages.

The European Union and its member States are
fully committed to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). The Union has already submitted three
reports to the CTC, the first two of which are contained
in documents S/2001/1297 and S/2002/928. The latest
one was submitted last month with a view to the
upcoming special meeting scheduled for 7 March 2003.
Those reports detail specific action undertaken to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). The latest report
lists the recent legislation adopted by the Union in the
areas covered by resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the
regulatory measures that provide for the freezing of the
funds, financial assets and economic resources of
persons, groups and entities involved in terrorism and
for the prohibition of the provision of financial services
to them.

The European Union has also established an
executive mechanism to prevent and suppress terrorist
financing, through which it develops and reviews, on a
regular basis, a common list of persons, groups and
entities involved in terrorist acts. In addition, plans are
being developed to improve police cooperation and
enhance judicial cooperation in member States. The
European arrest warrant, which provides for simplified
surrender procedures between judicial authorities of
member States based upon the principle of mutual
recognition of judicial decisions, also covers terrorist
offences.

The European Union has also developed close
cooperation with third countries in the field of counter-
terrorism, particularly through an expanded structured
dialogue. In that respect, anti-terrorism clauses have
been included in the Union's contractual relations with
third countries. Close cooperation on these issues has
also been established between the European Union and
regional bodies.

The European Union is of the view that the 12
United Nations conventions and protocols and their
implementation play a pivotal role in the fight against
terrorism, and its member States are committed to the
ratification and rapid implementation of all those
conventions through the adoption of Common Position
930 of the Council of the European Union, of 27
December 2001.

The European Union also supports the early
conclusion by consensus of negotiations on the draft
comprehensive convention on terrorism and the
adoption of the draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, in particular in
view of the risk posed by certain terrorist groups that
have gained access to weapons of mass destruction.

The European Union wishes to express its full
support for the statement made by the President of the
Security Council (S/PRST/2002/38) on behalf of the
Council on 17 December 2002, in which the Security
Council notes the key role played by international,
regional and subregional organizations in supporting
Government capacity-strengthening on counter-
terrorism and in furthering the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). In the same statement, the
Security Council encourages the CTC to build a
dialogue with international, regional and subregional
organizations in areas covered by resolution 1373
(2001). The Council also requests the CTC, with a
view to improving the flow of information on
experiences, standards and best practices and to
coordinating ongoing activity, to invite all relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations to
a special meeting on 7 March 2003.

The European Union is also of the View that
regional, international and subregional organizations
play an important role in the fight against terrorism and
that closer cooperation with the CTC would enhance
their efforts and would contribute to a better
implementation by their member States of their
obligations in this field. The European Union
welcomes the convening of the special meeting of the
CTC and believes that the meeting will provide a good
opportunity for those participating in it to explore the
matters that are covered by the declaration of the
Security Council of 20 January 2003 (resolution 1456 (2003), annex), as was also requested by the Security
Council.

The European Union also noted that some
proposals were made during the Security Council's
ministerial-level meeting dedicated to counter-
terrorism held on 20 January in order to strengthen the
role of the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism. It is the wish of the European Union that
follow-up be given to those proposals in the competent
organs of the United Nations.

With respect to the latter aspect, on 10 December
2001 the European Union launched a targeted initiative
aimed at reducing the risk of non-State actors gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction, radioactive
materials and means of delivery. That initiative, which
was supplemented by a list of concrete implementation
measures adopted by European Union foreign ministers
on 15 April 2002, encompasses the following four
main elements: strengthening the relevant multilateral
instruments in the field of disarmament, arms control
and non-proliferation; improving export controls;
strengthening disarmament cooperation; and enhancing
political dialogue with third States.

