Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
comprehensive briefing on the fifty-fourth report on
the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (S/2018/974, annex).

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in recent years, following
the implementation of the Dayton-Paris Accords on
14 December 1995. The Accords, signed under the
auspices of the international community, have helped to
restore peace and endow the country with multicultural,
multi-religious and multi-ethnic institutions.

My country notes with satisfaction the firm
commitment of the Bosnian authorities to undertake the
necessary reforms, particularly in the areas of the rule
of law and the independence of the judiciary, in order to
complete the cycle of socioeconomic transformation in
the country and to encourage a favourable review of its
application for membership of the European Union. My
delegation also welcomes the Parliamentary Assembly's
adoption of the necessary amendments to the code of
criminal procedure in order to effectively combat the
scourges of corruption and organized crime, which are
the main obstacles to the economic and social take-off
of the country. The adoption of those legislative
amendments is an important step in the establishment
of the rule of law and the fight against impunity, in
order to promote national reconciliation.

However, that positive momentum should not prompt
us to lose sight of the administrative and institutional
dysfunctions, especially those ofthe general elections on
7 October. According to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and local non-governmental
organizations, those elections were marred by unequal
access to public media, irregularities on electoral lists
and the partiality of local observers at polling stations.
My delegation therefore encourages the Bosnian
authorities to remedy the shortcomings observed in the
organization of the elections and invites all stakeholders
to submit their complaints in the context of the existing
legal procedures.

C6te d'Ivoire is concerned about the persistence
of ethnic tensions. We therefore call on all political
groups and Bosnian populations to combine their
efforts to preserve the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In conclusion,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the spirit of compromise of
the States members of the Security Council that has
made it possible to renew the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea, whose
mission remains relevant in the search for peace,
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

