Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
commends the initiative of the Security Council for
convening this meeting. We thank Namibia in particular
for its leadership in this regard. It is a special pleasure for
me to see you, Sir, presiding over our meeting this

 

afternoon. We are immensely honoured that this important
meeting is being chaired by a person of your wisdom and
eminence.

Today's meeting gives the Security Council an
opportunity to follow up on the open debate we had last
year on the same issue and to come up with ideas on how
best the rights of children in conflict situations can be
protected and also how best this issue can be brought to
high-level governmental and international attention. Our
deliberations today will, hopefully, help identify key action
areas in a meaningful way.

Last month, the Council deliberated on the
maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-
building. Many of us highlighted the problems of children
in armed conflict in that meeting. My delegation continues
to believe that no other issue has the same urgency and
longer-term impact on problems relating to international
peace, security and development as has that of children in
conflict. Through its presidential statement of last year, the
Security Council expressed its intention to pay serious
attention to the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. Bangladesh strongly believes that, given the
seriousness and crucial importance of this issue, the time
has come for the Council to adopt an appropriately
articulated resolution on children and armed conflict,
thereby giving real meaning to its resolve to address the
issue.

This morning we heard a stimulating statement by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. The plight of children in
conflict situations, as he presented it, shocked and outraged
us. Of course, the United Nations has come a long way
since the Graga Machel report was presented in 1996 and
is now actively engaged in mitigating the suffering of
children in armed conflict with its programmes and
activities. We specially thank Ambassador Olara Otunnu for
his action advocacy as well as for his leadership role in this
area and encourage him to continue. His office needs to be
strengthened to be effective and produce results. We also
encourage better coordination between different parts of the
United Nations at the headquarters and field levels engaged
in child-related activities. My delegation, among others, was
looking forward to hearing from other key players of the
United Nations. We are particularly disappointed to see that
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has chosen
to be absent from the debate in the Council today.

In today's wars and conflicts, the parties involved
quite often have recourse to actions which constitute
flagrant violations of human rights and international law,
particularly humanitarian law, and the weaker and
vulnerable groups of society, which include children,
become the easy and innocent victims of conflicts.
Abuses of the rights of children are very common in
present-day wars and armed conflicts. This has been
rightly termed the modem-day version of "child
sacrifice". It not only robs children of their childhood but
destroys productive human potential for generations.

My delegation supports the Special Representative's
call for specific actions to prevent the suffering of
children in conflict situations and to make a tangible
difference in their lives. We believe that the international
community has the ability to work together to heal the
scars inflicted on children by war. The mobilization of a
coordinated response to post-conflict situations is
absolutely essential. The healing and rehabilitation of
children should constitute a central element and not an
afterthought of post-conflict peace-building programmes.
Humanitarian standards and commitments must be
translated into action that concretely helps endangered
children. Governments should incorporate forceful child-
protection elements in their domestic and foreign policies.
My delegation feels that in armed conflicts, facilities
meant for children, like schools, should be considered free
zones. The concept of children as zones of peace needs to
be realized through concrete action at all levels.

Bangladesh agrees with the Special Representative's
focus on priority areas of action relating to the
participation of children in armed conflict, sexual abuse
and gender-based violence, mine awareness and
rehabilitation of child Victims, integrating standards into
United Nations operations, and the impact of sanctions on
children. It is important to incorporate the need for
schooling and other activities to give structure to
children's lives - to protect boys from being drawn into
fighting and girls from being exposed to sexual
exploitation.

The supply and availability of small arms has
assumed a disastrous dimension for the well-being of
children. We are particularly pleased that child-protection
issues have been incorporated in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and that crimes of war now
include recruiting children below the minimum legal age
of 15 and targeting buildings and sites primarily used by
children. The Convention on the Rights of the Child has
the potential of addressing all of these areas in the best
interests of children.

 

My delegation believes that the cause of children can
best be served not by the actions of States alone but by all
women and men through the fostering of a culture of peace
and non-violence in every human being and in every sphere
of activity. The elements of a culture of peace draw from
age-old principles and values which are respected and held
in high esteem by all peoples and societies. The Special
Representative made a reference to this in his statement this
morning. The objective of a culture of peace is the
empowerment of people. It celebrates diversity and
advances understanding and tolerance. It works against
poverty and inequality and promotes development. We also
believe that the international community must make greater
political efforts to settle conflicts by addressing the
underlying political issues. An effective humanitarian
response is crucial, but it cannot substitute political will for
the settlement of conflicts.

