Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Both terrorism
and cross-border crime continue to constitute a serious
threat to international peace and stability. The planet
is riddled with criminal markets and channels for
trafficking in drugs, arms, hazardous materials,
including materials with nuclear use, human beings,
donor organs and others. The threat undermines
economies at all levels, corrupts authorities, fuels
conflicts, as well as aggravates drug addiction, sexual
exploitation and environmental damages. Unfortunately,
this scourge is also capable of undermining the rule
of law and good governance, which are so crucial for
sustainable development.

A phenomenon that is growing at an alarming rate
is the close nexus between transnational terrorists and
criminals who collaborate and share tactics, benefiting
from this interaction. The result is bolstered capabilities,
enhanced organizational infrastructure, improved
access to resources and expanded geographical reach.
One of the most dangerous and challenging threats
is the ideological influence and spiritual rhetoric of
terrorists on the young generation through information
technology and the Internet, as recent examples indicate
that terrorist and transnational criminal groups may
evolve, converge, transform or otherwise alter their
ideological motivations to recruit new members and

justify their acts and crimes.

The overwhelming extent and nature of
criminal-terrorist relationships, which have a direct
impact on the national security of individual countries,
as well as global security, are a cause of concern to my
country also. The potential convergence of criminal
and terrorist actors, skills, resources and violent tactics
can have devastating consequences in and across
regions. Globalization has extended the transnational
reach of terrorist and criminal groups. The nature
and activities of terrorist organizations, merged with
transnational organized crime, are manifested as
nuclear proliferation. We are aware of the potential
for criminal service providers to play an important
role in proliferating nuclear-applicable materials and
facilitating terrorism.

All these threats and challenges demand long-
term coordinated actions by all Member States and
other stakeholders through a comprehensive approach
and cooperation at the national, regional and global
levels. Education, human rights, social protection,
economic development, the promotion of tolerance and
non-discrimination are also significant and cannot be
overestimated as they are crucial components of life
betterment, particularly for the young generation.

An important role should be played by regional
and subregional organizations. Kazakhstan is a party
to all the major international conventions against
terrorism and supports the practical implementation
and improvement of all anti-terrorist mechanisms.
Furthermore, Kazakhstan is actively engaged in the
practical security measures of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Under
the auspices of these entities, law enforcement agencies
of Member States fight terrorism and transnational
crime through joint practical actions, international
and regional exercises, the exchange of best practices
and data. We are active members of the Anti-Terrorist
Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, as a signatory
to the Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism,
Separatism and Extremism, and all the agreements on
combating the illicit trafficking of arms, ammunition
and explosives.

We work closely with the regional office of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Central
Asia and other agencies of the United Nations system.
In September this year we organized a visit of Mr. Jean-
Paul Laborde, head of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to Astana, which was yet another
practical step to improve the cooperation of the United
Nations with relevant Kazakhstan law enforcement,
financial and special bodies. We engaged in the Joint
Plan of Action to implement the global strategy in
Central Asia elaborated by several partners - countries
of the region, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the European Union and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. At the national level, we adopted in 2013 a State
programme for countering religious extremism and
terrorism for the period of 2013-2017 and allocated
$600 million to its implementation.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to being actively involved in combating
terrorism, radical extremism and cross-border crime
along with other responsible members of international
community.

