Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to
condemn in the strongest possible terms the murderous
18 July bombing of a bus carrying Israeli tourists at
Burgas airport in Bulgaria. That cowardly attack on
innocent people provided a stark reminder of the level
of commitment we must demonstrate against terrorism
and its sponsors.

I would also like, on behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and
in particular for the outstanding manner in which you
have conducted the Council's work during the month
of July.

With all the acute crises and upheavals that are taking
place in the region, it would be wrong to underestimate
the threats posed to international peace and security by
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The current situation
of neither war nor peace is unsustainable. Rather than
focus on conflict management, we must strengthen our
efforts to seek a long-term solution.

In that respect, it is high time to return to genuine
negotiations. Unfortunately, the ongoing settlement
activities constitute a major obstacle on the path to
peace. Moreover, the creation of a committee by the
Israeli Government with the sole purpose of finding
arguments to legitimize the occupation and settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory has not
helped to build confidence among the parties concerned.
I recall that the deliberate policy of establishing
illegal settlements is inevitably accompanied by the
destruction of Palestinian homes. Is it possible to truly
measure the human tragedy of those who have suffered
the double heartbreak of the occupation and the loss of
their homes?

A negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict must be based on international law. The
Committee calls on Israel to demonstrate its good faith
by recognizing the 1967 borders, which are the basis of
a peaceful settlement under resolution 242 (1967), and
by adopting minimal confidence-building measures,
including a halt to the illegal settlement activities and
the release of Palestinian prisoners.

The Quartet should stay focused on ensuring
respect for the timetable it promulgated last year. At the
same time, without Palestinian reconciliation centred
on the leadership of President Abbas, there will be no
two-State solution. We call on all key international and
regional actors to redouble their efforts in support of
Palestinian unity.

The debilitating financial crisis affecting the
Palestinian Authority has reached unprecedented
proportions. Generous support from donors will be
needed to continue to support Palestinian State-building
efforts. It is also time to take a fresh look at Palestine's
application for admission to membership of the United
Nations. It deserves to be evaluated on its merits,
expeditiously and with an objective and open mind.

For its part, our Committee has continued to
contribute constructively towards our shared goal of two
States living in peace and security. The international
meeting we convened in April sounded an early warning
about the critical situation of Palestinian prisoners, and
we are pleased to note that other entities of the United
Nations system have engaged on the issue since then.

Our International Meeting on the Question of
Palestine in Paris in late May, followed by the Meeting
of Civil Society in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace
in early June, focused on the role of women and youth
in support of peace and on the use of social media. The
sense of frustration with the current situation conveyed
by participants served as a timely wake-up call that the
status quo should not be taken for granted.

Our most recent Asia and Pacific Meeting in Support
of Israeli-Palestinian Peace, held in Bangkok earlier
this month, focused on obstacles to achieving peace,
in particular the settlements, and discussed regional
strategies to ensure compliance in that context with
international law. It was also felt by participants that
the Security Council and the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention must honour their
obligations. The Human Rights Council's fact-finding
mission was welcomed and seen as a first step towards
abiding by the principle of accountability.

In conclusion, the Committee will continue to work
within the framework of its mandate to mobilize all
stakeholders in the international community in order to
uphold the principle of two States living side by side in
peace and security and within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

