Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am very
surprised at the statement made by the representative
of the United States, constituting as it does a blatant
attempt to once again make erroneous accusations
before the Security Council. As you are aware,
Mr. President, those accusations were first made by
Radio Dabanga, and for those who do not know about
it, Radio Dabanga was created by a non-governmental
organization based not in Darfur but in Amsterdam.
Radio Dabanga encourages the rebel movements that
reject the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, and
those movements have repeatedly refused the Council's
demands that they accept it. We have informed the
Council of those refusals numerous times, to no avail.

The Council requested that the rebel groups accept
the Doha Document after the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
visited the region and made a report that completely
exonerated the Sudanese Government. But the members
of the Council rejected the report because what they
had asked for was a report from UNAMID indicting
the Government. Since, however, the report's facts
told a different story, it was rejected. Previously, we
expected the Council to consider UNAMID's reports
credible. This time, the UNAMID report exonerated the
Sudanese troops in the village of Thabit. Furthermore,
the Government of the Sudan did not refuse the mission
access, and it was able to reach the site. If it had been
able to reach the site and found that it could not make
an investigation, it should have returned and reported
its inability to carry out an inquiry owing to a military
presence there, but that was not what happened. The
Mission reached the site and made a report. Since the
report exonerated the Government of the Sudan, it was
rejected.

I am therefore very surprisedto hear the representative
of the United States mention Human Rights Watch, which
has often spoken of the massacre or genocide of whole
peoples. Every time the Council deals with information
from organizations or the press that it characterizes as
so-called unverified reports, it rejects them. But since
this time we are talking about the Sudan, the great
Powers accept such reports. Human Rights Watch is not
an independent organization. The role it plays in the
Sudan is well known, and it is not impartial. Regarding
the indications in the report concerning Medecins Sans
Frontieres, as long ago as 2009 I spoke to the Council
about Medecins Sans Frontieres, asking that it leave
the Sudan, since we knew it was involved in activities
relating to Sudanese national security and espionage
information. This latest report of Human Rights Watch
to the Council is similarly fabricated. We do not and
will not recognize reports made by organizations that
persist in undermining the Sudan and its Government
and whose positions are well known.

Concerning the report under discussion today
(S/2015/31), I am grateful to the States that have
cooperated with us in efforts to reach a balanced
representation that includes the positive developments
in Darfur and the phases of implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Regrettably, the
resolution that has just been adopted (resolution 2200 (2015)) does not reflect those positive developments,
which raises a question. UNAMID has twice undergone
a strategic review, and its troop numbers have been
twice reduced, first the military component and then
the police. Now we are seeing the Department of
Peacekeeping Operation's second application for a
strategic review and implementation of the Mission's
withdrawal. We were expecting a report that reflected
the positive developments in this important phase for
peacebuilding in Darfur.

At the same time, we were struck by the paragraphs
introduced into today's resolution by countries wishing
to see peace, such as those that invite the rebel groups to
participate in the peace process without preconditions
and warning them against making any attempts to
alter the balance of power by the use of force. In that

regard, we reiterate the commitment of the Sudanese
Government to the peace process, to achieving stability
in Darfur, and to the inclusion of all the rebel groups, in
accordance with its policy of inclusive national dialogue
begun by the President of the Sudan in January 2014.
Under that initiative, we have given assurances to the
leaders of all the rebel movements to encourage them
to join the peace process. All such assurances made it
clear that their participation would be free, honest and
under no pressure in order to ensure the inclusion of
each and every citizen in the political process.

The resolution adopted today refers to intercommunal
fighting. The numbers cited by the representative of the
United States show that such tribal violence has had
disastrous effects on civilians. Several paragraphs of
the resolution are devoted to violations of international
humanitarian law. I would like to point out that tribal
violence is a historical issue that goes back a very long
way. We have talked about its causes in the past. Some
paragraphs do commend the efforts of the Sudanese
Government and its cooperation with UNAMID in
order to contain the tribal violence and address its
causes.

With regard to the part of the resolution that
mentions external military links with armed groups, we
emphasize that we do not associate with militias. Units
such as the Rapid Support Forces are similar to units
that exist throughout the world, not just in the Sudan.

Furthermore, we would like to express our
reservations about the provisions of the resolution
that compromise our sovereignty, which is guaranteed
by the Charter of the United Nations. The Sudan is a
completely sovereign nation. We are committed to
protecting our territory and our citizens. Resolution
1591 (2005) and subsequent resolutions that renewed the
mandate of the Panel of Experts should not undermine
our rights as a sovereign nation. We have the right to
possess all tools to preserve and protect our national
security, sovereignty and our citizens.

With regard to the Panel of Experts and what has
been said about my Government's failure to cooperate,
none of that is true. The reports of the Panel of Experts
refer to the Government's cooperation with the
Panel. I therefore do not understand these unfounded
accusations. If the Panel itself speaks of the Sudanese
Government's cooperation, why then are there
accusations?
The Government of the Sudan has taken the unique
step of appointing a senior official, General Mohammad
Mustafa Al-Dabi, to lead a committee established
precisely to implement resolution 1591 (2005). He has
been mentioned in all the reports of the Panel. The
committee includes relevant officials from various
Ministries, such as the Ministry of the Interior and the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, who were appointed to
facilitate the work of the Panel of Experts.

We challenge the Council to name a single instance
where we have obstructed the Panel or where we denied
it access to Darfur or any other province of the Sudan.
That simply has not occurred at any point during our
period of cooperation with the Panel of Experts. The
Council should acknowledge our cooperation because
we are well aware that other groups of experts in other
countries have not enjoyed the same level of cooperation

that my Government has shown to the Panel of Experts.

Finally, given that this an extremely important
phase in our national dialogue and in our efforts to
include rebel groups in the political process, I would
request that the Security Council fulfil its role and
exert pressure on the rebel groups to join in the political
process - today, not tomorrow - so that we can
achieve peace.

