Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Madam President,
and once again congratulate Lithuania for its very
effective and impactful tenure in the Security Council.
I wish also to thank you for holding this important
debate on the protection of journalists in conflict
situations and thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his valuable briefing and Mr. Christophe Deloire and
Ms. Mariane Pearl for their compelling testimonies,
each of which underscored the indispensable role that
journalists play in bearing witness to conflict and the
increasingly heavy price that is paid for conveying
information.

Sweden fully associates itself with the statement to
be made later by the observer of the European Union.

We remain deeply concerned by the high number
of acts of violence against journalists and other media
professionals. Freedom of expression is a fundamental
human right. It is an essential part of democracy and
helps shape our understanding of the world, but is not
to be taken for granted; it has to be fought for every day.

We all know that journalists in areas of armed
conflict are to be considered as civilians under
international humanitarian law and therefore respected
and protected as such. Resolution 1738 (2006) recalled
this fact and promised increased attention to the
issue of protecting journalists in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, the safety of journalists is becoming
increasingly threatened. Journalists who are reporting
from conflict areas, but also human rights defenders
and others promoting freedom of expression, including
new media, are ever more frequently falling victim to
attacks, persecution and abuse.

Syria provides a tragic illustration of, inter alia, the
perils associated with reporting from areas of conflict.
Swedish journalists were abducted but were recently
freed. However, we fully realize that others have been
less fortunate, and we are appalled by the number
of journalists who have lost their lives, including a
Japanese journalist at the hands of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant earlier this year.

We, the international community, have an obligation
to react and to take further steps to prevent violence and
to promote a safe environment for journalists and other
media actors. I would like to highlight three points in
particular.

First, we must continue to demand and explore
ways to ensure that the protection awarded to
journalists under international law is fully respected
and upheld. We welcome the adoption once again by
the Third Committee of a draft resolution on the safety
of journalists and the issue of impunity, in November
2014, as well as the resolution on the protection of
journalists adopted by the Human Rights Council this
past September.

The Security Council, as well as the entire United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, can also play
important roles by including protection of journalists
as part of the support to rule-of-law institutions
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and by
reacting when violations are being committed.

Secondly, impunity must not be tolerated. It is
primarily the responsibility of Governments to protect
journalists, human rights defenders and others promoting
freedom of expression, including our new media, and
to allow them to carry out their work independently,
without undue interference and without fear of violence
or persecution. But protection alone is not enough and
States must ensure accountability when crimes have
been committed. The most serious deficiency is not a
lack of rules but a failure to implement existing ones
and to systematically investigate, prosecute and punish
violations.

Thirdly, preventive action is needed in order
to promote the safety of journalists and to fight
impunity. We also need to address the root causes of
violence againstjournalists. Well functioning and open
institutions are fundamental in that regard. In a way,
media freedom is a litmus test for any society and its
absence can serve as an early warning sign of emerging
conflict. The United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, with
its focus on national capacity-building, deserves to be
highlighted in that context. We of course encourage its
full implementation.

