Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Let me express my
delegation's shock at the crashes involving two civilian
passenger aircraft yesterday in southern Russia. The
German Government would like to convey its deepest
condolences to the relatives of the victims.

My delegation is very grateful for the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2004/634) and for the
extensive and comprehensive briefing made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jean Arnault.

Let me begin by saying that Germany aligns itself
with the statement that the Ambassador of the
Netherlands will make on behalf of the European
Union.

Germany fully concurs with the findings of the
report and its concluding observations, as well as with
the assessment presented this morning by Mr. Arnault.

Voter registration, and in particular the high
percentage of women participating, has been a great
success and has exceeded our most optimistic
expectations. That is a clear sign that the Afghan
people are able and willing to determine their own
destiny. The presidential election is a decisive step
along the road of democratization and reconstruction,
as laid out in the Bonn process. We wish to thank the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its extraordinary effort in assisting the
Afghan Government in that endeavour.

The Afghan Government and the international
community must now undertake the necessary
measures to ensure that the presidential election is
conducted successfully. We welcome the fact that
observer missions from the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as well as from the Asia Foundation and the National
Democratic Institute, will be present. NATO is also
preparing to further assist the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) in providing the necessary
security for the election.

Germany is concerned about the deteriorating
security situation, which was mentioned by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. That situation
is also affecting areas that had heretofore been stable.
We share the assessment that security is threatened
from three sides, namely, by terrorist forces such as the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, by factional fighting between
hostile armed groups and by criminal activities,
particularly those associated with drugs. It will
therefore be of the utmost importance to continue to
reform the security sector by disarming militias and
further establishing a functioning judicial system and
national army and police forces. Germany will continue
its support for building up national Afghan police
forces.

The additional time gained due to the
postponement of the parliamentary election should be
used to improve the security situation. We hope that the
Afghan Government and the international community
will accelerate the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in all provinces, in
order to guarantee free and fair elections nation-wide
and to strengthen the authority of the federal
Government.

Germany is also alarmed by the increased
cultivation of drug crops. Last year Afghanistan had
the second largest opium harvest ever. The narco-
economy endangers economic reconstruction and the
establishment of functioning State structures. We
therefore welcome the measures taken by the Afghan
Government and others in combating this illicit
economy.

The Secretary-General has rightly asked the
international community to strengthen the effort to
consolidate peace and stability. Afghanistan will
continue to need external help in order to face the
challenges to security. In that context, I would like to
point to the establishment of a second German
provincial reconstruction team Faizabad, in
Badakhshan. An advance team is already on the
ground, and soon a first troop contingent will be
deployed. Germany remains the largest national
provider of armed forces for ISAF in Kabul. It also
provides troops for the Eurocorps headquarters, which
took over the leadership of ISAF in August this year.
Finally, German troops are part of the French-German
brigade within the Kabul multinational brigade.

Mr. President, Germany welcomes the
verification of the political rights campaign and the
report by UNAMA and the independent Afghan
Commissioner for Human Rights. This is an important
mechanism to ensure that the Afghan people can enjoy
their liberties, guaranteed in the constitution, and that
they can participate in the political decision-making
process, especially in the provinces.

