The Deputy Secretary-General: Before I begin
my remarks, let me say a few words about the tragic
events in Mogadishua today. The Secretary- General and
I were deeply saddened and shocked by the outrageous
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu
this morning. Full details are still emerging, but we
know that several people have died. The Secretary-
General and I express our deepest condolences to the
families of the deceased. Our thoughts are with the
United Nations staff and all those who have suffered
through this tragedy.

We remain committed to the principles of achieving
peace and keeping Somalia on its path to recovery,
which were strongly endorsed recently by the Council.
I thank you, Sir, for your words before the beginning
of this meeting. We thank the Government of Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia for their
prompt response. I have just learned that the Secretary-
General and the President of Somalia have spoken to
one another by telephone.

The Council is well aware of the link between
abundant extractive resources and conflict. In Sierra
Leone, guns financed by blood diamonds and illegal
timber are now silent. Liberia's Charles Taylor is facing
international justice. The scars of war are healing. But
in too many countries, a wealth of resources - such as
timber, oil, coal, diamonds and precious metals - fail to
translate into equivalent wealth for the people. Instead,
communities and individuals pay a terrible cost in terms
of corruption, human rights abuses and environmental
damage. Only a powerful few benefit. The result of this
inequality - this injustice - is bitterness, mistrust
and alienation. These are the precursors of conflict.
This is the so-called resource curse.

Yet, managed wisely, extractive resources can and
should be the foundation for sustainable development
and lasting peace. I therefore welcome this thematic
open debate of the Council and the opportunity to
outline how the United Nations system is working with
Member States, the private sector and other partners
to help transform the resource curse into a resource
blessing, in the best of cases.

Last month, the Secretary-General briefed the
Council about his joint visit with World Bank President
Mr. Jim Yong Kim to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Their message was clear.
Peace, development and the rule of law go hand in hand.
That is why the Council and the United Nations system
are supporting the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. That is why the World Bank is investing
heavily in the region and encourages business to follow.

The private sector is a key player in equitable,
transparent and sustainable exploitation of extractive
resources from Botswana to Brazil, from Cambodia to
Colombia, and from Malaysia to Mozambique. But it
is only one among a broad cast of actors. Civil society,
national Governments and international organizations
have important roles to play. And, where conflict
rages or is a distinct risk, the Security Council has its
obligations.

The primary responsibility for preventing conflict
and transparently and equitably managing resources
lies with Governments. Political leaders are to ensure
that extractive industries generate employment and
tax revenues that support economic development and
the provision of basic services. And leaders are to be
held accountable by national institutions that promote
social cohesion and inclusion based on the rule of law
and an independent judiciary. Transparency, it should
be noted, is not limited to just tracking the flow of
payments from extractive industries. Information about
the quantity, value and location of resources is also
essential to managing public expectations and reducing
tensions.

Preventing conflict related to resources also
means identifying social, economic and environmental
impacts. Measures must be taken to mitigate negative
consequences, in close contact with local communities,
and clear processes for compensation must be available
to prevent tensions and disputes. The United Nations
Environment Programme has been working closely
with the Government of Nigeria, for instance, to assess
the environmental and public health impact of oil
contamination in Ogoniland, in the Niger delta, and to
identify the options for clean-up.

United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions and country teams support dispute resolution
and grievance mechanisms through their rule of law
programmes. We also work to ensure that issues related
to extractive industries are part of mediation efforts
and are addressed in peace processes. We have now
included an expert on natural resources in our stand-by
team of mediation experts. Together with international
financial institutions, we can help Governments to
develop capacity on taxation policies and regulations
relevant to extractive industries, and to address the
impact of inflation and currency fluctuations.

There is also a significant gender dimension
to extractive industries. The United Nations is
working to ensure that this aspect is addressed. In
Mozambique, HIV/AIDS is a major problem related
to migrant workers working in South Africa's mines.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
is working with companies in South Africa and with
the miners' home communities to raise awareness and
reduce transmission of the disease. And with the rapid
expansion of Mozambique's own extractive industries,
the United Nations system as a whole is working on
the broad spectrum of related health and development
issues.

Where countries are recovering from conflict, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and country
teams can engage extractive companies in training
and employing former combatants. Where resource
extraction is fuelling conflict, the Security Council, of
course, has a crucial role to play. The expert groups
that support sanctions committees are a valuable tool.
They have presented findings on extractive industries,
such as charcoal, timber, diamonds and gold. Their
recommendations to the Council, its committees and to
Member States should be important catalysts for action.

The expert groups have also provided guidance
to the private sector, for instance on due diligence for
individuals and entities that trade, process and consume
minerals from eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Private sector initiatives, such as the Kimberley
Process in relation to Liberia and cote d'Ivoire, and
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, are
important to accountability, conflict prevention and
sustainable development. Ending corruption must be a
core goal of the United Nations.

Voluntary action by the corporate sector also
underpins the United Nations Global Compact and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights. Endorsed in 2011 by the Human Rights
Council, the Principles provide a global standard for
preventing and addressing human rights abuses linked to
business activity. Member States - both the traditional
major players, as well as the emerging economies that
are increasingly entering the resources market - should
support these initiatives and principles.

Ultimately, all parties need to recognize and act
upon the links between poverty, inequality, conflict
and sustainable development. As demand for extractive
resources increases, so will competition and rivalry.
This must lead not to more violent conflicts in fragile
nations, but rather to cooperation and a sense of shared
responsibility As we are seeing in many developing
countries, resource wealth can be a catalyst for
development. As the report of the Secretary-General's
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015
Development Agenda states:

"We need a transparency revolution, so
citizens can see exactly where and how taxes, aid
and revenues from extractive industries are spent."

Let us support this process of transparency and sharing
so that the people of developing nations can benefit
from their own natural resources.

