Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General and to express
our appreciation for his recent and insightful report on
the situation in C6te d'Ivoire (S/2005/186). Many
thanks go also to Mr. Alan Doss for the clarity of his
briefing.

We would also like to express our thanks to
President Mbeki of South Africa for his tireless efforts
to bring peace back to a country that had for a long
time been an example of peace and prosperity in the
region. We also wish to thank Mr. Aziz Pahad for
having taken the time to come to New York to brief the
members of the Security Council.

The observation of the Secretary-General that the
security situation remains precarious makes us all feel
deeply concerned. His warning that, if the arming and
the activities of militias are not controlled there will be
a very real danger that events may spin out of control,
with incalculable consequences for the people of Cote
d'Ivoire and the subregion as a whole, is even more
disturbing.

It is regrettable that, despite the laudable efforts
of President Mbeki on behalf of the African Union to
advance the plan of action agreed upon by the parties
in December 2004, important proposals contained in
that plan have not yet been implemented.
Unfortunately, progress has been limited and the
country remains divided. The Ivorian parties,
particularly those controlling militia groups, should
exercise restraint and hold their leaders accountable for
their attacks against civilians and peacekeepers.

The implementation of resolutions 1572 (2004)
and 1584 (2005) is of the utmost importance for the
improvement of the security situation in the country.

We are grateful to the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the Licorne forces for
their efforts to monitor the implementation of the
embargo. Taking into account the lack of progress in
the peace process, we fully subscribe to the suggestion
of the Secretary-General to reinforce the capacity of
UNOCI and to provide it with additional resources in
order that it may more effectively be able to fulfil its
difficult mandate.

May I use this opportunity to recall that the arms
embargo is an obligation binding on all Member States.
That obligation is of particular relevance to the
countries of the region. In that respect, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
paragraph 14 of resolution 1572 (2004), I would like to
appeal to all Member States of the region that have not
yet done so to submit to the Committee the relevant
information on national measures that they have taken
for the strict implementation of the arms embargo.
The international community is following the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire very closely. It would be
particularly pleased to see the situation improve very
soon, and the country return to peace and stability. If
the situation continues to be volatile, there will be no
other option but to proceed to the full implementation
of resolution 1572 (2004) against those obstructing the
peace process and committing Violations of human
rights.

The recent dramatic incident in Logouale shows
how volatile the security situation is and how easily
violence could escalate further. We therefore call upon
all the parties involved, in particular the Ivorian
leaders, to face up to their responsibilities and to
implement the terms of the peace process and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The upcoming
meeting scheduled to take place in April in Pretoria
will give them another opportunity, which they should
grasp, in order to bring peace to their country.

