Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Allow me to extend our
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. The Indonesian delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express its appreciation to you and the
members of the Council for convening today's open
debate. We also commend the format of the discussion
today, which enhances the possibility of the further
involvement of Member States that are not members of
the Council in issues under discussion in the Security
Council. Likewise, we look forward to the application of
such a format in the discussion of crucial issues
concerning the maintenance of international peace and
security.

In welcoming this open debate on an issue which
has evoked widespread interest and concern, it is worth
noting that AIDS, particularly in Africa, is complex and
multidimensional. It needs to be urgently addressed by the
international community.

Certainly, at this stage it is beyond the capacity of
any single Government to respond. In that regard, this

 

issue has also been the focus of other bodies of the United
Nations system. Today's discussion before the Council will
surely enhance the multidimensional approach to addressing
this issue in the continuing endeavour to overcome its
devastating repercussions.

The Secretary-General has underscored the fact that
the struggle to bring about peace and security in Africa is
inextricably linked to economic growth and development.
In the absence of sustained socio-economic progress, it is
doubtful that lasting peace and stability could be secured.
As the report further highlights, conflict prevention and
post-conflict peace-building are meaningless unless they can
enable a society to develop.

What has not been so clearly established or so widely
recognized is the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on
peace and security. Though there has been little direct study
on the impact of AIDS on stability and security in Africa,
many believe that the devastating impact of the disease on
the fabric of society is self-evident. At the same time,
deprivation and poverty are well recognized as non-military
sources of conflict and instability. Thus, the connection
between AIDS and security is a credible one. The
widespread epidemic that is currently devastating many
countries in Africa can be clearly seen not only to have an
impact on development but also to constitute a perennial
source of political insecurity and instability.

According to available statistics, it seems that poor
people, drug users and neglected populations, including
women, are the most vulnerable ones. What is also of deep
concern is the increasing numbers of infants and children
who are being infected with and dying from AIDS. With
the growing costs of providing health services in many
countries, it is no longer possible to meet the escalating
demands created by HIV.

To address this complex and pervasive crisis in Africa,
my delegation believes that the international community
should undertake a sincere commitment to eradicate this
scourge through a developmental approach. The health
needs of Africa must be borne by international burden-
sharing. However, we are all aware of the difficult road
ahead, as the financial and human resources to deal with
this epidemic are woefully inadequate, both at the national
and the international level. What does show promise,
however, is the multisectoral approach of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) which is
sponsored by many bodies of the United Nations and
provides effective system-wide coordination. In this light,
a coordinated, multisectoral approach, backed by adequate
resources, is urgently needed.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to share the
vision that we should all seek to work for a world free of
the unprecedented human disaster of HIV/AIDS - a
world in which HIV/AIDS transmission is substantially
reduced; where there is affordable treatment; where there
is a substantial reduction in individual and collective
vulnerability to the epidemic; where there is a significant
alleviation of the adverse impact of the disease on
individuals, communities and nations; and where the
silence surrounding the disease is broken for ever, thereby
sharply reducing the stigma and denial that have stifled
resolution. Indonesia believes that this vision can be
achieved only through partnership, and we thus support
the recommendation that the Economic and Social
Council should encourage UNAIDS in its efforts to
develop a global strategy based upon this shared vision.
I sincerely believe that only through such a multisectoral
approach, promoted through partnership, can HIV/AIDS
be successfully combated in Africa, development
successfully fostered and peace and security successfully
ensured.

