Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to congratulate
the Malaysian presidency of the Security Counci on the
initiative to convene this open debate on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for their interest and commitment, as well as for their
very thorough briefings on the issue.

Greece aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like
to add the following.

Greece attaches great importance to the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations against
children in situations of armed conflict. In recent years,
we have witnessed increasing challenges in this field.
Indeed, in protracted conflicts, humanitarian crises,
forced displacement and violent extremism, children
are directly affected and, in many instances, have
become targeted victims. The latest report submitted by
the Secretary-General (S/2016/306) is crucial in laying
out these challenges. We attach major importance to
the impartiality of the report and fully support the call
of the Secretary-General on all parties to work closely
with the Special Representative.

However, much more needs to be done to further
strengthen international efforts aimed at the protection
of children in armed conflicts. It is imperative to ensure
that children are able to grow up in a safe environment,
free from exploitation and any form of abuse and
violence. Having ratified the relevant international
normative framework for the protection of children,
Greece strongly encourages all States to sign, ratify and
fully implement the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its first Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflicts. In Greece, since 2011
the recruitment of children in armed conflicts has

constituted a war crime under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and is punishable as such
by the national judicial system.

Greece was among the first endorsing States of
the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration of May 2015, which
calls upon parties to armed conflict to avoid using
educational buildings for military purposes or making
them targets of attack. We believe that the Safe Schools
Declaration provides a concrete way for countries to
commit to protecting children's education even during
armed conflict.
The competent Greek authorities are currently
elaborating an action plan on the rights of the child that
sets as a priority the protection of children in refugee
crises. My country, deeply. affected by unprecedented
refugee flows, spares no effort to provide assistance and
protect the rights of children fleeing armed conflicts. It
is our utmost priority to save thousands of children's
lives in search-and-rescue operations at sea and to
receive them in a humane way. In 2015 alone, more than
150,000 people, including thousands of children, were
rescued by the Hellenic Coast Guard in about 2,500
operations at sea.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate that Greece
remains committed to effectively ensuring respect for
and protection of the fundamental rights of children as
a crucial guarantee for the future of our societies. In
that regard, my country fully subscribes to the call to
intensify international and regional efforts to strengthen
cooperation in putting an end to grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict around
the world.

