Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish, on behalf of the Government and the people of
Peru, to express our condolences and sentiments of
solidarity with the Government and the people of the
United Kingdom and with the relatives of the Victims
of the terrorist attacks carried out in London on 7 July.
Those criminal acts deserve our deepest condemnation.

Peru, which fought and defeated terrorism from
1980 to 1992, strongly and unequivocally condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
it takes place and whoever commits it. No ideological,
political or religious reason can be used as justification
by those who carry out, cooperate in or finance
terrorist acts.

We all know that terrorism cannot be fought in a
conventional war. There is no territory or theatre of
operations, because the actors are clandestine. It is an
asymmetric struggle, and the way to wage it is,
therefore, different.

Based on our own successful fight against
terrorism, Peru can state that only through a holistic
approach is it possible to combat this scourge
effectively. An appropriate legal framework is needed,
along with operational capacity in the areas of security
and, above all, in intelligence. In that holistic struggle,
it is necessary to respect human rights and international
law. Firmness in the fight against terrorism also
requires firmness in the preservation of civil liberties.
The democratic State cannot put itself on the same
level with terrorists; that is our experience.

Another long-term element that must be
considered as part of this holistic approach is the
elimination of the social exclusion and the frustration
that lie behind terrorist alienation. Within the
framework of this holistic strategy, it is essential that
we build structures of inter-State cooperation. We are
therefore grateful for the briefings by the Chairs of the
three Security Council committees and appreciate the
convening of today's open meeting. I will now make
some brief comments on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).

Peru appreciates the efforts made by the Chair of
the CTC to give priority attention to the Committee's
role as a facilitator of technical assistance both
between States and between them and international
organizations.

We also highlight the importance of the CTC's
continued coordination and cooperation with other
organs of the United Nations and with international,
regional and subregional organizations in order to
focus efforts and avoid duplication. In that context, we
should respect the different spheres of competence of
the various forums and be mindful that
recommendations coming from diverse organizations
belonging to diverse forums, spheres of competence
and situations cannot automatically become universal
norms.

With regard to the reports, there are some points
that could be considered to improve their effectiveness.

First, delays in the submission of reports, as the
Chair of the Committee stated, are to a large extent due
to reporting fatigue and lack of capacity. In other
words, countries that lack financial resources,
experience in the fight against terrorism or the required
personnel or that have not been able to adopt specific
national legislation must be able to receive the
assistance they require to adequately implement
resolution 1373 (2001) and to report on those activities
to the CTC. It is those deficiencies that must guide the
CTC's cooperation with States. That is important,
because the Committee's main task is to ensure that
States have the necessary tools to fight terrorism.

In addition, in connection with reporting fatigue,
it would be useful to agree on a timetable for the
submission of reports, as set out in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1373 (2001). That would help the
Committee itself and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to duly process the
content of the more than 600 reports that have been
submitted by States during more than three years.

A second element is following up the reports. It is
necessary that the responses and the courses of action
taken by the CTC in each case be based on a
meticulous and rigorous analysis of the reports and that
the specific situation and experience of each country be
taken into account. Otherwise, the Committee risks
adopting a mistaken approach with respect to the
reality in some countries, affecting its contribution to
States' mechanisms to fight terrorism.

Thus Peru agrees that the CTED, the technical
support organ of the CTC, must complete its team as
soon as possible and become fully operational. In
addition, the resulting team must include strategists in
the fight against terrorism and specialists in the various
areas of that fight. Legal professionals are needed, as
are intelligence and police experts with experience in
the field. The members of the team, as has been said,
must come from different geographic regions and legal
traditions and, most important, must have practical
experience in fighting terrorism.

It is necessary to overcome the limitations I have
mentioned in order to optimize the use of the report
system and the specialized activities of the CTED. That
way, the CTC will best be able to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council.

Before concluding, I would like briefly to refer to
the work of the 1267 Committee. Peru hopes that the
efforts to incorporate the information from the lists into
the Interpol database can be completed as soon as
possible. That would exploit the capacity of that main
organism for international police cooperation and
facilitate the tasks of national authorities.

The adequate functioning of the list system,
including the listing and the delisting of individual and
entities, continues to require the utmost attention.
Respect for due process and the rights of those
included on the lists must be considered at all times.

