Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): May I
begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
this relevant debate, the third that the Council has
organized this year on the topic of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The frequency of the
debate illustrates the ongoing challenge that protection
represents. We thank you, Madam President, for having
launched the debate, and we would also like to hail the
commitment of the Secretary-General, of Ms. Pillay,
of Ms. Amos and of Mr. Spoerri, all of whom have
worked for the protection of civilians in line with
their institutions' respective mandates. Allow us to
express our gratitude to them for their most edifying
contributions to today's debate.

The protection of civilians has always been at
the heart of laws governing war and of international
humanitarian law. That protection has become
increasingly necessary in the light of the trend towards
asymmetrical wars, where regular armies face off
against non-State armed groups. The imperative
need for protection has also come to light given the
devastating consequences of those conflicts and the use
of increasingly deadly weapons. Although protection
applies to all civilians, be they locals, refugees or
international players such as journalists or humanitarian
workers, particular concern must continue to be shown
for women and children, who are innocent primary
targets of exactions, Violations, atrocities and other
types of abuses.

Protection is an obligation set forth in international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. It is
clear that, despite the clarity and long-standing nature
of rules governing the protection of civilians and the
commitments of parties to conflict, civilians continue
to pay a high price in clashes. The striking brutality
that we have seen over the past months is yet another
reminder of that.

Challenges to the protection of civilians are
enormous and have become increasingly complicated,
owing to internal conflicts that become military in
nature in a most dangerous way, taking on political,
religious and sectarian dimensions that endanger the
lives of civilians. It is inadmissible that violations of
the fundamental rights to life, physical integrity and
dignity of thousands of innocent people continue to
occur in all impunity before our eyes without leading
to a forceful and decisive response from the Security
Council.

Since the presentation in 1999 of the first report
of the Secretary-General on the topic (S/1999/957), the
Council has adopted several statements and resolutions
particularly or specifically on the protection of
civilians. At the same time, concern for the protection
of civilians is increasingly being realized, thanks
to United Nations action on the ground. My country
is pleased to contribute to the achievement of that
humanitarian goal through its participation in various
peacekeeping operations.

By adopting the presidential statement contained in
document S/PRST/2013/2, the Council rightly sounded
the alarm with regard to

"the acute impact of conflict on refugees and
internally displaced persons [... and] the need for
all actors to work together for a durable solution for
refugees and internally displaced persons including
voluntary safe, dignified and sustainable return,
resettlement, or local integration, as appropriate".

In that context, the Council correctly underscored the
importance of registration, as it enables protection and
the assessment of needs with regard to the provision
and distribution of aid to refugees. The Council has
requested that all actors take appropriate and necessary
measures in order to guarantee the upholding of
principles applicable to the protection of refugees and
the rights of refugees, in particular with regard to the
civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps.

The protection of civilians is a matter, first and
foremost, of primary responsibility for the States of
which the civilians are nationals. However, it also
touches upon the role of armed non-State actors, who
unquestionably present a real challenge, given their
responsibility for most of the recent armed conflicts
we have seen, their participation in the commission
of atrocities and massacres against civilians and their
efforts to control humanitarian aid.

As emphasized by the Secretary-General in one of
his most recent reports, humanitarian activities continue
to suffer from the meddling of State and non-State actors
that are pursuing non-humanitarian objectives, which
leads to the disruption of humanitarian projects and
the diversion of aid. We think that that is an important
aspect that should indeed be delved into further in
future reports of the Secretary-General in order to
determine responsibility and prevent such interference.

Improving access for humanitarian workers
is strongly tied to the need to protect civilians in
situations of armed conflict. In particular, that involves
facilitating unfettered and safe access on the part of
humanitarian organizations to those who need them.
That access must be granted in a context of upholding
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence in all matters related to humanitarian
affairs.

Finally, the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly was marked by the adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty, to which my country made its own humble
contribution. We express our hope that the adoption of
that instrument and its entry into force can lead to an
improvement of the protection of civilians in times of
conflict.

