Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and I wish you every success. I also thank Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing on the latest developments
in my country. I also thank Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

In the run-up to 4 April, we were waiting for the
inclusive national conference, on which Libyans pinned
great hopes to end the difficult transition in our country
and move ahead towards fair and transparent elections
that would bring about a democratic Government that
respects democracy and the peaceful transfer of power,

protects human rights and promotes the rule of law.

However, such hopes diminished with the
commencement of the attack on Tripoli, which
continues to seeks to return the country back to
despotic military rule. In view of that, the Government
of National Accord (GNA) had no choice but to stand
up against that aggression and defend the capital, its
neighbourhoods and its people. Now, four months
after this attack, Libyans have lost about 2,000 of
their children, thousands have been injured and more
than 500,000 people displaced, in addition to damage
to infrastructure, public facilities, field hospitals,
ambulances and medical personnel. The latest of such
incidents was the attack against the field hospital in one
of the capital's neighbourhoods two days ago, killing
three doctors and wounding many others.

That humanitarian tragedy has been recently
exacerbated by the deliberate aerial bombardment on
a migrant detention centre in Tajoura on 2 and 3 July,
which caused dozens of casualties. The GNA condemned
the bombardment and considered it a war crime that
should be investigated and those responsible should be
held to account. It requested the Security Council to set
up a fact-finding mission to determine the perpetrators
of that crime, hold them to account and punish them.
However, the Council did not take a decisive measure to
that end, which could lead to similar tragedies.

Benghazi also witnessed an unprecedented
incident, on 17 July. An armed militia attacked the
house of member of Parliament Siham Sergewa,
shot her husband and kidnapped her. Her fate is still
unknown. That comes at a time when Haftar claims that
he is maintaining security and providing safety, but in
fact he is silencing voices and attacking what should
be inviolable. That blatant violation against the rights
and freedom of women in particular calls for a firm
stance to bring pressure to bear on the kidnappers and
determine her fate. Regrettably, the Security Council
stands idle in the face of the serious situation in my
country. We wonder why the Council has not taken an
unambiguous position or called things by their names.
Why has it not taken a decision to stop the aggression,
condemn the attack and end the negative interventions
by some countries? In addition to the litany of the
already mentioned violations, we note the activities
of terrorist groups in some parts of Libya who are
exploiting the ongoing conflict. We have repeatedly
cautioned against that, which plays into the hands of
terrorists and enables them to continue their activities.
Such activities will not be limited to Libya alone, they
will also threaten international and regional peace
and security. Despite the attacks on the capital and its
neighbourhoods, GNA forces continue to combat the
terrorist groups and track down their members. A case
in point is our strategic cooperation with a number of
countries, in particular the United States of America.

It is not a secret that documents and reports of
the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committee
established by Security Council's resolution 1973
(2011) have sufficient information and evidence on
such interventions, which regrettably have not been
met with a firm position by the Council to stop such
countries and hold them to account for their behaviour,
which runs counter to the Charter of the United
Nations and the principle of State sovereignty and
non-interference in their internal affairs. In that regard,
we recall resolution 2419 (2018) and call on the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities.

The position of the countries that support Haftar
and allege that his criminal militias are the Libyan
National Army encroaches on the rights of the GNA
in accordance with Security Council resolutions,
starting with resolutions 2259 (2015) and 2434 (2018),
which recognize the Libyan National Army under the
control and leadership of the GNA and supreme leader
Serraj - not the Libyan Arab army forces, which is
the name Haftar gives his militias. The countries that
support that aggression have breached the Articles of
Chapter V of the Charter and its functions and powers,
namely, Articles 24 and 25, which provide that Members
of the United Nations shall agree to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Security Council.

Despite the challenges, the Government of National
Accord continues to believe in a peaceful, rather than
a military, resolution of the conflict as the only way to
safeguard the stability and security of Libyans and to
establish a State that meets their aspirations, founded
onjustice, democracy and respect for human rights. We
are therefore committed to complying with the Security
Council resolutions on Libya, and the Government has
expressed its continued support for the efforts of Special
Representative Salame to implement the peace plan.

We have made significant progress in that direction,
and people have begun to feel the improvement
achieved in the security situation, their livelihoods
and services. We have always recognized the security
challenges that need to be addressed, which call for
the operationalization of the army and the police.
Given its sensitive nature, the situation requires that it
be addressed in a gradual manner. We have therefore
introduced security measures and held consultations
in coordination UNSMIL. At the same time, we
have seen a positive response to those measures by
most stakeholders.
We had hoped to see the strengthening and a
fruitful outcome of those efforts with the convening
of the inclusive national conference. We had looked
forward to the conference producing a road map leading
to security for our country. What has happened since
4 April, however, has undermined those efforts and
complicated the challenges facing our country.

Pursuing efforts to achieve peace is unavoidable.
As the President of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez
Serraj, stated at the twelfth extraordinary summit of
the African Union in Niamey,

"We are well aware that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Libya and that there is no winner
in this war; the only loser in this struggle is Libya".

Therefore, on 16 June, Mr. Sarraj announced an initiative
to all Libyans who call for a peaceful solution to the
conflict and the establishment ofa civil State, aimed at
achieving political stability and cooperation and holding
a meeting with UNSMIL to which representatives of all
sectors of society would be invited to agree on a road
map and establish the constitutional grounds on which
to hold presidential and parliamentary elections by the
end of 2019.

That meeting would also adopt laws on electoral
and constitutional processes and set dates for the
achievement of those milestones, which would be
referred to the High National Elections Commission.
The outcome would be binding for all. The United
Nations would organize and oversee those processes
and ensure the necessary capacity and resources for
their realization.

We continue to entertain high hopes that the
implementation of that initiative will be endorsed at
the regional level and by the international community,
with the Security Council's support and assistance. But
we are concerned that the inability of the Council to
end the encroachment on the hopes and aspirations of
Libyans might send a message to some people that could
be interpreted as an encouragement for propagating
further devastation, conflict, humanitarian suffering
and political division.

We firmly believe that the attack on Tripoli would
not have happened had the Council taken more robust
and deterrent measures. However, we continue to
believe in the ability of the Security Council to end
the deteriorating crisis in Libya. We are counting on
its unity to engage constructively with the Libyan
crisis with full objectivity, while exercising pressure
on all parties that have embraced acquiring weapons
and personal gain at the expense of the sacrifice that
Libyans have made in terms of their pride and dignity
to establish a democratic State.

In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
stands ready to cooperate with the Security Council
with regard to issues related to the safety and security of
the Libyan people. We remain committed to assuming
our responsibilities to serve our people and country. We
stand ready to continue cooperation and consultations
to allow us to achieve a peaceful solution to the situation
in the country

