Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First let me
thank you for convening this Security Council meeting
on the situation in Afghanistan. It is a very timely
decision to hold a meeting in a format that provides a
platform for interested Member States. We all want
Afghanistan to be rebuilt, and we should all do our best
to provide help to this long-suffering country.

I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General and Mr. Costa, Executive Director,
for their comprehensive briefings on the situation in
Afghanistan.

It is commendable that, despite completely
destroyed infrastructure and great human losses during
the prolonged war, the people of Afghanistan have
enthusiastically tackled the task of building a new
society. It is quite encouraging to see positive changes
and processes in the country in such areas as national
reconstruction and state-building.

Work is well under way to convene a
Constitutional Loya Jirga, which promises to become
the most significant political event in Afghanistan this
year. Public service reform is picking up its pace, a
system of administration is being put in place, both
nationally and locally, and efforts are being made to
prepare for judicial sector reform. The Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission has been
actively investigating human rights violations. More
than 4 million boys and girls started a new school year.

The Government of Kazakhstan supports the
selfless efforts of President Hamid Karzai of
Afghanistan, who leads the successful rehabilitation
process in Afghanistan in close cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi.

We find ourselves at the starting point of a long
and extremely complex process leading to the
restoration of credible peace in Afghanistan. For this
reason, it is necessary to further intensify international
peacekeeping efforts in the country in order to prevent
a relapse into civil war.

We fully share the concerns expressed by the
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
regarding the deteriorating security situation due to
inter-ethnic and factional clashes, increased activity by
elements associated with the Taliban and a drug-based
economy. All these factors impede the reconstruction
effort, political transformation and re-establishment of
the rule of law.

Kazakhstan has always called for an early
settlement of the situation in Afghanistan. We continue
to firmly believe that the United Nations should play a
central role in international efforts to provide
assistance to Afghanistan. Now that the process of
peaceful settlement has reached the stage of practical
actions, the Government of Kazakhstan is working to
broaden its participation in political and economic
activities of the international community to rebuild
Afghan society.

Although the political situation in Afghanistan
has become somewhat stable, the country continues to
be a source of numerous threats and challenges. In this
context, Kazakhstan is especially concerned by the
production and trafficking of illicit drugs.
Unfortunately, Afghanistan continues to be the main
source of drugs bound for international drug markets.
Despite the efforts by the international community,
opium production in 2002 has returned to former high
levels and, as a result, opium transit through the
Central Asian countries has increased. It should be
noted that the significant scale of illicit drug trafficking
constitutes a great threat not only to our region, but to
the whole world. We are convinced that, as long as this
alarming trend persists, international terrorism will
continue to have a source of financial support.

We believe that in order to effectively counter the
existing drug threat, it is necessary to apply a
comprehensive approach to the solution of this
problem, with the United Nations playing a
coordinating role. We commend the Government of
Afghanistan for taking measures to control poppy
cultivation. National drug control strategy provides for
alternative economic stimulus packages for farmers and
the strengthening of the administration of justice
capability in the country. In that context, I would like
to stress the importance of convening a drugs control
conference in Kabul, which would contribute to the
coordination of efforts to combat illicit drug production
in Afghanistan.

Kazakhstan commends the contribution by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Drug Control Programme to the efforts
to eliminate drugs on a sustainable basis and welcomes
the outcome of the International Conference on Drug
Routes from Central Asia to Europe, held in Paris on
21 and 22 May 2003.

The Government of Kazakhstan attaches great
significance to the signing in December 2002 between
the Government of Afghanistan and the six
neighbouring countries of the Kabul Declaration of
Good Neighbourly Relations, wherein the seven
signatories reaffirmed their determination to defeat
terrorism, extremism and drug trafficking.

The current discussions give us grounds for
concluding that opium production and the existence of
a drug-based economy undermine security. Without
adequate measures of control, this situation can disrupt
the efforts of the international community to end this
prolonged crisis in the country and to establish the rule
of law in Afghanistan. We should set up joint
mechanisms to eliminate channels for drug trafficking
from Afghanistan by allocating adequate resources to
drug control programmes and projects.

In that regard, I would like to mention the great
efforts made in this area by the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Central Asian Cooperation
Organization.

Like any other regional State, Kazakhstan is
interested in the strengthening of the "security belts"
around Afghanistan in order to prevent traffic in illicit
drugs in Afghan territory and to prevent precursor
chemicals from flowing into Afghanistan.

We also believe that in the existing situation, it is
imperative to develop a United Nations programme to
combat drug trade in Central Asia on a systematic
basis. In that context, the initiative of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to create a regional
cooperation structure between the Central Asian
countries should be supported.

Effective assistance to strengthen the border
guard, customs and law enforcement agencies of States
located alongside the drug-trafficking routes from
Afghanistan and to improve interaction between drug
control agencies at the regional level could be an
important factor in preventing drug trafficking in
Afghanistan.

We agree with the main provisions of the
statement of the President of the Security Council on
the item under discussion and call on other States to
support it.

Kazakhstan reaffirms its commitment to the
efforts of the international community to implement the
Bonn Agreement and stands ready to do all it can to
contribute to the creation of a new and independent
Afghanistan.

