Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Allow me, Mr. President,
to thank you and your delegation for having convened
this very important meeting on this crucial topic. I
should like also to stress that Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

One of last century's most influential advocates of
world peace, His Holiness Pope John XXIII, used to
say, "Let us strive to find that which unites rather than
that which divides". That concise but powerful sentence
offers us guidance in our quest for permanent peace
and security, the core business of the United Nations.
Through seven decades of efforts in pursuit ofthis goal,
through trials and failures, we have come to understand
that it is difficult, but not impossible, to achieve.

It requires solid foundations that must be carefully
laid. Peace is not only a matter of signing a treaty. It
cannot be imposed; it can arise only from a mutual
understanding of the parties involved and from their
recognition of that which unites.

This is just the starting point - the precondition
to a lasting peace. This is what we learned from the
Mozambican experience. A successful and still-lasting
peace agreement for Mozambique was signed in Rome
in October 1992.

The Secretary- General ofthe United Nations at that
time, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, called this peace the
"Italian formula": a patient exercise of reconciliation
between the parties to a conflict, engineered by a
coalition of actors that included the Italian Government,
the Italian opposition, an Italian non-governmental
organization, the Catholic Church and, of course, all of
the Mozambican actors in that crisis.

Once an agreement has been signed and a ceasefire
reached, some conditions have to be met for peace to last.
Respect for human rights is paramount, as is setting the
conditions for social and economic development. All of

those matters are an essential part of the Organization's
job today.

Last week, the Permanent Mission of Italy had the
privilege of co-hosting here at Headquarters an event to
commemorate Martin Luther King Day. At that event,
dedicated to the threat of growing inequalities, Nobel
Laureate Joseph Stiglitz warned us of the perils of
economic inequalities, a ticking time-bomb. That issue
must form a crucial part of our reflection on how to
achieve permanent peace and a fundamental element of
our inter-State cooperation. The widening gap between
those who have too much and those who have too little
is a source of destabilization in our world. We need
to bear this in mind and be ambitious in our quest for
permanent peace and on the path to the new agenda for
international development.

The United Nations does a remarkable, difficult
and often misunderstood job, through the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, a job that Italy fully
supports. Our Organization is too often blamed for
conflicts in the world, but no club is greater than the
sum of its members. The United Nations can only
try to deal with the troubles its Members create.
That will be especially difficult if the Organization
lacks the necessary tools and structure. That is why
Italy supports the long-needed reform of the Security
Council, the organ with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
To be effective, this reform needs to conform to a
set of binding principles, namely, inclusiveness,
representation and accountability. The reform must
increase the Council's flexibility and its interaction
with the general membership, which should perceive it
as a reliable, not an exclusive, club.

Ultimately, what the United Nations is about is
a world without war. This goal is reflected in every
aspect of our work, and it must be our guideline and
our ambition, in every decision we take.

Finally, allow me to come back to our experience
in Mozambique. The lesson that we learned, which is
even more relevant today, is that peace is a dynamic
process. It should not just be preserved; it must also
grow, becoming a safeguard for human rights, economic
development, stability of life, democratic institutions,
security and the rule of law. Today as in the past, there
is a need to seek out that which unites.

