Mr. Ndiaye (spoke in French): Today, on the eve of the Council's deliberations on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), I am very pleased to be introducing the Secretary-General's report on the situation in the Central African Republic (S/2020/994). As members are aware, the presentation of this report is taking place at a crucial juncture for the men and women of the Central African Republic, who will be electing their President and deputies in a little over two months. This is a unique opportunity to leverage the democratic gains of the 2015 elections, consolidate constitutional order and pursue efforts to stabilize the country. Twenty months after the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic between the Government and 14 armed groups, noteworthy progress has been achieved, particularly in the areas of political reform, the restoration of State authority and transitional justice. The peace agreement makes it possible to provide a strategic framework for the promotion of an environment that enhances the physical protection of the population and better enables them to exercise their rights, especially their political and civic rights. Since 2019, MINUSCA and the international partners of the Central African Republic have supported the efforts of stakeholders to draft an electoral code. Today the country has a computerized electoral roster, which was set up despite the health crisis and a number of technical, operational and security challenges. MINUSCA continues to work to ensure that all segments of Central African Republic society can participate in the elections in peace and a calm environment. In that spirit, we encourage refugee participation in the electoral process. While taking note of the challenges that the Government faces, we continue to encourage the national authorities and neighbouring countries to pursue, with the help of the international community, efforts to create conditions conducive to the voluntary and dignified return of refugees and to ensure their full participation in the socioeconomic and political life of the country. To date, the National Electoral Authority has an electoral roster of some 1,859,890 Central African Republic eligible voters in 16 prefectures around the country and 13 countries in the diaspora. I am pleased that the registration of women has reached 46 per cent. With the publication of the 14 October electoral list and the convening of the electoral body scheduled for 28 October, the Central African Republic is definitely on its way to holding successful elections, which requires the commitment of all actors and respect for the authority of the Constitutional Court, the sole arbiter of the elections. We therefore urge all political actors, the media and other opinion leaders to refrain from disinformation campaigns and messages of stigmatization, which MINUSCA will document and present to the Council. Through concerted and coordinated efforts with the international community, MINUSCA is determined to facilitate three important elections. I invite the States Members of the United Nations to help the Central African Republic fill the financial gap. We are still short $4 million for the basket fund managed by the United Nations Development Programme for the presidential and legislative elections, and some $17.7 million for the elections as a whole, including local elections planned for 2021. Local elections will be critical for the development of local governance and the effective restoration of State authority, as well as the advent of decentralization and the restoration of the social contract between the State and the people it governs. They will make it possible for us to set in motion a gradual transfer of responsibilities back to the State. The political situation remains tense. To date, there are 16 candidates for the presidency, including three women and the incumbent. The first electoral round is planned for 27 December. Some candidates have already cast doubt on the viability of the peace agreement and are even proposing to renegotiate it if elected. The main opposition coalition recently took over regional mechanisms in order to contest the legality of legislative reform adopting exemption provisions with respect to the electoral code. However, those tensions have not jeopardized the possibility of holding elections in accordance with constitutional timelines. We must do more to encourage all candidates to adhere to a code of conduct to ensure peaceful elections and a peaceful electoral campaign in order to build confidence among all political actors and preserve the peace agreement. I call on stakeholders to see the upcoming elections aS an opportunity to consolidate the democratic process and politically transform the current crisis in the country with a view to reaching sustainable solutions. Through my good offices, I continue to encourage political dialogue in support of creating an environment conducive to the holding of inclusive, free, fair, transparent, credible and peaceful elections by engaging the international community, including the group of five plus, and Central African actors in Bangui. The coordinated and continuous support of international partners to stakeholders will be key to the success of the presidential and legislative elections. The road to peace is slow and winding. Through a robust and deterrent posture, MINUSCA has been able to use force to open up a space for dialogue, which, together with the guarantors of the peace agreement, namely, the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), has enabled voter registration to be brought back to life in the north-western region of the country. While significant, the progress in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, with 2,094 ex-combatants having been disarmed and demobilized, the establishment of two joint special security units, comprising 562 elements, in the west, and the redeployment of defence and security forces are reassuring in that they constitute the first steps towards the dissolution of armed groups, in accordance with the requirements of the peace agreement. We will need to accelerate the pace so as to better maximize the positive impact on the peace and security of the country. MINUSCA continues to support the Government in implementing its strategy for the restoration of State authority, including by facilitating the deployment of local authorities and building their capacity. Recently, the presence these local authorities has enabled them to expand their role in the prevention of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the resolution of local conflicts, including those related to transhumance. The Mission's support in sequencing this deployment makes it possible to help with the gradual and sustainable return of local authorities so that they may serve the populations and provide the basic social services to which these populations are legitimately entitled. I also welcome the establishment of the new European Union Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic to support the country's security sector reform, which will strengthen the work of MINUSCA and such bilateral partners as France, Russia, the United States and China. We must encourage the Central African Government and all security sector reform partners to invest more and together in the democratic control and governance of the defence and security forces, which are factors of national cohesion. We must continue to support the fight against impunity and for justice reform, the deployment of the criminal justice chain, the strengthening of judicial services and the demilitarization of the penitentiary system. In this regard, we must continue to provide technical and financial support to the Special Criminal Court. The Government's willingness to promote transitional justice also involves the operationalization of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation, which plays a critical role in national reconciliation by giving concrete expression to the legitimate aspiration of victims for justice, truth and reparation. The predominance of elections and_ political activities should not overshadow the humanitarian emergency in the country, including the COVID-19 pandemic, which has exacerbated the Central African Republic's socioeconomic vulnerabilities. The aim in this regard is to take into account the growing needs of the population and to provide the necessary support to humanitarian partners who provide vital assistance to more than 1.3 million people every month. I condemn in the strongest possible terms attacks against humanitarian workers, which are all the more unacceptable as they have had the effect of aggravating the situation of people in need. In view of the increase in such attacks, MINUSCA will continue to take all measures necessary to protect not only civilians but also civilian infrastructure and humanitarian workers. This is essential to promote the creation of conditions conducive to unhindered access to humanitarian assistance, including in the most remote areas. I appeal to the generosity of donors to continue funding the 2020 humanitarian response plan. We must allow the people to express themselves through elections. Despite the fragility in some areas and the security situation, encouraging results have been achieved, thanks, inter alia, to the military operation launched by MINUSCA. One peacekeeper lost his life on 13 July. This crime will not go unpunished and will have to be investigated by the Central African justice system as soon as possible. I take this opportunity to pay the highest tribute to the peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the service of peace. Needs remain immense in the face of the security challenge, particularly in dealing with the danger of newly discovered landmines, particularly in the west of the country. With the signing of the integrated election security plan by the Prime Minister on 2 October, the Government and MINUSCA have adopted a harmonized approach to securing the electoral process throughout the country. I wish to commend the foresight of the Security Council in giving MINUSCA a robust electoral mandate and adequate resources that will enable us to effectively assist in the presidential and legislative elections. It is now more than recommended that this same mandate be extended to the local elections, which have not been held in the Central African Republic since 1988. They are indispensable for grassroots democracy, local governance and the deployment of local authorities. Despite the negative impact of the pandemic on our operations, MINUSCA has continued to implement its mandate. We currently have only four active cases in the Mission - two civilian and two military - and evolving measures have been put in place to protect personnel and avoid transmission within our premises or to the population. On 30 September, all our personnel returned to duty. Indeed, MINUSCA is able to continue supporting the authorities in the fight against COVID-19, in particular through logistical and material assistance. Faced with the health crisis, we have also adapted the way we conduct our operation across the country. I should like to conclude by thanking the President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera, the Prime Minister and all members of the Government for their efforts towards the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. I commend the contribution of the technical and financial partners of the Central African Republic. I welcome the high-quality work carried out by the group of five plus, the consultative framework that brings together, in addition to the United Nations, the United States, France, Russia, the European Union, the African Union and the World Bank. The subregion's support has proven its effectiveness and complementarity with the Mission's actions. The forthcoming visit to the Central African Republic, from 27 to 30 October, of the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail Chergui; the ECCAS Chair, Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Verissimo; and the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean- Pierre Lacroix, who invited the European Union to join the visit, is eagerly awaited. I would also like to take this opportunity to particularly thank the African Union and ECCAS for the continuous and assiduous monitoring of the implementation of the political agreement and for the excellent cooperation between these two institutions and the United Nations. As I have said so many times, this imminent visit is welcome and very timely and will, I am sure, contribute to raising the awareness of all political and social actors of the need to create an environment of peace and serenity conducive to the smooth conduct of the presidential and legislative elections. I know that the people of the Central African Republic can, as in the past, count on the renewed unanimous support of the Security Council.
