Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
declaration.

First of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate.

The European Union welcomes the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2008/159) and the briefing given by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno. We support the
recommendations on the future activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
especially the strengthening of UNAMA's central role
in coordinating the overall international effort in
Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the EU and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Let me
add that we welcome the appointment of Kai Eide as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We look forward to working closely with
him.

We look forward to the renewal of UNAMA's
mandate, which will reaffirm the international
communities support for increased international
cohesion in our collective efforts to support the
Government of Afghanistan.

The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
long-term support for the people and the Government
of Afghanistan and the core principles of promoting
Afghan leadership, good governance, responsibility
and ownership, and fostering the development of a
democratic, secure and sustainable Afghan State with
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

The European Union supports the initiative by the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, which met
in Tokyo on 5 and 6 February, to arrange an
international conference in Paris in June to review
progress in the implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact, reaffirm the commitment of the international
community to Afghanistan and discuss the way
forward. In this context, the European Union would
like to underline once again its strong support for a
comprehensive approach. The European Union calls on
the Government of Afghanistan to make further
progress on human rights and good governance,
including through the establishment of an independent
mechanism on senior appointments, the
implementation of the national anti-corruption strategy
and the approval of a media law consistent with
freedom of expression.

The European Union remains committed to
working with the Government of Afghanistan to
strengthen its human rights institutions and
mechanisms. The European Union recalls its urgent
appeal to halt any future executions, to re-establish a
de facto moratorium on the use of the death penalty
and to enhance the implementation of the transitional
justice action plan.

The European Union underlines its continued
engagement in Afghanistan, including through the
bilateral cooperation programmes of EU member States
and through the EU's assistance strategy, which
contains a substantial multi-year commitment until
2013 and which focuses on governance and the rule of
law - particularly on the judiciary and the police -
and on rural development and health. The European
Union looks forward to the finalization, launch and
implementation of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and welcomes the participatory
process that this has involved to date.

The European Union reaffirms its support for
elections in Afghanistan. The EU remains committed to
working with the Afghan Government to ensure free

and fair elections in 2009 and 2010. The EU reaffirms
that it is for the Afghan Government to decide on the
format and timing of the elections. We call on the
Afghan Government to ensure that such decisions are
made in good time, to allow for adequate preparations.

The EU welcomes the progress of the European
Union Police Mission in Afghanistan (EUPOL Afghanistan) towards full deployment at the central,
regional and provincial levels. The mission is
supporting the development of the Afghan police force
under local ownership, with respect for human rights
and operating within the framework of the rule of law.
The EU remains committed to addressing the multiple
challenges lying ahead, in close cooperation with the
Afghan authorities and international partners. The
European Union expresses its readiness to consider
further enhancement of its engagement, particularly in
the spheres of the police and the wider rule of law, in
line with the adoption by the Afghan authorities of the
National Justice Programme.

The European Union, underlining its overall
coherence of objectives with the United Nations and
NATO on the basis of the Afghanistan Compact,
reaffirms its readiness to work closely with UNAMA
and the International Security Assistance Force, inter
alia through EUPOL Afghanistan, in order to
strengthen the overall coordination of the international
community in Afghanistan. The European Union will
continue closely to follow developments with regard to
Afghanistan, including at the forthcoming NATO
summit in Bucharest.

The European Union will keep its policy towards
Afghanistan under review in the coming months, in
advance of the Paris conference.

