Mr. Walker (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
particularly thank the Argentine Republic for the
timely convening of this open debate on Haiti.
Likewise, we congratulate its Minister for Foreign
Affairs, our dear friend Rafael Bielsa, on that
important initiative and wish him every success in the
presidency of the Security Council. We also want to
thank Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Chile, for the comprehensive report he provided us
this morning. In addition, we welcome the presence of
Ambassador Luigi Einaudi, Acting Secretary General
of the Organization of American States (OAS), and
commend him for the presentation we just heard.

Undoubtedly, this is an excellent opportunity to
renew the international community's commitment to
ensuring the success of the peace mission in Haiti and
to assessing the efforts already undertaken, so that we
do not repeat the errors of the past. This time, the
United Nations must not fail in Haiti. We must
establish clear political objectives and accelerate
institutional and economic rehabilitation as a
fundamental condition for the restoration of sustainable
stability in this brotherly State.

As members are aware, Chile, mindful that it was
imperative to prevent a humanitarian emergency in
Haiti, participated very early on in the Multinational
Interim Force and immediately joined MINUSTAH.
We did so and are doing so in the understanding that
only a comprehensive, multidimensional and long-term
peace operation will make possible the political,
economic and social rehabilitation of the country. Latin
America's significant participation in MINUSTAH
attests to a collective political will to help resolve the
problems of our region in the context of maintaining
international peace and security, as we reaffirmed at the
most recent meeting of the Rio Group, on 5 November.

During our tenure as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council, we stressed the fundamental
principles that we believe should govern the political
transition in Haiti: convening a broad-based national
dialogue, without any exclusion, that will promote
national reconciliation; holding transparent and free
elections in 2005, with international supervision; full
respect for human rights; observance of the norms of
due process; disarming paramilitary groups; and
putting an end to impunity.

Although progress in creating a climate of
security has been relatively slow - particularly in the
beginning, as a result of the difficulties in bringing the
MINUSTAH contingent up to full strength - we now
note with satisfaction that there has been substantive
progress in that area in the past two months, which was
made clear in the Special Representative's
comprehensive briefing this morning. That has made it
possible to carry out joint operations that have included
United Nations military and police forces in
coordination with the inadequate local police forces. In
that context, we believe it is essential to rebuild and
strengthen the Haitian police as a professional and
depoliticized institution that proves itself worthy of the
people's trust by operating with respect for human
rights and the rule of law.

Another important aspect of achieving social
peace has been the search for an effective response to
the social demands of members of the disbanded armed
forces. Their reintegration into the work force is an
issue that requires priority attention in the context of an
effective commitment to the rule of law and a clear,
categorical rejection of violence.

Just as reintegration is an imperative task, it is
essential that it be accompanied by a process of
disarmament not only of former soldiers, but of Haitian
society as a whole. That is a basic prerequisite for
restoring confidence.

We also believe that, without a political process
that brings together all sectors of Haitian society to reach
a governance pact, it will not be possible to achieve
sustainable peace and security. That is why we have
always stressed the urgent need to generate a dialogue
among all the relevant political forces - including the
Fanmi Lavalas party - so as to achieve a basic
consensus. Only then can there be legitimate elections in
Haiti to elect its new authorities. We recognize that that is
a matter for Haitians to decide. MINUSTAH and OAS
will provide technical support and act as facilitators to
create substantive security conditions that will make it
possible to hold free, secret and informed elections. We
reiterate our appeal to the Transitional Government of
Haiti to take all necessary steps to ensure the normal
development of this political and electoral process.

In the past 11 years, the international
community's efforts in Haiti have led to ephemeral
successes, which has obliged us to take up the task
again and again. Therefore, we believe that, together
with the Haitian society and Government, we should
address the causes of those repeated failures. In that
connection, we believe that the strengthening of State
institutions is the foundation for a national
reconciliation and reconstruction process.

When we say "no more impunity", that must be
supported by a strengthened and reformed judicial and
prison system. When we reject violence, we must
develop institutions that can effectively restrain it.
When we speak of national reconciliation, we need to
strengthen political parties and civil society
organizations that will serve as tools for channelling
the people's demands through a democratic system.

No political process will seem credible to a
population that is malnourished and wracked by abject
poverty and chronic unemployment. It is, therefore, of
capital importance to design short- and long-term
development projects that will help to objectively
improve the living conditions of the Haitian people.
We must begin with basic, specific projects that will be
valued by the people and that will promote a positive
perception of the international community's action in
Haiti. In that connection, we want to reiterate very
strongly, in this forum, our appeal to donor countries
and the international financial organizations to release,
without delay and with greater flexibility and urgency,
the resources pledged to Haiti at the Washington donor
conference held in July 2004. Perhaps we must
communicate, in this forum, at this meeting, our sense
of urgency with regard to those financial resources.

Chile and Ecuador have sent a contingent of
engineers to carry out road infrastructure projects. We
are facing a paradoxical situation, because we have
qualified personnel and adequate machinery, but we are
having serious difficulties in finding the financial
resources and procuring the basic supplies needed to
implement specific projects. That has caused the
venture to focus on secondary tasks, which is surely
also happening with other cooperation projects.

As a Government, we have invested $20 million
in equipping that engineering corps and in military
equipment, but at present we are carrying out only a
$100,000 project. Resources and capacities are available,
but they are underutilized because of a lack of financial
resources. It is necessary further to clarify the priorities
set out in the interim cooperation framework and to
establish expedited processes to enable international
organizations and donors to contribute to MINUSTAH.
We therefore urge the Transitional Government to
continue to work on specific economic development
projects, with emphasis on the provision of basic
services. From that perspective, we deem it of the
greatest importance that MINUSTAH have the capacity
to administer quick-impact projects.

Finally, I should like to reiterate our willingness
to help ensure that the rehabilitation of Haiti, to which
we all are committed, facilitates the functioning of
solid and effective democratic institutions in a context
of economic development and social equity. We must
be clear, at the level of the United Nations and at that
of the financial institutions, that this is a fundamental
political objective to which our actions and projects
must be geared.

To the extent that we all can, in accordance with
our respective capacities to cooperate in carrying out
that task, we will be working for a lasting peace and
stability. That will require a sustained effort over time
as well as perseverance in our actions. We cannot allow
a recurrence of the cycle of crisis and indifference that
has characterized the relationship of the international
community to Haiti throughout history.

We invite the Council to adopt a forward-looking
approach, because only in that way can we can help to
ensure that the Haitian people can once again aspire to
a future of democracy and dignity.

