Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I thank Spain for
organizing this timely meeting and Foreign Minister
Garcia Margallo for presiding over it. I would also like
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
strong remarks and strong message to us this morning.

I welcome the Secretary-General's visit to the
region, and, as he said in Jerusalem earlier this week,
the terror attacks against civilians are deplorable. Such
random attacks make every place unsafe and every
person a potential victim. We are, of course, deeply
concerned about the deaths on both sides, with nearly
2,000 injured so far in October, a vast majority of
whom were Palestinians. The Israeli response must
be proportionate. All perpetrators must be brought to
justice and excessive use of force must not be used.
There is an urgent need for leadership, responsibility
and restraint.

One year ago, Sweden decided to recognize the
State of Palestine. Our recognition aimed at making
the parties to the conflict less unequal. It aimed at
supporting moderate Palestinians and Israelis alike,
providing a positive input into the dynamics of the
dormant Middle East peace process and at sending
a clear and convincing message of hope to younger
generations that there is an alternative to violence
and to the so-called status quo. As we have seen in
recent weeks, the absence of hope is one of the greatest
challenges facing the prospect of peace and the vision
of a two-State solution.

But we believe that it is not too late for initiatives
for de-escalation, confidence-building and peace in
the region. It is time to create conditions for a results-
oriented peace process, including confidence-building
measures such as settlement freezes. Now it is time
for the full implementation of agreements reached
between Palestine and Israel. Now is time to end the
isolation of Gaza and for all factions in Palestine
to cooperate. Now it is time to remove obstacles to
economic development in all of Palestine, including
that of limited access to Area C and Gaza. Now it is
time for an international recommitment regarding clear
parameters and realistic time frames for negotiations
and an end to the occupation. We must not lose track of
the real goal: a negotiated two-State solution and an end
of the occupation where both Palestine and Israel can
live side by side in peace and security, and the Council
should lead the way.

The recent escalation of the violence in Syria is
deeply concerning, and the present situation, more
than ever, calls for the complete, genuine and concrete
support of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
a political solution. That humanitarian crisis is the
world's largest in modern times, and my country,
Sweden, shoulders its responsibility in three ways.

First, we are currently receiving 3,000 Syrian
refugees every week, and to date we have received
100,000, although I know it is a small number compared
to the neighbouring countries of Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey. Secondly, Sweden has so far contributed over
$213 million in humanitarian assistance. Thirdly, in
addition to our humanitarian assistance, Sweden will
allocate another $220 million over the coming five
years, through a new Syrian crisis strategy. I want to
encourage all others present here to also step up their
engagement. I know that many are already doing a lot.

Throughout the conflict in Syria, women and girls
have been targeted on the basis of their gender. Sexual
violence is systematic and widespread among many
warring parties, including its use as a tactic of terror
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. But Syrian
women are not only victims; they are also actors.
That is why I am hosting a meeting on Syrian women
peacebuilders tomorrow morning. It is important to
look upon women as actors of change who want to be
given a voice in any discussions about the future of
Syria.

Lebanon is one of the countries most affected by the
conflict in Syria. Domestic stability in Lebanon is key,
and Lebanese leaders need to set their differences aside
and elect a new President without any further delay. But
Lebanon also needs and deserves more international

support. Lebanon, led ably by Prime Minister Tammam
Salam, is hosting more than 1.2 million refugees who
have fled the war in Syria. Our substantial humanitarian
assistance and our contribution to the Trust Fund for
Lebanon, managed by the World Bank, will soon be
complemented by increased development assistance. I
strongly encourage others to follow suit.

As already mentioned, the vicious cycle of direct
and indirect violence has to be broken. Security
cannot be achieved through bombs or rockets, war or
violence, humiliation or threats. Genuine security can
be achieved only through peace. We need to take our
responsibility. We owe that to the children and future
generations in Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Syria and
other countries in the region. We need to restore the
hope of a better future.

