Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The aim of
the co-sponsors of this resolution is purely humanitarian;
no more and no less. We have devised a system which
could substantially alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi
people, with whom we have never had any quarrel. My
Government has been concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Iraq since 1991, when the Council adopted
resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991), which offered Iraq
the possibility of exporting oil in exchange for
humanitarian supplies. We deeply regret the refusal of the
Government of Iraq to operate that scheme. It bears a
heavy responsibility for the suffering of its people.

Our determination to do something about this major
humanitarian problem led us to see whether there were
ways in which we could improve the earlier scheme. In
drafting this resolution we took careful account of the
concerns expressed by the Government of Iraq during the
abortive negotiations they held with the United Nations
Secretariat on implementing resolutions 706 (1991) and
712 (1991). We have also listened carefully to views
expressed by other Council members. The text we have
just adopted represents a serious attempt to meet those
concerns. The scheme it establishes is more generous and
more flexible than the earlier arrangements provided for
in resolutions 706 (1991) and 712 (1991).
Iraq will remain subject to a regime of sanctions
imposed under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter
until it complies fully with all the Security Council's
relevant resolutions. That is the reason for the detailed
provisions of this resolution. That is why we have
provided for independent inspection agents to ensure that
Iraq does not export more oil than it is entitled to under
the provisions of this resolution and does not under-price

 

it. That is why we have insisted that all the proceeds of the
oil sales should be deposited in an escrow account. That is
why we have asked the Secretary-General to ensure that
there is equitable distribution of the humanitarian assistance
to all the Iraqi people.

We have been compelled in this resolution to allocate
between $130 million and $150 million to be spent in the
three northern Governorates of Iraq by the United Nations.
This is not because the Security Council does not respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We do
respect Iraq's sovereignty and its territorial integrity, even
if Iraq itself has not always been so respectful of its
obligations in this respect towards its neighbours; and we
have made our respect for those principles clear in this
resolution. But it is Iraq itself that imposes an economic
blockade against its three northern Governorates. The
provision for the North is simply intended to ensure that the
inhabitants of the three northern Governorates receive an
equitable share of the humanitarian goods to be purchased
with the proceeds of the oil sales. It is not politically
motivated. It is simply intended to ensure that all Iraqis,
and not just some of them, benefit from the sale of oil
provided for in this resolution.

We have also made it clear that this resolution is a
temporary measure. It is not intended to substitute for the
action that will be taken on sanctions when Iraq complies
with all its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The recent reports of the Special Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency make it clear
that such compliance by Iraq with the provisions of the
Council's resolutions relating to weapons of mass
destruction is not just round the corner. The continuing
problems over the missing Kuwaiti and other nationals,
over the return of Kuwaiti property and over Iraq's
repressive record on human rights demonstrate very clearly
that Iraq is still far from fulfilling the conditions that could
justify lifting sanctions: all the more reason, therefore, for
the Council not to ignore the suffering of the Iraqi people.

It is our earnest hope that Iraq will decide to cooperate
in the implementation of this resolution. It is a reasonable
and workable scheme. It should enable Iraq to import
substantial amounts of food, medicines and other
humanitarian goods to meet the needs of its people. But in
case there are shortcomings we have provided for a review
of all aspects of the scheme just three months after it starts.
If the Secretary-General reports that there are problems -
for example, that the amount of money available for
humanitarian relief is insufficient, or that the Iraqi oil
industry is incapable of exporting enough oil to generate the
revenues provided for in this resolution - we will be
ready to look again at the details of the scheme and to
consider making the appropriate adjustments. We now
look to Iraq to cooperate in this scheme's implementation.
If it fails to do so, it will have demonstrated once again
its lack of concern for the welfare of its own people.

