Mr. Hill (Australia): We would like to take this
opportunity to thank Special Representative Hasegawa
and the staff of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL) for their dedicated efforts. We also
thank Ian Martin and his team, and congratulate them
on a thorough and professional investigation into the
situation in East Timor. We congratulate Minister
Guterres on his appointment and wish him well for the
future. The international community was quick to
respond to the deterioration in the situation in Timor-
Leste with the dispatch of an international stabilization
force, which has successfully restored security and
stability.

We have now all had the opportunity to consider
the Secretary-General's comprehensive report and must
focus on moving forward, in partnership with Timor-
Leste, to secure that country's future stability, security
and prosperity. Australia has been at the forefront of
efforts by the international community to assist Timor-
Leste. Along with Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal, we dispatched troops and police to Timor-
Leste in response to the crisis. We contributed
8 million Australian dollars to address humanitarian
aspects. We have provided 450 million Australian
dollars in development assistance to the country since
1999. We will provide an estimated 43 million
Australian dollars during 2006 and 2007. That will
involve a strong focus on strengthening governance
institutions, including in law and justice, public
administration and public sector financial management,
and improving delivery of services to rural
populations. And we stand ready to contribute to a new
United Nations mission in Timor-Leste.

As a close friend and neighbour of Timor-Leste,
Australia has a vital interest in ensuring that it develop
as a stable democracy, and we are willing to take a
leading role in the international community's efforts to
ensure a better future for the Timorese people.

The United Nations must also continue to play a
robust role in supporting Timor-Leste. The United
Nations should focus its resources on those areas of
key concern where the United Nations can make a
difference.

We welcome the emphasis on support for political
and community reconciliation contained in the
Secretary-General's report. To ensure long-term
stability, it is vital that the United Nations assist Timor-
Leste in resolving political difficulties. We welcome
the proposal to provide electoral assistance to Timor-
Leste ahead of next year's elections. Those elections
represent an important step in the country's political
maturation, and it is in the interests of all of us to
ensure their success. It is important, however, that
efforts to support elections give priority to ensuring
that Timor-Leste establish electoral institutions which
are, and are accepted by all stakeholders as being,
politically neutral, independent and professional in all
respects.

We are pleased with the priority given to policing
in the report. Public security is a prerequisite of
building both a democracy and an economy. We accept,
for the time being, the need to have a force with an
executive capability. We are pleased with the emphasis
on the community policing model, which will not only
best address local needs but also help build public
confidence.

We are pleased with the acceptance of the need to
help build a sustainable Timor-Leste police force that
will have the confidence and culture to be able to deal
with any future crisis of law and order in a fair and just
way. We will offer a significant contribution to
policing.

The security task for the future is primarily a law
and order one, but to be addressed by civilian police.
However, we accept that for some time there will be a
need for a military back-up to the police and for the
additional security of the United Nations personnel and
property that a military force can give. We also accept
the desirability of support from a military force while a
significant number of high-powered weapons remain
unaccounted for.
We are currently contributing up to 2,000 troops
to the international stabilization force. While we are
gradually drawing down our contribution as conditions
improve, we have indicated that we are prepared to
continue to provide a force that is required to meet
both of the needs to which I referred. In consultation
with Timor-Leste, we would seek regional participation
in such a force, which would provide both a rapid
deployment capability and security for the United
Nations. That would ensure a flexible force with its
own air mobility, which could, at short notice, be
bolstered to meet unexpected circumstances - a force
familiar with the environment and the tasks with
proven command and control. It would be cost-saving
and would enable the United Nations mission to focus
on the tasks that can be best done by the United
Nations and where a real need exists. With regard to
both the policing and the military tasks, we believe it is
important that the Security Council provide authority
under Chapter VII to permit the effective functioning
of the forces, together with the support that they are
entitled to expect.

The international community is again ready to
come to the assistance of Timor-Leste, and Australia
will play its part. A new United Nations mission
represents an important opportunity to repair and
rebuild those institutions which have been damaged or
destroyed during the recent crisis and to further
strengthen those institutions which have shown
resilience.

Above all, the United Nations and the many
friends of Timor-Leste in the international community
must lay the groundwork that will enable the Timorese
people to take responsibility for their own affairs.

