Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his briefing.

Taking into account the early renewal of the mandate,
we hope that Operation EUFOR Althea and the Office
of the High Representative will continue to cooperate
closely and play a constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bolivia reiterates its commitment to full respect for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, we emphasize
that safeguarding them requires that its Constitution and
the decisions rendered by the judiciary be respected,
in accordance with the rule of law. We also call on
political leaders and all parties to refrain from using
rhetoric that promotes the division of the country.

With regard to recent events, we commend the
holding of general elections in October and welcome
the fact that they took place in an atmosphere of calm.
However, we are concerned that the parties did not reach
an agreement on electoral reform. We therefore call on
them to work together in an inclusive environment and
to respect the Dayton Peace Agreement, which remains
the legal basis and benchmark for stability and the
peaceful settlement of disputes among the parties.

We also welcome the adoption of the amendments
to the criminal procedure code, a joint endeavour that
demonstrates the commitment of the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue undertaking the
necessary reforms in order to promote the country's
stability and contribute to the initiatives aimed at
achieving the development and stability they seek. We
therefore encourage them to focus on those aspects and
to intensify their efforts in implementing the 5+2 plan
as a prerequisite for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.

Despite those advances, certain challenges remain
with regard to the political environment. We call on
political leaders to pursue dialogue and take consensual
action. The challenges should not be an obstacle that
threatens the stability of the country. We urge all parties
to put the interests of their people before particular
political or ethnic interests.

Similarly, we call on local authorities, the
international community and all regional, subregional
and United Nations agencies to intensify efforts
to support the thousands of refugees who have
applied for asylum throughout the year, especially
with the coming of winter, since many do not have
adequate accommodation.

Finally, we encourage the entire population in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to live together in harmony
by overcoming the divisions of the past and putting
shared development first. In that regard, we urge the
international community to take a neutral and equitable
approach in considering the concerns of all parties with
a view to achieving lasting stability.

