Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We share the concern reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373), which
points out that civilians continue to account for the
vast majority of casualties in conflict and are the
targets of indiscriminate attacks and other violations.
The States Members of the United Nations must act
decisively to prevent conflicts, for conflict prevention
is the safest and least costly way to protect civilians.
To that end, the Charter of the United Nations, and its
purposes and principles in particular, must be strictly
respected. It is also essential to work to eradicate
the underlying causes of conflicts, in particular by
supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

The Security Council must fulfil its vital
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security by encouraging respect for international
law and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It should
refrain from supporting military ventures and from
resorting to the threat or use of force to resolve
conflicts. The responsibility for conflict prevention
and the protection of civilians during conflicts belongs
to States. The international community, the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations can
provide constructive assistance but cannot replace the
role of the Governments of the countries concerned.
They should support and complement the efforts of
national Governments when requested, impartially and
unconditionally, with strict respect for their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. It is
totally unacceptable for efforts to protect civilians to
be used to advance the geopolitical interests of certain
States or as a pretext for disregarding and violating the
principles of the Charter and meddling in the internal
affairs of States.

We firmly condemn the killing of innocent people
and the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of
force against civilians. Their protection cannot serve
as a pretext for legitimizing military interventions with
the aim of imposing regime changes and overthrowing
the legitimately established political, economic and
social order.

We recognize that humanitarian assistance
constitutes a fundamental component of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, but it must be provided
in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
international law, international humanitarian law and
General Assembly resolution 46/182. The guiding
principles of humanitarian assistance - humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence - must
be respected, and assistance must be provided in
accordance with international law and the national laws
of the countries concerned, and with the consent of
the host States. We reject the political manipulation
of humanitarian assistance and the imposition and
strengthening of unilateral coercive economic
measures, which cause severe deprivation and harm to
the very civilians they seek to protect.

All parties involved in hostilities must comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional. That also applies to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly those
with protection of civilian mandates. They must have
realistic and achievable mandates, with concrete, clearly
defined objectives and the necessary resources to avoid
jeopardizing the safety and security of peacekeepers.

Peace operations with robust mandates that allow
for the proactive use of force in the protection of civilians
have not always ensured a safer environment. The
flexible application or reinterpretation of peacekeeping
principles has increased the risk of threats and attacks
against United Nations personnel and affected their
integrity, credibility and neutrality.

As the Secretary-General's report reflects,
concrete improvements are possible, particularly if
arms transfers to unauthorized non-State actors are
prohibited, military expenditures and the exponential
development of sophisticated conventional weapons
reduced, lethal autonomous weapon systems and the use
of military attack drones banned, and war machinery
stopped and its resources reallocated to economic and
social development.

As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and
their Protocols Additional, relating to the protection
of victims of non-international armed conflicts, their
provisions remain in full force. The life and dignity of
persons in hostilities must be protected and respected,
without discrimination of any kind.

