Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. I too would like to welcome Mr. Nikola
Spiric', Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who is participating in our meeting
today. I should also like to thank Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and European Union Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
introduction of the thirty-first report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. As today's
briefing to the Security Council was Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling's last, allow me to wish him every success in
his future endeavours.

After months of heated campaigning, followed by
months of hard work to form governments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina at both the State and canton levels, a
federal Government has finally been successfully
established. We hope that governments will soon be set
up in the three cantons that still have none. We also
hope that the completion of the electoral process and
the formation of governments will make it possible to
refocus the country's energies on the necessary
conditions for the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, fully
implementing the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its annexes and
realizing the vision contained in the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

In the current circumstances, and in view of
progress made, the Peace Implementation Council
decided last February to extend, to June 2008, the
prescribed period before the closure of the Office of
the High Representative and to replace it with the
Office of the Special Representative of the European
Union. We hope this additional period will be utilized
to meet the conditions required for such a step.

Among the priority issues that must be addressed
in the next phase are constitutional reform, police
restructuring and reform of the economy and of the
defence, intelligence and public administration sectors,
as well as the permanent return of refugees, unification
of the city of Mostar in accordance with its civil
regulations, and finding a long-term political solution
to the problems that continue to sour relations between
the State and the people of Brcko. Regional issues and
uncertainty concerning the final status of Kosovo ought
not to affect the political debate now taking place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Those who committed crimes of genocide and
war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be
convicted and sentences must be carried out in order
for justice to be fully served. Full cooperation with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is
required, as is capturing the wanted indictees and
bringing them to justice. That cooperation is necessary
also because it is a requirement for the implementation
of the Dayton Accords.

We wish to express our satisfaction at the
resolution of an issue that has preoccupied us since
January last year - the decertification of police
officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, we
commend the enthusiasm of the United Kingdom
delegation during its Council presidency last month,
which culminated in the efforts of the High
Representative and the Government to reach the best
possible solution to this issue.

Continuing commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the part of the European Union and
NATO will be needed in the next phase, because the
EU Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
NATO presence have made essential contributions to
strengthening peace and maintaining stability in
general, within the framework of the military aspects
of the Peace Agreement and relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Now, more than a decade after the signing of the
Dayton Peace Accords, the time has indeed come for
the transition of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a stage
where it becomes a Viable European country rooted in
reform and characterized by modernity and democracy.

