Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate. I would also like
to thank the representatives of the Secretariat and of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
presentations made this morning.

I would like to begin by also thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/376), in
particular for the clear and unambiguous manner by
which a number of the most sensitive issues relating
to the protection of civilians have been addressed. In
that regard, I would like to take this opportunity to
add Uruguay's voice to those that have emphasized
the importance and necessity of redoubling efforts to
strengthen consensus and restore confidence in the
concept of the protection of civilians, which is based
on respect for universally accepted standards of
international law and international humanitarian law,
human rights and the rights of refugees.

We deplore the continuing violations of human
rights and humanitarian law, reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, that have occurred in
various armed conflicts, as well as the increase in
the number of victims among civilian populations
through various acts of violence, including sexual
violence, displacement, forced disappearances, the
torture of civilians, attacks on schools and hospitals,
the recruitment and exploitation of children, the
indiscriminate use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, and the impunity that the perpetrators
of such acts continue to enjoy.

Given that backdrop, the five challenges laid out
in the Secretary-General's report remain fully valid in
the situations of armed conflict existing today. In that
context, it is worth reiterating the continuing urgent
importance of facilitating access for humanitarian
personnel and of ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law on the part of all parties involved
and in every situation, in order to provide the security
conditions that will allow them to carry out their work.

I believe this is also an opportunity to recall the
references that the Secretary-General includes in
his report to various areas that are in need of further
attention and from which the protection of civilians
could benefit, such as the importance of improving
the record of victims. We are very conscious of the
importance of this activity, in line with the principles
of humanitarian law; first because of its relationship to
some of the values most intrinsic to human dignity, and
also because of its potential practical effects, since that
such a record could also shed light on the causes of the
harm done to civilians and on the measures necessary
to end it and prevent its recurrence.

Similarly, we agree that the forthcoming United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty represents
an extremely important opportunity to address the
human cost of the lack of regulation of the arms trade
and the wide availability and improper use of arms.
The treaty should rightly prioritize the humanitarian
dimension by, for example, including criteria that
would forbid the transfer of weapons when there is an
evident risk that they would be used to commit serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights norms.

The protection of civilians continues to pose a
significant challenge to the United Nations system,
and in particular to its peacekeeping system. Under
its mandates for protecting civilians that system has
not only one of the most delicate tasks there is but
also one of the activities by which the international
community judges the effectiveness of the United
Nations. As a country that contributes troops who
are deployed in some of the most difficult situations
under highly complex mandates, we understand the
importance of progressing towards a thorough and
inclusive conceptual and operational analysis of the
implementation of mandates for the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations, considering the
gap that exists between what the Security Council
mandates, the resources available to implement it and
the legitimate expectations of the affected civilian
populations.

In that regard, despite the fact that the challenges
remain enormous, it should be acknowledged that in
the past three years the United Nations system has
made significant strides forward in achieving more
consistency in the implementation of its mandates, in
diagnosing the problems and existing limitations, as
well as in seeking solutions, or at least remedies, that
focus on situations most urgently in need of protection
due to the imminent threat of physical violence. While
it is essential that such situations be addressed, at
the same time it is equally important to ensure that
such protection can be sustained once missions have
withdrawn.

In that regard, based on the cardinal principal
that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians falls to the host country, the United Nations
system, including through its peacekeeping operations,
should conduct a more thorough analysis of how it
might contribute to strengthening national institutions,
particularly those that deal with providing security and
implementing the rule of law. Moreover, this should go
hand in hand with the comprehensive vision needed to
sustain the protection of civilians, including from the
perspective of development.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that Uruguay views
the issue of the protection of civilians as constituting
a multidimensional agenda that is informed by more
specific and closely linked themes, such as those of
children in armed conflict and of women and peace
and security, among others. It is therefore crucial that
progress be made with the greatest coordination possible
in order to generate synergies, avoid the duplication of
efforts and make the most effective use possible of the
instruments that the Organization can deploy on the
ground. That will enable better coordination between
all stakeholders involved, leading to more coherent
responses in the area of the protection of civilians,
particularly for those groups in vulnerable situations,
who are most exposed and require grater efforts to
ensure their effective protection.

