As pointed out by several speakers before me, Iraq is facing several challenges. The Iraqi Government must act now and develop long-term measures to overcome them. It is crucial that all political actors show national unity and solidarity and allow Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi's Government to do all it can to move towards a democratic, peaceful and prosperous Iraq. We call on the international community to show its continuous support to Iraq in these trying times. The efforts of the Iraqi Government to combat the coronavirus disease and mitigate the effects of the economic crisis are welcome and should be supported. However, more attention should be paid to the impact of the crisis on vulnerable populations, including women and children. In order to improve long-term stability and respond to the calls of the people, we urge the Iraqi Government to accelerate structural reforms, including economic reforms, implement effective measures to counter corruption and enforce the rule of law. Furthermore, it is essential to carry out security sector reform and bring all armed forces under State control. It is positive that the Iraqi Government's programme is oriented in the same direction. We welcome the announcement of elections taking place in June 2021. We look forward to Iraq conducting free and fair elections, with continued electoral assistance by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We also urge the Council of Representatives to finalize the elections law. The efforts of the new Iraqi Government towards ensuring accountability for violations carried out during the demonstrations are a step in the right direction. Hopefully, those efforts will continue, with the ongoing engagement of UNAMI and relevant United Nations bodies. Although there are no longer violent crackdowns on protests, several worrisome incidents have occurred during recent months, including violence against protesters and arbitrary arrests of journalists, as well as killings of civil society activists. We call on the Iraqi Government to ensure the protection of human rights, including the freedom of expression and assembly, and to hold the perpetrators to account. Regarding regional developments, I would like to stress the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We call on all actors to refrain from any military action, which would threaten the stability of Iraq. Finally, concerning the issue of the missing Kuwaiti persons and property, even though progress has been limited owing to COVID-19 related restrictions, I welcome the commitment of the Iraqi Government to resolving the outstanding issues and the positive contacts between the two countries in this regard.
