I would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this important and timely meeting on the situation in Somalia. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, South Africa, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). This briefing takes place against the backdrop of Somalia embarking upon a political milestone of holding 2020-2021 elections and having witnessed the significant progress made by all Somali parties and leaders, especially with regard to the electoral model, timetable and procedures that will guide the implementation of those elections. The A3+1 would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in Somalia (S/2020/1113). We would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. James Swan, and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, for their briefings. We commend everyone involved for their abiding commitments and efforts to support the stabilization and continuing State-building processes in Somalia. Our statement today will focus on four important issues and developments in Somalia, namely, the political developments, which include the preparations for the elections, the security and humanitarian situation and the roles of the United Nations and African Union (AU) missions. With regard to political developments, the A3+l1 commends the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states for their recent important consultations and agreements reached, which constitute significant steps towards reaching broad political consensus on key issues, in particular the holding of the 2021 general elections. To that end, we welcome the agreement reached by Somali leaders on the electoral model and timetable, with a view to ensuring that the general elections are held as scheduled at the end of 2020 and in early 2021. We are encouraged by the unveiling of the draft national election security plan. It is our considered view that the holding of successful and secure elections in Somalia requires the full participation of, and information-sharing and coordination among, the police, the military, AMISOM and other international partners. That will further demonstrate that Somalia is making notable progress in addressing its security concerns and to countenance the propaganda and destabilization efforts of armed groups. Similarly, we applaud all Somali political stakeholders, including civil society organizations, for their commitment to consolidating democracy, in particular with a view to ensuring the holding of timely and credible elections, guaranteeing the 30 per cent quota for women's representation in Parliament and upholding the imperative to protect Somalia's sovereignty, independence, stability and unity. We urge all stakeholders in Somalia to maintain that spirit of national ownership and cooperation going forward, in all aspects, in order to reach broad-based agreements on critical matters such as advancing their aspiration of moving the country towards one-person, one-vote elections in future, concluding the drafting of the Federal Constitution and establishing security and power-sharing arrangements, among others. In that respect, the A3+1 congratulates His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble on his election as the new Prime Minister of Somalia and on his new inclusive and representative Cabinet. We hope that the new Government will continue to build on the significant advances made by Somalia in recent years with regard to its political, economic and security priorities. The A3+l remains concerned about the continuing volatile security situation in Somalia. We strongly condemn all attacks, in particular those carried out by Al- Shabaab using improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and vehicle-borne IEDs against Somali civilians, security forces, AMISOM, the United Nations and the international community, including on critical infrastructure. We therefore pay tribute to the ultimate sacrifice of AMISOM personnel and the Somali security forces in their quest to bring peace, stability and development to Somalia. We underline that those responsible for those heinous crimes should not go unpunished. We reiterate our previous calls urging the Federal Government of Somalia - with the support of the United Nations, AMISOM, UNSOM and international partners - to continue the generation, training and resourcing of capable, efficient and effective Somali national forces who will ultimately take over the country's security responsibilities, in line with the revised Somali transition plan and the national security architecture. The recent decision of the Security Council to further ease the arms embargo in Somalia will contribute to strengthening the capacity and capabilities of the Somali security forces. We strongly condemn the reported incidents of civilian casualties and conflict- related sexual violence, which continues to disproportionately affect women and girls. We also strongly condemn the grave violations against children, including abduction, recruitment, use, killing and maiming, that have been registered during the period under review. More effective measures must be taken to prevent those violations, consistent with international human rights law and international humanitarian law. We therefore support the calls urging that all perpetrators of such crimes be identified and held accountable. On the humanitarian situation, Somalia has been impacted by the triple threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, desert locusts and floods. Those challenges have deepened Somalia's humanitarian crisis. COVID-19 in particular has exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupted socioeconomic gains and affected the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis. We commend the actions undertaken by humanitarian partners to expand their support for the Somali authorities in order to address the impact of COVID-19. The A3+1 notes that the adverse impact of flooding due to climate change remained widespread in Somalia during the period under review. We are concerned that that situation will continue to exacerbate the displacement of people, food insecurity and the outbreak of water-borne diseases, as well as to adversely affect the livelihoods of those made most vulnerable across the country. In that respect, Somalia requires the continued support of the international community and humanitarian partners to mitigate the impact of the triple threat. We support the call by the Secretary-General for the additional funding that is urgently needed to continue to deliver humanitarian assistance. We regret that the security situation remains a major constraint to humanitarian operations. We strongly condemn the recorded and continuing violent incidents against humanitarian operations and providers, including recorded incidents that led to the killing, abduction and, in some instances, detaining of humanitarian workers. Furthermore, we take note of the attacks against journalists and violations of the freedom of expression mentioned in the Secretary-General's report and encourage the Somali authorities to take the necessary measures to address those issues. The A3+1 recognizes the critical socioeconomic challenges facing Somalia, which have negatively impacted the expansion of some security activities, including liberating more areas. In spite of those challenges, we commend Somalia for the progress it has made in meeting all structural benchmarks in the first International Monetary Fund review mission under the Extended Credit Facility. We further welcome the supplemental Development Policy Financing operation from the World Bank to support the triple crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic, desert locusts and floods. Those support measures have ensured that the Somali economy remains resilient amid the ongoing challenges. On the role of the United Nations and AU missions, we commend the sustained commitment of the United Nations through UNSOM and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), AMISOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service, the Federal Government and the federal member states of Somalia and international partners for their continuing efforts and the progress in bringing about stabilization and deepening federalism and State-building in Somalia. We are concerned that the United Nations trust funds in support of AMISOM and the Somali security forces are seriously underfunded. That will have a negative impact on AMISOM and the Somali security forces pertaining to the provision by UNSOS of essential logistical support, training, mentoring and equipment to counter the threat of IEDs. We call for more contributions to those trust funds, as the lack of funding may erode the gains made by Somalia, as supported by the United Nations and African Union missions. We urge a continued and strengthened working relationship between AMISOM and UNSOM to assist Somalia in taking ownership of its own security challenges, as envisaged by the Somali transition plan. We look forward to the finalization of the updated transition plan, which will guide the handing over of security responsibilities from AMISOM to the Somali security forces. However, we reiterate that the withdrawal and eventual exit of AMISOM from Somalia should be conditions-based and dependent on the security situation in the country. The A3+1 supports the continuing presence of AMISOM and UNSOM in Somalia, as the current security situation remains volatile and is characterized by frequent terrorist attacks. We also concur with the observations of the Secretary- General that a successful transition is contingent upon Somalia having adequate institutions, the generation of forces and the enhancement of the oversight, management and sustainment capacities of the Somali security services, including through financial, operational and logistical support. More efforts must be directed towards the realization of those benchmarks. We also recognize the relevance of conducting regular assessments and reviews of the assistance provided to Somalia by the United Nations and the African Union. We wish to underline the critical importance of soliciting and taking into account the views of relevant key stakeholders on the continent, including the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and troop- and police- contributing countries concerning future international support to Somalia beyond 2021. There can be no real progress in Somalia or elsewhere on the African continent without the active participation and contribution of its peoples in seeking solutions to African problems and in seeking to silence the guns. In conclusion, we appreciate the continued efforts of regional and subregional partners and the international community, including the United Nations, the AU, the European Union and IGAD, among others, in bringing political stability to Somalia and the region and in support of Somali-led and Somali-owned peace, security and peacebuilding processes.
