The President (interpretation from French): At the
outset of the meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to express deep sympathy to the
Government and people of the United States and to the
Governments and peoples of the other countries whose
citizens lost their lives as a result of the air disaster
concerning flight TWA 800.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi

Letter dated 22 July 1996 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/591)

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hajayandi
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1996/591, which contains the text of a letter dated
22 July 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at
recent information on political developments in
Burundi. It strongly condemns any attempt to
overthrow the present legitimate Government by
force or coup d 'e'tat.

"The Security Council takes note of the letter
dated 22 July 1996 from the Secretary-General to
the President of the Council (S/ 1996/591). The
Council condemns the massacres of civilians
including that of more than 300 women, children
and elderly men in Bugendana commune in Gitega
province. The Council calls upon all parties to the
conflict in Burundi to cease immediately any acts of
violence and to cooperate fully with all those who
are seeking to bring an end to the vicious cycle of
violence. The Council urges all parties to exercise
restraint and requests the Burundi authorities to
conduct a proper investigation of the massacre.

"The Security Council once again urges the
authorities and all parties concerned in Burundi to
set aside their differences, renounce the use of force
and demonstrate a firm political will for the prompt
settlement of the conflict.

"The Security Council deplores the recent
forced repatriation of Rwandan refugees from
refugee camps in Kibezi and Ruvumu and calls upon
the Government of Burundi to honour its obligations
under the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees of 28 July 1951, and to desist from further
refoulement of refugees. The Council is also
concerned at reports of Rwandan cooperation in the
forced repatriation process.

"The Security Council supports the efforts of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and urges all parties to work with
UNHCR to ensure that the rights of refugees are
respected. The Council calls upon the international
community to respond favourably to the recent
appeal to fund their activities in the region.

 

"The Security Council stresses its full support for
the efforts of former President Nyerere including the
agreements of the Arusha Regional Summit of 25 June
1996 (S/l996/557), and welcomes the full support of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) for these
agreements. The Council supports also the acceptance
by the Arusha Regional Summit of the request by the
Government of Burundi for security assistance in
order to complement and reinforce the Mwanza peace
talks as well as for creating conducive security
conditions for all parties to participate freely in the
Mwanza process. The Council encourages all parties
to work in a constructive manner with former
President Nyerere. It urges the Government of
Burundi to grant permission to the International
Technical Committee, established at the Arusha
Summit, to enter the country in order to work out the
logistics of the regional peace plan.

"The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of the continued cooperation of the United Nations
with the OAU, the European Union, the United States,
and other interested countries and organizations in
coordination with former President Nyerere, aimed at
achieving a comprehensive political dialogue between
the parties in Burundi. In this regard, the Council
expresses its support for the efforts of the OAU and
its observer mission (MIOB) and welcomes the
extension of the mandate of MIOB.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
it attaches to the contingency planning called for in
paragraph 13 of resolution 1049 (1996), and notes
the consultations which have already taken place. In
the light of recent developments, it requests the
Secretary-General and Member States concerned to
continue to facilitate contingency planning for a
rapid humanitarian response in the event of
widespread violence or a serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in Burundi.

"The Security Council reminds all Burundian
parties of their responsibilities for restoring peace
and stability in Burundi, and underlines its
commitment to follow events in Burundi closely and
recalls its readiness, as set out in resolution 1040
(1996), to consider the adoption of further measures
should the parties fail to demonstrate the necessary
political will for a peaceful solution to the crisis.
The Council will remain seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l996/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.30 pm.

