Mr. Gata MaVita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Madam
President, I would like to express how honoured we are
to see you presiding over the Security Council today.
You represent Luxembourg, a country with which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo enjoys a long
relationship marked by mutual esteem and respect. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor, the representative of Lithuania, and
to congratulate her for the commitment and skill with
which she headed the Council during the past month.

I should also like to convey to the Security Council
the gratitude of the people and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the United
Nations efforts to uphold the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country and to ensure its peace and
stability.

Finally, I would like to pay tribute Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, whose interest in working to
consolidate peace in my country led to his personal
involvement in bringing together the leaders of the
Great Lakes region and Southern Africa for the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
That agreement was concluded in Addis Ababa on
24 February 2013.

My delegation has taken note of the Secretary-
General's report on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2014/153), as
well as the Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/157), which
the Council is currently discussing.

My delegation is pleased to note that the two
reports both acknowledge the efforts of my country
in the implementation of its commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. For the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the implementation
of the Framework - which for the first time lays the
foundations for sustainable peace in the east of the
country and for peaceful cohabitation between it and
its neighbours, especially those of the east - should
be emphasized. That Framework and resolution 2098
(2013), which reinforces the Framework, represent major
innovations, both in stemming the crisis that has been
rampant in the Great Lakes region since the mid-1990s
and in the traditional United Nations peacekeeping
doctrine. For the long-suffering people of the region,
the Framework and the resolution are striking proof of
the determination of the international community to
help find a definitive solution to the instability that has
lasted far too long and has cost my country greatly.

From that perspective, my delegation would like to
endorse the appeal launched by the Heads of State and
Government of the signatory countries of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework at the high-level
meeting of the regional oversight Mmechanism, which
took place in Addis Ababa on 31 January 2014, in which
they called upon the countries of the region to cooperate
and undertake necessary measures to neutralize armed
groups; to combat impunity for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, conflict-related sexual violence and
other gross violations ofhuman rights; and to undertake
appropriate actions against those persons subject to the
United Nations sanctions regime.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
determined to assume its share of responsibility so that
peace and concord return to the region. To that effect,
as soon as the Framework was signed, the Congolese
Government undertook to fulfil its obligations. It is
pursuing its efforts to conclude security sector reform.
Reforming the structures and staffs of the army, the
security services and the police; recruiting Congolese
youth from all provinces of the country into the defence
forces; reopening military academies; and training,
with help from bilateral partners, of special forces
and support units, with the primary goal of making
operational the rapid-reaction force - all those concrete
actions have already begun and the Government will
bolster them so as to make the defence of our territory
more effective and to better guarantee the authority of
the State.

As stressed by the Secretary-General in his
two reports, the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, promulgated
on 11 February 2014 the law on amnesty for rebellion,
war and political crimes committed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between 18 February 2006 and
20 December 2013.

One month ago, after his statement before the
Lower Chamber of Parliament, the Chair of the
Independent National Electoral Commission met with
political parties and groups. That meeting, which
marked the launch of the 2014-2016 electoral cycle, led
to the unanimous adoption of the new Code of Conduct
for political parties and candidates. As of 10 February,
the Code had been signed by 233 political parties.

Within the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
I wish to recall that on 26 December 2013 the
Council of Ministers adopted the third national plan
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
The identification of combatants from armed groups
in North Kivu, regrouped into the Bweremana and
Kanyaruchinya sites, has been completed. Those who
are eligible under the plan will be consistently evacuated
to triage centres for DDR operations. Meanwhile,
the evacuation to the Kitona triage centre of Bakata-
Katanga ex-combatants who fulfil the conditions
continues.

Furthermore, as my country's President announced
in his address to the nation on 31 December, the
decentralization process will soon start with the
establishment of the new Government, against the
background of the gradual establishment of new
provinces, the devolution of central Government
financial services to the provinces and the establishment
of the national stabilization fund.

The Council will recall that, after the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the President,
the Supreme Commander of the Forces arme'es de
la Republique democratique du Congo, ordered the
forcible disarmament of all national and foreign armed
groups still active throughout the country who refused
to respond to the offer of voluntary disarmament.

In the area of operations, the pursuit of rebels who
rejected the DDR programme began with the launch of
the campaign to restore peace to the east by the Forces
arme'es de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) on 16 January. Operations are progressing
satisfactorily against the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) in North Kivu and in the southern part of that
province, and against the Rwandese rebels of the FDLR
in South Kivu.

In that vein, Mr. Martin Kobler recently welcomed
the FARDC operations against the FDLR and the
armed groups and announced the support and close
engagement of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) with the Congolese army
to neutralize the FDLR. As the spokesperson of the
Government said during a press conference on 7 March,
Mr. Kobler has also requested, in a communique to the
FDLR rebels, that they immediately stop supporting
their leaders who are being prosecuted, or expect to be
forcibly disarmed.

Along those same lines - to take up the idea
expressed on 26 February before the American Senate
by the Special Envoy ofthe United States ofAmerica for
the Great Lakes Region - if the countries sheltering the
defeated elements of the M-23 fail to hand them over to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and international
justice, they will have the great responsibility, in line
with the provisions of the Framework, to ensure that
those individuals do not resume their hostile activities.

With regard to the support of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the FDLR,
which the Ambassador of Rwanda has just spoken
of, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during
a previous Council meeting (see S/PV.7107), made
the Council aware of the Government's efforts in the
pursuit it had already conducted with the Government
of Rwanda. Subsequently, those efforts were continued
by my Government alone, and then with the help of
MONUSCO. As we have already told the Council,
those efforts were interrupted after the M-23 rebellion.

As I have just said, now that the M-23 rebellion
has been put down, it was the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that asked the Council to establish the
Intervention Brigade. The Brigade was established at
the request of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and on it the Council conferred the mandate to eradicate
all the opposition forces in the region, as well as the
various armed groups. That task - as I have said, and
Mr. Kobler is present - has begun.

As we have always said, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not interested
in supporting the FDLR. The FDLR has been present
in Rwanda since the Rwandan genocide. The Council
knows well that the FDLR did not come to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo at our country's
request. It was because the Democratic Republic of
the Congo wanted to be hospitable by welcoming the
Rwandan people who were fleeing the genocide. That
is how those responsible for the genocide came to the
country.

Today the problem has become a problem of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is constantly
having to deal with it. It is certainly the Democratic
Republic of the Congo that is suffering because the
FDLR, since coming to our country, has been killing
the Congolese. Congolese women are being raped.
Congolese villages are being burned. We are the ones
suffering from the FDLR. Unless one is cynical, can one
believe that a Government Whose people are suffering
from such acts can support those criminals? No, one
cannot. I said that the last time to the Ambassador of
Rwanda, who, as the Council, knows, continues to talk
about the genocide, soon to be commemorated. But he
should not be cynical about the Congolese people, who
are suffering.

In the eastern part of my country, we have lost
more than 6 million people, who have died. As I said
here last time, if the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was not involved in the Rwandan genocide, could
Rwanda not help us regarding the 6 million people who
have died in the east? One should not make fun of the
Congolese people because the Congolese Government
has no reason to support the FDLR. We have no interest
in supporting it.

Mr. Kobler works in the region. He can attest to
that. Yesterday, as the Council knows, when the experts
presented the report here, what were the accusations
of the Rwandan representative? In condemning the
experts' report he was also criticizing MONUSCO.
He said that MONUSCO was also cooperating with
the FDLR. I believe that to be in bad faith, because
Rwanda supports that element, which allows it to carry
on destabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is a pretext, and he knows that today, if the Council
removes that pretext there will no longer be any reason
to be in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
carry out such activities there. I therefore appeal to
the international community and all Security Council
members to help us to resolve the situation, in which
my country is truly innocent. We cannot tolerate being
accused here without grounds.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo should be undertaken in the spirit of paragraphs
9, 10, 11 and 12 of resolution 2098 (2013), of 28 March
2013, by which the Security Council decided to extend
and complete, through the Force Intervention Brigade,
the mission it had been given to neutralize armed
groups, as set out sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 12 of
the resolution, which would allow it to reduce the threat
posed by armed groups to State authority and civilian
security in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and prepare the way for stabilization activities.

To that end, I congratulate MONUSCO, its
Intervention Brigade and the countries contributing
troops to it for the quality of the work done throughout
the first term now coming to a close. The work of the
Intervention Brigade, working side by side with the
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
led to the defeat of M-23, was very much appreciated by
the Congolese people.

For my Government, the second mandate of the
Intervention Brigade, which will soon begin, should
bring success to the efforts already undertaken to
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and throughout the Great Lakes region. In the words
of President Kabila Kabange on the occasion of the
signing of the Framework Agreement,

"It is time, high time, that we guarantee our
people the right to life and sustained enjoyment of
the most precious good which they expect from their
leaders, namely, peace - not the peace ofbayonets,
and still less the peace ofcemeteries, whose essence
is artificial and ephemeral, but the peace that arises
from the recognition of a shared destiny, the will
to live together and responsibly address problems,
and respect for rules and principles, especially
those that we have just subscribed again by signing
the Framework agreement.

"That peace is admittedly demanding, but it is
the only one able to withstand the ravages of time
and the vagaries of history. It is not possible without
the sincerity of the actors, and it can only be built
in the context of truth. The truth is that, though
it has been repeatedly assaulted, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a country that loves peace,
has always respected the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all its neighbours. And it always will
be thus."

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity
to welcome the presence among us of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler,
and thank him for the dynamism that he has impressed
upon MONUSCO's activities in the field of operations.
I also wish to express our gratitude to Her Excellency
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for her
commitment and efforts towards restoring a lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
throughout the Great Lakes region.

