Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express my pleasure at
participating in this debate under your presidency,
Madam, to discuss the work of these three Security
Council Committees and their efforts to combat
terrorism and to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. At the same
time, I thank the three Chairmen for their
comprehensive briefings.

(spoke in French)

These three Security Council Committees
represent an important element of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, and there can be no
doubt that their actions towards that end contribute to
the overall efforts of the international community
aimed at assisting Member States in their efforts aimed
at fully implementing the Council's resolutions in this
field.

Morocco recognizes the primary role played by
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security and fully shares the
determination of the international community in its
resolute and united fight against terrorism, and it
reiterates its commitment to continue its efforts for the
full implementation of the Security Council's
resolutions in the area of the fight against terrorism in
all its manifestations.

Here, my delegation welcomes the valuable
cooperation and the rich dialogue which mark our
interactions with the three Security Council counter-
terrorism Committees and their expert groups. My
delegation welcomes the efforts made to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees with a counter-terrorism mandate, as well
as with the expert groups assisting them in discharging
their mandates.

Regarding the 1373 Committee, my delegation
welcomes with interest the ambitious programme of
work announced by the Turkish chairmanship of the
Committee, especially measures aimed at ensuring the
effective implementation of the obligations pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the continuation of
initiatives aimed at promoting the implementation of
the resolution through regular thematic discussions and
informal briefings with Member States, the most recent
of which related to maritime security and acts of
terrorism on the high seas.

Turning to the 1267 Committee, the Moroccan
delegation commends the continued efforts to improve
the effectiveness, credibility and transparency of the
three elements of the sanctions regime, especially
through the conclusion, which is expected in June, of
the process to review the entries on the consolidated
list. Here, my delegation would like to renew its
commitment to continue to contribute to that process
and to maintain dialogue with all relevant players
working to achieve our common objectives.

Finally, on the 1540 Committee, my delegation
takes note of the submission of its annual programme
of work for the period 1 February 2010 to 31 January
2011 and welcomes the activities planned to increase
awareness, consultation, assistance and cooperation in
promoting the implementation of all aspects of the
resolution. Likewise, Morocco welcomes the
confirmation of the approach adopted by the
Committee to strengthen its role in facilitating and
providing technical assistance towards implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), inter alia, by actively
matching offers and requests for assistance.

International efforts to confront the threat of
terrorism are essential, and they must continue without
pause. To be effective, they require solid, systematic
and unfailing regional and subregional cooperation.
Such cooperation, which is the main, crucial link
between national efforts and those of the international
community, is indispensable, especially in regions that
are the declared targets of terrorist groups and the
traffickers of all sorts who sustain it. That cooperation
cannot be successful unless it involves all the parties
concerned without exception.

Experience has also amply demonstrated that, in
the face of the breadth and sophistication of the means
that can be mobilized by terrorist groups, it is delusory
to seek to combat terrorism that targets a specific
region through either individual efforts or an
exclusionary partnership. The Maghreb subregion, to
which my country belongs, and the neighbouring Sahel
region continue to experience terrorist acts of which
the Security Council has repeatedly taken note. These
acts, unfortunately, once again prove that terrorist acts
against the security of these areas are far from being
eradicated. They also prove that national efforts,
howsoever significant, remain inadequate insofar as
they do not take place in a framework of genuine
partnership and mutual confidence conducive to
ongoing regional and international cooperation that is
effective and inclusive.

For our part, in line with our commitment to
combating terrorism since the issue was first placed on
the agenda of the General Assembly in 1979, Morocco
will continue to spare no effort to contribute to all
honest initiatives in support of collective regional and
subregional efforts to combat and eradicate this threat.
This commitment is inspired by our deeply held belief
that terrorism remains a complex phenomenon and
that, as a result, efforts to eradicate it must necessarily
be based on synergistic actions that include addressing
its underlying causes.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco would
like once again to reiterate its resolute and unequivocal
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and whatever its perpetrators, sources or
motivations. We also reiterate our genuine commitment
to work with our neighbours and with the rest of the
international community to eliminate it.

