I would like to thank The Honourable President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings today and for their recent reports. I also congratulate them on their reappointment. The reporting period was marked by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We recognize that this global health crisis affected the Mechanism's work and caused unfortunate delays to the estimated timetable. We wish to commend the Mechanism for remaining operational and continuing to carry out its mandate, while safeguarding the health and safety of its staff members, non-staff personnel and those in detention facilities. However, the important work of the Mechanism in bringing justice to thousands of victims is not yet complete. The commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year reminded us all of the importance of holding its perpetrators to account. Croatia takes note of the progress described in the most recent reports and supports the ongoing efforts of the Mechanism to complete its remaining trials and appeals efficiently and thoroughly. We still await judgement in the trial of Jovica Stanisi¢ and Franko Simatovic¢, as well as appeal an judgement in the Mladic¢ case. It is extremely important that the judgements in both cases not be delayed any further. The trial of Slobodan MiloSevie lasted so long that he died before a verdict could be rendered and contribute to a better understanding of the dominant role of his regime in conflicts and atrocity crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. Verdicts in the Stanisie and Simatovic and Mladic cases are the last opportunities to make it up to the extent possible. In addition, we would like to emphasize that, in the contempt of court proceedings against Petar Joji¢ and Vjerica Radeta, the latest decision by the Court, which was rendered only a few days ago, is clear. Serbia has to execute the arrest warrants and related transfer orders against the accused. And we underline once again the need for Serbia to fully cooperate with the Mechanism. Croatia remains committed to the continuing cooperation with other countries in the region on matters related to war crimes. In that respect, we appreciate the positive developments in cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which resulted in the transfer of some cases to the Croatian judiciary. Croatia hopes to achieve the same progress with Serbia in due time as well. Croatia is still awaiting Serbia's response to its invitation from September 2019 to the fourth and final round of negotiations, which we hope will result in the finalization of the draft text of a bilateral agreement on processing war crimes. The invitation was renewed in November this year. Croatia will continue its staunch support for the European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of the region, based on individual merit and fulfilment of all criteria. In that context, we underline the importance of effective handling of domestic war crimes cases without discrimination, including through meaningful regional cooperation and full cooperation with, and support to, the work of the Mechanism. The search for missing persons and mortal remains is one of Croatia's top priorities. It is not just a political issue; it is a humanitarian imperative. After more than 25 years since the end of the war, Croatia is still searching for 1,869 missing persons. Strengthening cooperation among countries in the region with the aim of clarifying the fate of the missing persons is of the utmost importance. In recent years, certain steps forward have been made regarding the cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, but when it comes to the cooperation with Serbia there is still no real progress in resolving this open issue. We hope that the recent meeting of officials responsible for the search for missing persons in Croatia and Serbia is a step in the right direction towards more meaningful bilateral cooperation on this topic. Croatia remains a strong supporter of international criminal justice mechanisms and believes that the Mechanism and other international courts are crucial cornerstones of the international rules-based order. Therefore, we will continue to offer our full support to the remaining work of the Mechanism, with the hope that the long-overdue justice in remaining cases will be fully served soon.
