The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Deputy Secretary-General, ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Poland, Qatar, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this
meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Christophe
Deloire, Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders, and Ms. Mariane Pearl.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/307, which contains a letter dated
1 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ian Eliasson, and I give
him the floor.

