Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted against today's
draft resolution (S/2017/172), on imposing sanctions
Syria, because its authors' concept, which by its very
nature is offensive and flawed, is totally unacceptable.
The fact that the draft resolution failed to receive six
Council members' votes out of 15 should give its authors
serious reason to think. The statements we have heard
have left us in no doubt that the draft resolution was
based on the Western capitals' anti-regime doctrine. As
for the insulting remarks about Russia, China and other
States, we leave them to their consciences and may
God be their judge. Let us try to sort out what really
took place.

When the draft resolution first saw the light, at the
beginning ofDecember 2016, we expressed our concerns
on a number of occasions, collectively and separately, to
each co-sponsor. Our scepticism about the conclusions
of the third and fourth reports (see S/2016/738/Rev.1 and S/2016/888) of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
to investigate cases of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria is well known. Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, late
Permanent Representative of Russia, had already made
detailed comments highlighting their uncorroborated
conclusions, and at that point we thought we had made
things quite clear. Apparently not. From the point of
View of their practical legal application, the JIM's
conclusions are not based on convincing facts on which
any sort of charges could be founded. Moreover, they
take no account ofthe fact that besides the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, there is widespread use of toxic
substances in Syria by the Al-Nusra Front as well as
numerous opposition groups on the ground, including
for purposes of provocation aimed at discrediting the
country's armed forces and its leadership.

The problem is that the work of the experts in
Syria is based on questionable information provided
by the armed opposition sympathetic international
non-governmental organizations, the media and so-
called friends of Syria. At the same time, the attitude to
requests from Damascus about the investigations is one
of shrugging contempt, as was clearly demonstrated
in the report of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission on
an incident that occurred on 2 August of last year in
Aleppo. No wonder, when two thirds of the Mission's
expert team was staffed by representatives from a
single group of countries. Its geographic balance is in
urgent need of correction. Let us be frank: the whole
thing strengthens the impression that the authors of
the draft text submitted for a vote today needed the
Joint Investigative Mechanism for the sole purpose of
laying responsibility for the use of chemical weapons
at the door of Al-Assad's Government, thereby creating
additional reasons for regime change in Damascus.
We should once again emphasize that this obsession
with that destructive geopolitical project continues to
be an obstacle to the ability to think clearly and weigh
decisions carefully with the goal of reaching a political
settlement, not just in Syria but in a number of other
trouble spots in the Middle East.

When we created the JIM. and agreed to extend its
work for another year, it was on the clear understanding
of the nature of the threat posed to this troubled
region by the use of chemical weapons by terrorist
organizations. Today that dangerous trend threatens
to spill beyond the borders of the Middle East. We
were led by the expectation that the Mechanism's
work would be founded on a basis of impartiality and
on established facts, not assumptions, conjectures or
fabrications. In that regard, the Mechanism needs to
seriously rethink the principles behind its work. We
believe that, as envisaged in resolution 2319 (2016),
the Mechanism's activities will go beyond Syria to
include its neighbouring countries, and that its mandate
will provide for real counter-terrorism measures.
Much remains to be clarified in that regard, including
enabling Damascus, in accordance with its obligations
under article VII of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC), to appropriately conclude a comprehensive
national investigation verifying the facts laid out in the
JIM's reports. What is there to say about a situation when
the investigators did not actually travel to the places
where the crimes were alleged to have been committed?

Based on the unconvincing findings of the
JIM's reports in today's draft resolution, there is no
justification for concluding that Damascus has failed
to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention or
has violated resolution 2118 (2013), despite the fact that
resolution 2118 (2013) was seen as a huge success for
the Security Council in its unprecedented disarming
of Syria's chemical weapons. The draft resolution
envisages applying sanctions similar to those that
have been imposed on other countries. Working from
this type of carbon copy is totally unacceptable. The
authors of the draft resolution have gone as far as to
propose financial, economic and other restrictions on
specific individuals and legal entities.

However, they do not bother to provide justification
for the establishment of sanctions lists. The JIM. has not
spoken about any Syrian officials, scientific institutions
or economic entities. This is a clear attempt to prejudge
the outcomes of the investigations. When agreeing
upon this draft resolution, we were told that it served
the goal of non-proliferation. However, if one reads this
voluminous document, it becomes absolutely clear that
the point is to levy sanctions against Damascus, under
imagined pretexts.

We are seeing a clear trend of bringing powerful
political pressure to bear on the Mechanism and
pre-programming the results of the investigation. The
Mechanism is being forced to set aside the principles of
objectivity, independence and impartiality, which were
set forth in the resolution tht established it. No lessons
have been learned from the past. I recall the tragedy
that occurred as a result ofthe pressure brought to bear
on the Special Commission on Iraq, and then on the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission. It seems the Council has forgotten that
this marked the very beginning of destabilization in the
Middle East. We have no right to repeat such a thing.

The annex of the draft resolution refers to a ban on
the provision to Syria of a large number of chemical
substances, the majority of which have nothing to do
with the CWC. An embargo on the exports ofthis country
can adversely affect the fulfilment of maj or agricultural
and economic needs, in particular given that there are
already unilateral sanctions in place. A ban on the
provision of helicopters, spare parts and services could
indeed be seen as an attempt to undermine the counter-
terrorism efforts being undertaken by Damascus, not
to mention the critical role played by small aircraft in
resolving humanitarian issues in an armed conflict.

We truly wonder against whom and to what end this
draft resolution has been crafted. It lay on the shelves
for three months and underwent no significant change
despite our numerous observations and the alternative
we proposed on how joint work could be organized to
combat chemical terrorism in the region. Nevertheless,
the draft resolution was brought to the Security Council
for a vote in the context of the efforts undertaken in
Geneva and Astana to establish an intra-Syrian political
dialogue to settle the crisis. This is a railroading of
the draft by the Western troika of permanent Security
Council members. We see this as an attempt to retard
and undermine current political and diplomatic efforts.
We have seen the same scenario before. They say one
thing and then do something completely different. The
sponsors were unable to recognize the inappropriateness
and untimeliness of measures; nor were they able to
recognize the real threat of chemical terrorism in the
Middle East. They do not understand that unilateral
and multilateral sanctions against Damascus will only
weaken the international counter-terrorism effort.

In spite of our consistent appeals, the sponsors
preferred a politically biased approach, leading to
confrontation and an exacerbation of the situation,
including in the Security Council. They heated things
up intentionally, well aware that the initiative had no
chance ofbeing adopted in the Security Council. In that
context, we had no other choice than to block this draft
resolution. The sanctions list contained therein was
taken from analogous American lists approved at the
beginning of this year by the outgoing United States
Administration. One should not turn it all around,
get it all backwards, create Virtual pictures. Today's
confrontation is not a result of our negative vote, it is a
result of the fact that the sponsors opted for provocation,
all the while knowing our position.

Furthermore, we would like to underscore that, in
voting against this draft resolution, we voted against
confrontation. By doing so, we demonstrated that
confrontation is doomed to failure. It should be a thing
of the past. We are sending a message: only through
cooperation will we be able to resolve the most difficult
of tasks and move forward in finding a solution to the
Syrian crisis. It is high time that we do so by creating a
broad counter-terrorism front.

