Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to thank
Croatia for taking the initiative to organize this open
debate on such an important issue. I would also like to
thank His Excellency the President of Croatia for
presiding over this morning's part of our meeting.

In fact, terrorism is already one of the most
discussed topics at the United Nations. There is every
reason for that, since terrorism constitutes one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Indeed, it concerns all nations, large and small, and it
takes its toll on human beings of every age, culture,
religion and nationality.

In other words, we all are vulnerable to this
global scourge. Thus, it requires a firm and united
response by all Member States. And that is why we see
each and every discussion on this issue, including
today's debate, as useful in helping us to better
understand various national and regional perspectives
so as to find common ground for joint and more
effective responses.

In that regard, I would like to add my voice to
those of previous speakers in strongly condemning all

acts and practices of terrorism. Terrorism is a crime
against humanity, and it can never be justified under
any pretext, regardless of its motivations and
objectives.

The recent heinous terrorist attack in the city of
Mumbai underscored once again the importance of a
firm commitment on the part of the international
community to effectively combat and eradicate
terrorism. Our hearts go out to the victims and their
families, who were targets of that monstrous crime
against humanity. It once again underlined the fact that
it is only through a coherent, consistent and resolute
stance on the part of the international community that
we can gain the upper hand against this scourge. We
therefore hope that our debate today not only will send
a strong message confirming our determination and
unity in the fight against terrorism, but also can
identify ways and means to further strengthen the
central role of the United Nations in global counter-
terrorism efforts.

In fact, this Organization has already made some
significant contributions to global counter-terrorism
efforts, primarily through norm-setting and capacity-
building. We commend those endeavours. However, we
can by no means consider our mission accomplished.
In the area of norm-setting, for instance, we ought to
finalize, without further delay, our work on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and present the international community with a
comprehensive instrument that would further
strengthen our efforts to combat terrorism.

As regards capacity-building, on the other hand,
the United Nations should continue to strengthen the
facilitation of technical assistance aimed at enhancing
the capabilities of Member States in the fight against
terrorism. We must help those countries that are willing
to shoulder their counter-terrorism obligations but lack
the necessary resources and expertise to do so.

In that context, we note with appreciation certain
steps taken, such as the recently introduced
Preliminary Implementation Assessment mechanism,
which is expected to identify areas in which countries
need to take additional measures for the full and
efficient implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001).

We also welcome the completion of the general
survey of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we are
looking forward to having the draft technical
implementation guide that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is currently
preparing. We hope that those initial steps will pave the
way for the United Nations to play a more regulatory
and guiding role in steering our counter-terrorism
efforts.

That said, we need to work on developing a
global monitoring mechanism that would not only
identify threats and perpetrators in clear terms, but also
highlight the weak and strong aspects of our
implementation of the resolutions and agreements that
we collectively underwrite. It is only through such
central and effective monitoring and follow-up
mechanisms that we will be able to fulfil our
commitments and encourage tangible and substantive
cooperation among Member States in a way that can
create a synergy of efforts.

Turkey, as an advocate of strong international
cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism, is ready
and willing to contribute to all efforts to that end. In
the light of our upcoming membership, we are also
looking forward to actively and constructively
participating in the counter-terrorism activities of the
Security Council in the next two years by sharing our
experiences and best practices on this matter.

Before concluding, allow me to briefly mention
the Alliance of Civilizations initiative, which was
launched in 2005 by the Secretary-General under the
sponsorship of Turkey and Spain. The initiative, which
is aimed at building bridges among diverse cultures
and religions through our common values and ideals,
could in fact be one of the most effective ways of
dealing with all forms of extremism, including
terrorism.

Finally, we thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. We are looking forward to
working with you in strengthening the international
community's fight against terrorism.

