Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank the French presidency for holding the open
debate on children and armed conflict with a particular
focus on children as victims of armed non-State groups.
It is our obligation to continuously raise our voices
against the immense suffering inflicted on children
in conflict-prone environments. This holds especially
true since child abuse is an ever more prevalent feature
of conflicts across the world, despite all preventive
and awareness-raising efforts invested by the States
Members of the United Nations and the coordinated
actions of international organizations.

We very much appreciate the briefings today's by
speakers who shared their valuable views on this issue
from various perspectives, and have thereby provided
us with additional ideas for action.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union,
and fully supports the proposals made therein. We
wish to especially emphasize our support for the
recommendation with regard to further strengthening
the role of the International Criminal Court in ensuring
accountability for crimes committed by non-State
armed groups against children.

Furthermore, Croatia supports all sixrecommendations
for ending and preventing violations of children's
rights by non-State armed groups, put forward by
the Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict to the
Security Council and Member States.

This year we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
the resolution 1612 (2005), through which the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict was established.
For more than 20 years, the Security Council has been
making serious efforts aimed at preventing and ending
the recruitment and abuse of children by non-State
armed groups. Yet it is evident that the gap between the
commitments and actual practice is still too wide.

In that context, allow me to highlight our strong
support to the ongoing campaign "Children, Not
Soldiers", jointly launched by UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and aimed at preventing the
recruitment and use of children by national security
forces. The campaign has substantively contributed
to the signing of national action plans with the United
Nations and has had a serious impact on improving the
situation on the ground in the countries concerned. Such
efforts also need to be fully extended to the activities
of non-State armed groups, since they accounte for 51
out of the 59 listed parties in the last year's report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/339). In doing so, we are
hopeful that we will witness more examples of success,
such as the recent release of several hundred child
soldiers in South Sudan.

We are witnessing horrific violence committed
by extremist non-State armed groups. The news about
abductions and brutal sexual violence committed
against children, as well as their active engagement in
armed conflicts, are almost becoming commonplace.
The abductions of schoolchildren by Boko Haram and
other extremist groups represent not only an abhorrent
crime, but are used systematically as a tool of war and
a strategy for spreading fear. Croatia believes that such
mistreatment of children has to be addressed decisively,
and supports the inclusion of abduction among the
listing criteria in our efforts to ensure that perpetrators
are held accountable.

However, prevention alone is often not enough. We
therefore need to invest more efforts into the successful
reintegration of children who have been exposed to
armed conflict. Developing a United Nations-assisted
action plan on this matter for the most affected States
would be highly welcome, as well as enhanced regional
cooperation in this particular domain. Our involvement
also needs to have a special focus throughout on the
protection of girls, who are particularly vulnerable in
armed conflicts as potential victims of rape, sexual
violence, sexual exploitation and early and forced
marriage.

In that context, I would also like to refer to the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups,
which Croatia has adopted, as a useful tool for
responding to the needs of children affected by the
armed conflict. Thos instruments recognize that in
situations of armed conflict, States and armed groups
are the actors with the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians. We believe that it is absolutely
crucial to pay continued attention to the specific needs
of children during and after armed conflict as part of
every effective Government policy.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
Croatia welcomes the intention of the French presidency
to further build on this debate by outlining key
recommendations, and intends to contribute concrete
proposals towards fulfilling our joint responsibility
to ensure childhoods free from fear and violence for
children all across the globe.

