Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Let me start,
Mr. President, by thanking you for organizing a very
pertinent meeting on Timor-Leste following the critical
situation the country experienced recently and with a
View to a Security Council decision on a follow-up
United Nations presence there. It is a particular
pleasure for me to welcome amongst us Foreign
Minister Jose Luis Gutteres. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ian Martin, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, for his insightful briefing.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by Finland on behalf of the European
Union. I would like, though, to make a few additional
comments.

We are pleased to note that the security situation
has calmed down after the unfortunate violent incidents
of recent months. Greece once more commends the
immediate dispatch and deployment of defence and
police forces by Portugal, Australia, New Zealand and
Malaysia in response to the relevant request by the
President and the Government of Timor-Leste.

At this juncture, we must not relax our vigilance.
The recent crisis demonstrated how fragile the stability
of that newly independent country is. In many ways,
the crisis itself further weakened State institutions,
such as the police. Clearly, the root causes underlying
the recent crisis - namely, youth unemployment and
unhealed wounds of the past - may yet reappear, so a
robust international security presence is needed.

Having played a crucial role in the creation of
Timor-Leste, the Security Council has, in our View, a
moral obligation to sustain the viability of the country
until such time as it can provide for its own security
and development.

As requested by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta, the
new mission to succeed the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) should have a police force of
considerable strength, backed by a small military force,
under the command and control of the United Nations.
That request is taken on board by the Secretary-
General in his latest report (S/2006/628).

We cannot fail to agree. Bilateral arrangements to
reinforce the internal security situation, though
welcome in the short term, cannot be a viable long-
term solution. The United Nations is in a unique
position to help stabilize security in Timor-Leste, while
at the same time providing aid for its economic
development. There are already many United Nations
agencies on the ground helping national authorities in
various humanitarian and development aid
programmes. What needs to be upgraded is the level
and quality of security provided to them, in order for
them to function in a stable environment. That can be
done only by a new United Nations mission that has
police and military components, as already suggested.

In any case, we are talking about a relatively small
force - nothing of the proportions of those that have
been dispatched to other parts of the world.

Such an arrangement would be in line with the
respect we have expressed for Timorese ownership,
would encourage the new Government of Prime
Minister Ramos-Horta in its endeavours and would
provide the necessary security umbrella for other
United Nations and humanitarian actors in the field. It
would thus underline the determination of the United
Nations not to let a nation with teething problems go it
alone.

The presence of an upgraded, multidisciplinary,
integrated new United Nations mission will also
provide the necessary help for the reform of the police
and the justice sector and would also serve to promote
national political dialogue and reconciliation. It would
also boost the sense of confidence of the Timorese
people in view of the presidential and parliamentary
elections to be held next year.

In closing, allow me to recall that we have to
learn from past experience. If we rushed to close down
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) - as is the prevailing sense right now -
we have to be very careful and not hurry this time.
Greece looks forward to working with the other
members of the Council towards achieving consensus
in formulating the most appropriate solution
concerning the United Nations mission that will
succeed UNOTIL.

