Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let
me express our thanks to Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Haysom,
Mr. Wais and Ms. John for their informative briefings.

I would like to take a moment to thank Nicholas
Haysom for his service as Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan and congratulate him on his new
position as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. We look forward to continuing our
close cooperation with him.

Today's briefing on South Sudan comes at a
decisive time in the country's history, as its leaders
signed a new Peace Agreement last week. As leaders
in South Sudan show their willingness for a renewed
commitment to peace in South Sudan, it is imperative
that the Council remain engaged. We must continue to
ensure that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) can support the people of South Sudan in
achieving sustainable peace. In that context, I will focus
on three issues: the political process, accountability
and UNMISS.
First, with regard to the importance of an inclusive
and genuine political process, we express appreciation
to all of the parties involved in the signing of the Peace
Agreement on 12 September. Let me especially thank
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This
is another chance at peace for South Sudan, and we call
upon all signatories to ensure that the Agreement is
respected and implemented. President Salva Kiir and
Riek Machar have a great and grave responsibility. It is
imperative that the peace process be inclusive. We must
not be naive - reaching an agreement on power-sharing
and security will not automatically lead to sustainable
peace. Building and sustaining peace in South Sudan
will require addressing the root causes of the conflict
and the commitment and inclusion of all actors.

Let me also stress the important role that the region
plays in ensuring a political process with concrete
results. Following unrelenting violence in South Sudan,
the Security Council imposed targeted sanctions and
an arms embargo in July of this year. Such measures
must be implemented and adhered to, especially by the
region. We consider the action taken on the ground to
be tentative steps in the right direction. For such steps
to endure, we must continue the targeted sanctions and
arms embargo, as they are crucial for ensuring peace in
South Sudan. The steps are indicative of the Council's
resolve to end the violence and protect civilians.

Secondly, concerning the need to ensure the
accountability of all actors in the conflict, we would
like to express our appreciation to the Government
of South Sudan for convicting 10 military officials
for the murders and rapes committed at the Terrain
Hotel in Juba. The Government of South Sudan
must build upon that important first step to ensuring
accountability. Once again, the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/83l) paints a horrifying picture. Sexual
violence in South Sudan is brutal, widespread and
systematic. It is despicable. We call upon the South
Sudanese Government to investigate all crimes. All
perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice,
in particular those responsible for the despicable acts
of sexual violence against women and girls. Impunity
must end. Accountability is key for building sustainable
peace. We firmly believe that the hybrid court for South
Sudan is a key instrument in ensuring accountability
for perpetrators. We call upon the Government of
South Sudan to sign the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union to finally establish that
necessary court.

Thirdly, with regard to the role of UNMISS, in
order to adequately protect civilians, UNMISS and
other United Nations staff and humanitarian workers
must have unrestricted access to all parts of South
Sudan. Freedom of movement for both UNMISS and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism is absolutely imperative. The
maintenance and implementation of the Monitoring
Mechanism is crucial, especially following the
signing of the new Peace Agreement. The Council
must strongly condemn all violations of the status-of-
forces agreement and ensure that they are adequately
addressed. On that note, we condemn the recent attacks
against peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. There
have been two incidents, which resulted in either the
death or serious injury of peacekeepers. On 26 June, a
Bangladeshi Blue Helmet lost his life. On 15 September,
three days after the signing of the Peace Agreement, a
Nepalese Blue Helmet was injured. Our thoughts are
with the families and friends of those peacekeepers.
The attacks must end. Furthermore, we are increasingly
concerned about rising tensions in protection-of- civilian
camps. We encourage the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons from protection-of-civilian sites.
We believe that UNMISS should develop plans and
strategies to ensure that the Mission is able to protect
civilians at protection-of-civilian camps. It must do so
in close coordination with other humanitarian actors.
The protection of civilians is one of the most important
tasks in the UNMISS mandate.

In conclusion, we are committed to building
sustainable peace in South Sudan. We look forward
to continuing to support the South Sudanese people in
building a more hopeful future for themselves - one in
which they are not plagued by the scourge of war and
hunger, but, rather, can live together in peace.

