The Secretary-General: I have been following
closely the reports of air strikes in Syria conducted by
the United States, France and United Kingdom. Last
night at 10 pm. New York time, the United States
President announced the beginning of air strikes with
the participation of France and the United Kingdom,
indicating they were targeting the chemical-weapons
capabilities of the Syrian Government to deter
their future use. The statement was followed by
announcements from Prime Minister May and
President Macron.

The air strikes were reportedly limited to three
military locations inside Syria. The first targets
included the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre at Al-Mazzah airport in Damascus, the second
an alleged chemical-weapons storage facility west
of Homs and the third an alleged chemical-weapons
equipment storage site and command post, also near
Homs. The Syrian Government announced surface-to-
air missile responsive activity. Both United States
and Russian sources indicated there were no civilian
casualties. However, the United Nations is unable to
independently verify the details of all those reports.

As Secretary-General of the United Nations, it
is my duty to remind Member States that there is an
obligation, particularly when dealing with matters of
peace and security, to act consistently with the Charter
of the United Nations, and with international law in
general. The Charter is very clear on these issues.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
I call on the members of the Security Council to unite
and exercise that responsibility, and I urge all members
to show restraint in these dangerous circumstances and
to avoid any act that could escalate matters and worsen
the suffering of the Syrian people. As I did yesterday
(see S/PV.823l), I stress the importance of preventing
the situation from spiralling out of control.

Any use of chemical weapons is abhorrent, and
the suffering it causes is horrendous. I have repeatedly
expressed my deep disappointment that the Security
Council has failed to agree on a dedicated mechanism
for ensuring effective accountability for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. I urge the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities and fill that gap, and I
will continue to engage with Member States to help
to achieve that objective. A lack of accountability
emboldens those who use such weapons by providing
them with the reassurance of impunity, and that in
turn further weakens the norm proscribing the use
of chemical weapons, as well as undermining the
international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture as a whole.

The seriousness of the recent allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in Douma requires a thorough
investigation using impartial, independent and
professional expertise. I reaffirm my full support for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and its Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic in undertaking the required investigation.
The team is already in Syria. I am informed that its
operations plan for visiting the site is complete and that
the Mission is ready to go. I am confident it will have
full access, without any restrictions or impediments to
its performance of its activities.

To repeat what I said yesterday, Syria represents the
most serious threat to international peace and security
in the world today. In Syria we see confrontations
and proxy wars involving several national armies, a
number of armed opposition groups, many national and
international militias, foreign fighters from all over
the world and various terrorist organizations. From the
beginning, we have witnessed systematic violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international law in general, in utter
disregard of the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. For eight long years, the people of Syria
have endured suffering upon suffering. They have lived
through a litany of horrors, atrocity crimes, sieges,

starvation, indiscriminate attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure, the use of chemical weapons,
forced displacement, sexual violence, torture, detention
and enforced disappearances. The list goes on.

At this critical juncture, I call on all States
Members to act consistently with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, including the
norms against chemical weapons. If the law is ignored,
it is undermined. There can be no military solution
to the crisis. The solution must be political, and we
must find ways to make real progress towards a
genuine and credible political solution that meets the
aspirations ofthe Syrian people to dignity and freedom,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). I have asked
my Special Envoy to come to New York as soon as
possible to consult with me on the most effective way
to accelerate the political process.

