Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, on behalf
of my Government, for convening this open debate. I
would also like to thank Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres for his report (S/2017/821) and to welcome
Mr. Mubin Shaikh and thank him for his valuable
briefing this morning. My Government would also like
to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, for her recognition of the results achieved
by the Colombian State, including in her briefing.
We reiterate our commitment to continuing to work
together to ensure that the violations committed against
children do not recur. We are sure that Mr. Gamba's Visit
to Colombia in November will provide an excellent
opportunity to go into further detail on the road map
that we will engage in together.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2017/892, annex), the complex and changing nature of armed
conflict represents one of the greatest challenges
for child protection. We agree with you, Madam,
in recognizing that, during the 10 years since the
International Conference in Paris on children involved
in armed forces and armed groups, some progress has
been made, despite the changing nature of conflicts. As
evidenced by this year's conference, we must renew the
commitment of States to combat the recruitment and
use of minors by armed forces and other groups.

Regrettably, Colombia is not a stranger to that
problem, owing to an internal conflict that lasted
more than five decades, with which the Council is
very familiar. Nonetheless, more than 20 years ago,
long before other countries were facing realities like
ours, we prohibited the recruitment of minors under
18 years of age into our national forces. Today, those
responsible for the recruitment of minors are solely the
illegal armed groups. Not only did the peace process
end the conflict, it also put victims, including children
who were recruited, at the centre of the process. As the
Security Council can attest at first hand, over the past
year 132 minors were released by the FARC and are
now being protected by the State in order to have their
rights fully restored.

Another important step was the establishment of
the National Reincorporation Council, which endorsed
the special programme entitled "A Different Way
of Life". The programme features a series of special
measures to reintegrate minors under the age of 18 who
were released from the ranks of the FARC, and seeks
to ensure that its young beneficiaries have the tools
necessary to help them make new plans and rebuild
their lives. It works to fully restore their rights, and
compensate, reincorporate and include them in society.

There has been a clear reduction in the number of
cases of recruitment over the years. Nonetheless, let us
continue to work on reducing the number of cases of
recruitment, with a View to ending that practice once
and for all. Colombia is determined to ensure that
children are not being used in armed conflict, while
also working to prevent re-recruitment, with particular
concern for minors of indigenous minorities and Afro-
descendant communities and those in marginalized
areas, through activities aimed at protecting them from
all human rights violations. We are committed not only
to preventing future cases of recruitment, but also to
providing children and adolescents who have been
released with other options. As stated earlier today by
your Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Madam
President, the path to reconciliation and a fair and just
society must begin with children themselves and, in
particular, with a focus on their education, because they
are the future.

