Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Sir, you
may have noticed that during my first statement I tried
to remain in keeping with the positive spirit of the
happy news we just received from Addis Ababa
regarding the signing of a temporary agreement on
Abyei. I do not wish to remain hostage to the events
preceding that agreement because, as we can see, it is a
step forward, despite our reservations with respect to
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM).

Nevertheless, given that the other side has
persistently repeated a number of inaccurate points
about the situation in Abyei and Southern Kordofan, I
have no choice but to refer to the violations committed
by the SPLM. in Southern Kordofan and Abyei.

The Sudanese Armed Forces intervened in Abyei
following a very long period of patience and restraint.
The former administrator of Abyei has failed to respect
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and withdraw his
troops from the border region in question. He has
attempted to establish facts on the ground in the region
by allowing in thousands of elements from the
Movement and other militias in an effort to change the
demographic makeup of the region.
Those actions and violations culminated with the
SPLM. attacking and killing many of our soldiers and
members of the armed forces who had previously been
members of the Joint Integrated Unit. When the SPLM
attacked the Joint Integrated Unit, comprised of our
armed forces and those of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), they killed many of our
soldiers. Since then, our armed forces had no choice
but to intervene to put an end to the violations
committed by the SPLM. in Abyei.

Council members may recall that we had stated
that the presence of our armed forces in Abyei was
temporary after events forced us to be on the ground.
We also stated that we would withdraw once an
agreement had been reached on security measures. That
is what we did, following the signing today of the
agreement in Addis Ababa. Our withdrawal was the
best testimony to the signing of that agreement. That is
the situation in Abyei.

Regarding the latest developments in Southern
Kordofan, on 4 June SPLM. forces attacked the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the police force in Umm
Dorien and then took control of that city. On 5 June,
elements of the SPLM. attacked Government forces in
the city of Talodi. On 6 June, the SPLM. attacked again
in the city of Kadugli, the capital of Southern
Kordofan, with the goal of taking control of it.
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu, who had lost local elections in
that state, was appointed governor. These attacks
caused the death, injury and displacement of many of
our soldiers and police, as well as innocent civilians.
Moreover, tens of thousands of civilians were forced to
leave the state. The SPLM. is responsible for all of this.

We did not want to go into the details of these
attacks, given the good news and intentions from Addis
Ababa. Nevertheless, we need to talk about this matter
in order to give a correct view of the situation. There
are many who misunderstand. I think some members
had prepared their statements before the signing of the
agreement in Addis Ababa. The war actions of the
SPLM. have never been condemned by the Security
Council. What we have seen is very timid
condemnation by the Council following the SPLM
attack against the joint forces of UNMIS and the
Sudanese Armed Forces. Must a strong condemnation
by the Council await a confirmed attack against
UNMIS and the Sudanese Armed Forces? When such
acts are not condemned, the party involved is
encouraged to continue. The result is the death of many
soldiers in the Sudanese Armed Forces.

Nevertheless, we would like to assure the
Security Council that the situation in Southern
Kordofan is under control. The security situation is
stable and life is returning to normal in the main cities
of the state. Our house has been put back in order after
these events, following the intervention of our armed
forces. We call on the Council to send a firm message
to the SPLM. condemning the violations that have taken
place in Southern Kordofan and calling for an end to
the cycle of violence and the withdrawal of forces, as
stipulated in the agreement between the two parties.
Repeated violations will make the anticipated peace
and stability impossible.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that the Government of
the Sudan is sincere in its desire to find a fundamental
solution to the situation in Abyei, Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile, in the framework of the efforts of
President Mbeki and other mediators. I reiterate our
call to the Council to support those efforts so that they
can bear fruit. We also urge the other side to end this
war, which has taken us backwards. We have taken a
positive step forward and we want to reach the end of
this road.

