Mrs. Machado (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Portuguese delegation for
the manner in which it has guided the work of this
Council. Its dedication to transparency and to the
involvement of all of the members of the Council and
the Organization in this body's work is a testament to

Portugal's commitment to the strengthening of
multilateralism.

In that regard, we understand the usefulness of
this stock-taking of the Security Council's engagement
with issues that have not traditionally been on its
agenda. The concept note circulated by your delegation
(S/20ll/6668, annex) is informative in recalling the
recent history of that engagement.

(spoke in English)

I am grateful to the Secretary-General for his
useful comments. I also welcome the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Yury
Fedotov, High Commissioner Antonio Guterres, and
Director-General Margaret Chan, and I thank them for
their very interesting briefings.

The large number of thematic debates and
briefings that the Council has held over the past few
years has demonstrated that Member States are
interested in engaging with the complex and
interrelated nature of global security challenges. It is
not enough to address only the most obvious and
immediate face of threats. The Council has been clear
regarding the need for a long-term View, which takes
into account both preventive actions and post-conflict
efforts to build truly sustainable peace.

However, there is the unavoidable issue of
legitimate action and potential encroachment. The
issue of Security Council encroachment on the
prerogatives of other United Nations bodies, in
particular the General Assembly, still worries a number
of delegations, including my own. The Council must
recognize and pay attention to the fact that a significant
number of Member States continue to be uneasy at the
political and legal implications of Council engagement
on issues such as climate change.

Faced with that scenario, our only alternative is
the path of genuine dialogue with the larger
membership and of extreme care in treating thematic
issues as direct threats to international peace and
security. A legitimate way to advance the discussion
without raising concerns is to highlight and explore
how the Council's security work can be better
integrated with the development and human rights
work of other actors. That is the approach we took in
promoting our debate on the interdependence of
security and development in February.

I will give two concrete examples. First of all, the
Security Council must have access to a greater scope of
information. Even though it does not deal directly with
economic, environmental or health issues, the Council
must know where those issues exist and the specific
way in which they interact with the security situation
in each specific situation on its agenda. The presidential
statements on development (S/PRST/2011/4) and on the
possible security implications of climate change
(S/PRST/2011/15) have language along those lines.

Secondly, in every thematic area, the Council
must work harder to understand the operational issues
that hamper the integration of the various aspects of
the reality on the ground. Certainly, the Secretariat
must do a better job of internal coordination and of
cooperating with the agencies, funds and programmes.
However, Member States must also work harder to
ensure the consistency of the guidance that they give
through the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Executive Boards and other organs.

Over the past few months, my delegation has had
the opportunity to discuss, in this Chamber, our
position on the links between security and such issues
as organized crime, HIV/AIDS and the adverse impact
of climate change. Today, I will briefly reiterate our
position on the last of those issues.

There are clear links between climate change and
development and between security and development.
The possible security implications of climate change
are far less obvious. In most cases, the exacerbation of
existing disputes resulting from the effects of climate
change arises from the lack of financial and
technological resources for adaptation.

That underlines the need for political, economic
and humanitarian approaches to those issues. While
security tools are appropriate to deal with specific
threats to international peace and security, they are ill-
suited to facing climate change. Effectively fighting
climate change and dealing with its myriad
implications must be a priority for the international
community. That underscores the importance of
redoubling our efforts to achieve ambitious results in
international negotiations on climate change.

The new challenges to international peace and
security are to be addressed using instruments that
promote capacity-building and the strengthening of
national institutions. That kind of cooperative focus
will inevitably be more effective and have more
sustainable results than attempts to punish, isolate or
repress. Assistance and cooperation, rather than
coercion, must be our watchwords.

