Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The Security Council has been seized of the
question of Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which poses a threat to international peace and security,
and it adopted successively resolutions 1160 (1998) and
1199 (1998). In implementation of those resolutions,
agreements were concluded between the Government of
Belgrade and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe on the one hand and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization on the other.

The States that constitute what is known as the
Contact Group recently met and unanimously expressed
their determination that those agreements should be
implemented. As provided in the agreements, they
concluded on an urgent basis a new Security Council
resolution in order to endorse the agreements and
therefore all of the provisions established in order to set
in train the mechanism for verification and
implementation.

The way is open to a peaceful settlement to the
question of Kosovo, but vigilance and commitment on the
part of all will be required. On the basis of resolution
1199 (1998), it is therefore incumbent upon the Security
Council, in the exercise of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, to

 

take the necessary decision. That is the objective of the
resolution just adopted.

The Council affirms that the unresolved situation in
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, constitutes a
threat to peace and security in the region and that it is
therefore acting under Chapter VII of the Charter. It
endorses the agreements signed in Belgrade and demands
their full and prompt implementation by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

The members of the Council are acting on the basis of
experience. Aware of the dangers and the threats, which
they witnessed in Bosnia and Herzegovina, they do not
want any recurrence of the violations of the safety and
security of those who, on the ground in a dangerous
environment, are entrusted with the verification and
implementation of the agreements.

The Council therefore welcomes the commitment of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to guarantee the
security of the Verification Missions, but it affirms that,
in the event of an emergency, action may be necessary to
ensure the Missions' safety and freedom of movement, as
envisaged in the agreements signed in Belgrade. This
affirmation on the part of the Council is welcome.

The provisions established by this resolution are in
the service of peace. The objective of each and all is a
peaceful settlement. The Council's decision supports the
persistent efforts of the negotiators and confers authority
upon them to persuade all of the parties and to contribute
to restoring peace and security in the region.

France therefore voted in favour of this resolution.
