Mr. Kebe (spoke in French): Allow me, Sir, to
convey the thanks of His Excellency Mr. Amara Essy,
Interim Chairman of the Commission of the African
Union, for the invitation you kindly addressed to him
to participate in this open debate. He sincerely regrets
that he was unable to come to New York because of
prior commitments. That is why he asked me to
represent him during these deliberations.

Sir, I should like to convey to you, and through
you to your country, Cameroon, heartfelt
congratulations on the your assumption of the
Council's presidency for the month of October.

The African Union welcomes this debate, and we
fully support it, because the Union believes that it is
the first step in a series of meetings to come between
the Security Council and the subregional organizations
on matters of peace and security. This debate coincides
directly with the objectives of the Working Group on
Africa established by the Council under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul.

This debate is timely, since the Central African
subregion, which has spared no effort to defuse
tensions and restore normal relations among its
members, has decided to deploy an International
Observation Force (FIO) in the Central African
Republic, responsible for, inter alia, security along the
common border between Chad and the Central African
Republic. The adoption on 18 October of the
presidential statement contained in document
S/PRST/2002/28, in which the Security Council said
that it supported the deployment of an International
Observation Force, is eloquent testimony to what the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
can do together in the area of the conflict prevention,
management and settlement.
What we think is crucial in this partnership is the
principle of shared responsibility - or sharing the
burden i in peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations should never give the impression that it is
abandoning its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
principle is today more relevant than ever before in
Central Africa. Within this partnership, we need to see
to what extent the Council can take over from the
regional and subregional mechanisms as soon and as
effectively as possible, once the financial and logistic
limits of these operations do not allow those
mechanisms to complete the peacekeeping operations
that they initiated.

The increasingly resolute commitment of the
African heads of State to make more effective and
more operational the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution in the African
continent is illustrated in the adoption by the first
regular session of the conference of the Union, held in
Durban, South Africa, of the protocol establishing the
African Union's Peace and Security Council. This
protocol defines the subregional mechanisms for
conflict management as being an integral part of the
continental mechanism, which has the primary
responsibility for promoting peace, security and
stability in Africa. The goal of the structural
relationship between the continental mechanism and
the subregional mechanisms is, first of all, to
harmonize and coordinate the activities of the
subregional mechanisms with regard to peace, security
and stability, and secondly, to ensure a real partnership
between the subregional mechanisms and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union within the
framework of the latter's mandate.

Central Africa has been ravaged for decades by
conflicts of every sort. That chronic instability has
always compromised efforts aimed at economic and
social development, despite the region's enormous
potential. Mindful of the fact that peace and political
stability are an essential requirement for development,
Central Africa has established several regional
cooperation frameworks and mechanisms for peace,
security, economic integration and development.

In order to support those efforts and support the
leaders of Central Africa in their quest for stability and
development, the African Union - which has always
worked in close cooperation with the subregional
organizations and with the representatives of the
United Nations on the ground - proposes the
following: first, to ensure the swift and effective
implementation of all resolutions related to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi; secondly, to develop a coordinated and
coherent United Nations policy in Central Africa that
would involve the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council through its
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries
Emerging from Conflicts, and the international
financial institutions in the rebuilding of the
subregion's countries; thirdly, to strengthen
cooperation among all organizations in the subregion
- the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community and the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries; fourthly, to make the Council for
Peace and Security established for ECCAS operational
and establish a working relationship between it and the
various United Nations departments and agencies; and
fifthly, to find, with the assistance of the international
community, a swift regional solution to the problem of
refugees and displaced persons in the subregion.

The African Union favours any new initiative in
this forum that might be undertaken with its member
States to support and strengthen their tireless efforts for
decades to restore peace and stability to their region
and to launch economic and social development
projects.

