The Russian delegation voted against draft resolution S/2020/797, submitted by the United State of America on the arms embargo against Iran. We consistently oppose attempts to impose through the Security Council an arms embargo on Iran. A case-by-case approval procedure for arms transfers to and from Iran in resolution 2231 (2015) has neither been linked to Iran's right to develop its peaceful nuclear programme nor subjected to any other conditions. Since the very start, it has been temporary; it was introduced for exactly a five-year term and was never meant to be extended. We continue to proceed from the assumption that there are neither legal nor any other reasons to review such an approach. Moreover, the United States proposal is a clear violation of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), which clearly stipulates that the only legitimate way to revise the timeline for the abovementioned arms transfer regime is a decision by consensus of the JCPOA Joint Commission. However, the United States forfeited the right to make use of this instrument since it deliberately and openly withdrew from the plan in 2018. Russia remains totally committed to the JCPOA. Its adoption in 2015 was a landmark political and diplomatic achievement that helped avert the threat of an armed conflict and reinforced nuclear non-proliferation. We strongly believe that there is an alternative to threats and blackmail, confrontation and coercion. The mutually acceptable solution lies in the field of multilateral actions that take into account the legitimate security concerns of all regional players. It is high time to launch a broad regional dialogue embracing all interested parties to de-escalate tensions and look for pragmatic compromise- based decisions. All of the concerns could be addressed if we treated each other's positions with due consideration and responsibility, while acting respectfully and in a collective spirit. Therefore, on 14 August, President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin suggested convening an online meeting of the Heads of State of the permanent members of the Security Council, with the participation of the heads of Germany and Iran, as soon as possible, in order to outline steps that could prevent confrontation or a spike in tensions in the Security Council. We circulated the text of his statement today as a document of the Security Council. At this leaders' meeting, the Russian Federation proposes agreeing on parameters for joint efforts to facilitate the establishment of reliable mechanisms in the Persian Gulf region for ensuring security and confidence-building. We call on our partners to carefully consider this proposal. Otherwise, we could see a further escalation of tension and an increased risk of conflict. This must be avoided. Russia is ready to work constructively with all parties interested in taking the situation back from the dangerous brink.
