The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like, at the outset of the meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the new representative of
Germany on the Security Council, His Excellency Mr.
Antonius Eitel. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him. We look forward to cooperating with him
in the work of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: 8/1995/563, letter
dated 12 July 1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United
A - vaJ A/I.'

 

Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a statement adopted on 11 July 1995
by the Organization of the Islamic Conference Contact
Group at its meeting on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina; 5/1995/571, letter dated 13 July 1995 from
the charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1995/572 and S/1995/573, letters dated 13 July 1995
from the charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/1995/574, letter
dated 12 July 1995 from the Permanent Representative of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting the text of a communique on
Srebrenica issued by the Presidency on 12 July 1995 on
behalf of the European Union.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1004 (1995). The Council is deeply concerned about
the ongoing forced relocation of tens of thousands of
civilians from the Srebrenica safe area to the Tuzla
region by the Bosnian Serb party. Such a forced
relocation is a clear violation of the human rights of
the civilian population. It is especially concerned
about reports of grave mistreatment and killing of
innocent civilians. It is equally concerned about
reports that up to 4,000 men and boys have been
forcibly removed by the Bosnian Serb party from
the Srebrenica safe area. It demands that in
conformity with internationally recognized standards
of conduct and international law the Bosnian Serb
party release them immediately, respect fully the
rights of the civilian population of the Srebrenica
safe area and other persons protected under
international humanitarian law, and permit access by
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

"The Security Council again condemns the
unacceptable practice of 'ethnic cleansing' and
reaffirms that those who have committed or have
A ,Auveu J v";

 

ordered the commission of such acts will be held
individually responsible in respect of such acts.

"The Security Council demands that the Bosnian
Serb party immediately allow unimpeded access to the
civilian population of the Srebrenica safe area by
international humanitarian organizations and cooperate
with any procedure established by those organizations
to determine which civilians wish to depart the area of
Srebrenica. It further demands that the Bosnian Serb
party respect fully the rights of those civilians who
wish to remain in the safe area and cooperate with
efforts to ensure that civilians who wish to depart are
allowed to do so with their families in an orderly, safe
way in conformity with international law.

"The Security Council demands that both sides
allow the unhindered movement of humanitarian relief
and cooperate with efforts by international
organizations and agencies and concerned
Governments to provide food, medicine, facilities, and
housing to the displaced.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand that
the Bosnian Serb forces immediately and

A . .,.,.'J A//_,

 

unconditionally release unharmed all detained personnel
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR),
and that the parties respect fully the safety of all
UNPROFOR personnel and ensure their complete
freedom of movement.

"The Security Council pays tribute to all the
personnel of UNPROFOR, and of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, especially
those deployed in the area of Srebrenica. It notes
that the presence and bravery of the troops has
undoubtedly saved the lives of many civilians in the
Srebrenica area."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/32.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.

