Mr. Pleuger (Germany): We welcome the fact
that, after long and difficult negotiations, the Council
has adopted this resolution. Negotiations are always a
process of give and take, but in the end we believe that
the signal the Council is now sending to Khartoum is
unambiguous. The Government of the Sudan has been
given a chance to avoid the imposition of sanctions by
demonstrating, within the next 30 days and in a clear
and verifiable manner, that it is making significant and
measurable progress on disarming the Janjaweed
militias and bringing them to justice, and that it is
making every effort to protect its own people. This is a
clear and constructive message, and Germany therefore
decided to sponsor this resolution.

The Council's common expectation is that the
Government of the Sudan will now have the wisdom to
take more forceful actions towards complying with the
established benchmarks, as laid down in the resolution
and in the joint communique issued on 3 July by the
Government of the Sudan and the Secretary-General.
We hold the Government of the Sudan responsible for
the security of all 1.5 million people at risk in Darfur
and for the unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid.

We sincerely appreciate the leading role that the
African Union has taken in confronting this conflict, at
both the political and the peacekeeping levels. This is
an important development, and Germany is keen to
maintain and further develop a close partnership with
the African Union.

We note that the Secretary-General's recently
established Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide has a mandate to make recommendations on
situations of massive human rights violations that, if
not prevented, could lead to genocide. Only a few
weeks ago, the Council unanimously welcomed the
creation of this new mechanism. We trust that Mr.
Mendez, the Special Adviser, will make full use of his
mandate and will help clarify the persistent reports we
have already received on the ethnic dimension of the
situation. In this context, we would like to point out
that a variety of mechanisms have a role in monitoring
the human rights situation. Some of those mechanisms
are already in place, others not. I would like to recall
that not only Germany but all European Union Foreign
Ministers have called, in their most recent joint
declaration on Darfur, 26 July, for the establishment of
an independent international commission of inquiry
into the abuses committed in Darfur, following up on
the recommendations in the report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

While the Council has been deliberating, the
suffering, the killing and the dying in Darfur have
continued. The Government of the Sudan must now act
rapidly and decisively for the sake of its very own
population - which it has, as the Secretary-General
rightly put it, a sacred obligation to protect. Otherwise,
paragraph 6 of the resolution would apply, and further
Council deliberations could lead to the imposition of
sanctions. Although we would consider that a very
unfortunate development and although we sincerely
hope that it will be avoided, we explicitly reserve the
right to follow that path if the Government of the
Sudan leaves us with no other choice.

Let us not be misunderstood. Our goal is to stop
the suffering and the killing of innocent civilians. We
expect all parties, the rebel side as much as the
Government of the Sudan, to fulfil their obligations.
Without a political solution to the crisis in Darfur, we
will not achieve sustainable peace for the entire Sudan.
Germany, bilaterally and together with its partners in
the European Union, stands ready to support all efforts
to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan.

