Mr. Apakan: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Council about the situation in Ukraine. Since
the last time I addressed the Council (see S/PV.73ll),
a package of measures towards the peaceful solution
of the conflict in eastern Ukraine has been agreed in
Minsk. We welcome this agreement. We also welcome
the declaration by the Normandy Powers - France,
Germany, Russia and Ukraine - and their determination
that the package of measures agreed in Minsk should
be implemented in full. The Security Council has
unanimously endorsed the package of measures and
welcomed the declaration. We are working for their full
implementation.

The Minsk package is an integrated whole, and
foresees an immediate and unconditional ceasefire
and a withdrawal of heavy weapons, followed by a
political process involving local elections, as well as
constitutional reform. The agreed ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weapons are now the priority and
the basis for all other provisions ofthe Minsk documents.
Nevertheless, immediately after the entry into force of
the ceasefire, heavy attacks by rebels around the town
of Debaltseve took place. This was an attempt to create
new facts on the ground, and so to change the basis on
which the latest package of measures had been agreed.
These attacks were against the letter and the spirit of
the Minsk agreements.

Today, I can report that in the past few days combat
operations have been significantly reduced across
the conflict zone, although some violence has still
occurred around Donetsk airport, as well as close to
the town of Mariupol. Over the past two days, we have
also seen significant indications that both sides are
now taking steps to comply with their responsibilities
under the Minsk package. Concerning the withdrawal
of heavy weapons, yesterday our monitors began
observing the movement of heavy weapons away from
the line of contact in several instances. Despite the fact
that the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) was not able to establish the origin or final
places of storage for those weapons, this is a welcome
development. However, it is only the beginning of
the process, and we encourage the sides to take more
steps in that direction. The OSCE has been given some
direct tasks related to implementation of the package of
measures, one of which is that it will facilitate, monitor
and verify the withdrawal of heavy weapons from a
defined security zone.

The Special Monitoring Mission is ready to take
on that responsibility in line with its mandate, but in
order to fulfil that role we need improved baseline
information. On 13 February, immediately after
agreement was concluded on the package of measures,
we wrote to the signatories to make clear what
information we needed from them if the Mission were
to conduct this work. That information should cover the
heavy weapons they have, the current location of those
weapons, the routes that will be used to withdraw them
and their locations after they have been withdrawn. The
parties have provided answers, but the information is
not yet sufficient. The Mission has been monitoring
the movement of heavy weapons for five months, but
there is a clear distinction between that activity, which
will continue, and our ability to verify that the weapons
have indeed been withdrawn and safely and securely
stored. The same requirement for baseline information
applies to monitoring the withdrawal of foreign armed
formations and mercenaries, another responsibility the
OSCE has been given.

After expansion in line with our mandate, the
Special Monitoring Mission currently has 451 monitors,
of whom more than 300 are in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. In that context, it is important to note that the
Mission remains a civilian mission that is being assigned
tasks that come close to the purview of peacekeeping.
Furthermore, the Mission's operations related to the
Minsk package will not be confined to monitoring on
or around a contact line. Our operations will take place
in and around the entire defined security zone, which
is more than 400 kilometres long and 140 kilometres
wide and includes large parts of the Russian-Ukrainian
State border. That huge area, approximately 50,000
square kilometres, will form the core of the Special
Monitoring Mission's activities and will necessitate
new operational capacities and processes.

Those new capacities include expanding the
Mission's technological capacity and corresponding
expert staff. Our monitors' work should be
complemented with additional information-gathering
means such as satellite imagery, the relocation of a
large number of unmanned aerial vehicles and more
image-gathering technology. Those elements have been
established in the Minsk documents. In order to make
this qualitative upgrade of the Mission's capacity, we
will need close cooperation with the United Nations.
We are also examining an expanded geographical
capability for the four existing teams located in
Luhansk, Donetsk, Kharkiv and Dnepropetrovsk, the
areas of responsibility where we anticipate seeing the
ceasefire and heavy weapon withdrawal zones. That
may require establishing additional patrolling hubs to
better cover the weapons withdrawal area.

The conclusion of the Minsk accords also gives
hope for improvement in the humanitarian situation.
To date, however, there are still more than a million
internally displaced persons, some living in desperate
circumstances. The conflict continues to take a heavy
toll on the civilian population, particularly in and around
the conflict zone. The Special Monitoring Mission,
within the framework of its mandate, will not lose sight
of that aspect of the conflict and will concentrate on
related tasks throughout Ukraine. We will continue to
facilitate humanitarian aid where possible and do our
very best to be helpful to the population through our
wide presence on the ground. This important work
in the areas of human rights, gender and dialogue
facilitation will help to consolidate the basis on which
the political part of the Minsk agreements relies.

In conclusion, I should repeat that a full and
unconditional ceasefire remains the foundation for
further implementation of the Minsk accords. The
Special Monitoring Mission can and will be helpful in
this process and will implement its mandate impartially
and in close cooperation with all sides. However,
nothing can replace the firm political willingness on
the part of all sides to achieve peace and normalization.
The Minsk documents and President Poroshenko's
peace plan remain the way forward for restoring peace
and stability to Ukraine.

Lastly, I would also like to mention the valuable
work of the Trilateral Contact Group and the efforts
of Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini, with whom we are
working closely and to whom we are grateful.

The President (spoke in Chinese). I thank
Ambassador Apakan for his briefing.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
express the Chinese delegation's sincere appreciation to
the members of the Council, especially my colleagues
the Permanent Representatives, their staffs and the
Secretariat of the Council, for all the support they have
given us. It has indeed been a busy month, and one in
which we rallied to arrive at a consensus on several
important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as all
the relevant conference service officers. As we end
our presidency, I know I speak for the whole Council
in wishing the delegation of France good luck in the
month of March.

The meeting rose at10.30 am.
