Mr. Motoc (Romania): We are shocked and
appalled by the tragic news coming from Moscow
regarding the horrific terrorist attack in the Russian
capital's subway. We strongly condemn it, and I wish
to express our deepest condolences to the bereaved
families and to the Russian people.

I would like to join my colleagues in extending
our appreciation to Chile for its busy and successful
presidency and to wish the new Chinese presidency the
greatest success. Let me also say that Romania
associates itself with the statement to be delivered
shortly on behalf of the European Union by the Irish
representative, Ambassador Richard Ryan.

I too would like to thank Special Representative
Holkeri for his thorough report. Romania appreciates
the efforts he has made in Kosovo since taking up his
duties, in particular those related to the initiation of
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
issues of common concern and to the setting up of a
comprehensive approach to the "standards before
status" policy. A decisive period lies ahead for Kosovo.
We would like to assure Mr. Holkeri of our full support
and of our readiness to contribute to addressing the
coming challenges.

I am pleased also to welcome the presence of
Assistant Foreign Minister Perovic' at this meeting.

Romania continues to fully support resolution
1244 (1999) and its goal of a democratic multi-ethnic
Kosovo. In this framework, Romania keenly supports
the genuine implementation of standards in Kosovo.
The Security Council should give no consideration to
any future status for the province until the standards
spelled out by the international community become
effective in Kosovo. The standards are not mere
technical benchmarks; they are the measure of
Kosovo's transformation into an area offering safety
and opportunity to all its inhabitants, an area that is no
longer a challenge to regional stability. What is at stake
here is not only the status of a province, but the status
of each and every member of its population.

In fact, we believe that no status will prove to be
a solution in Kosovo unless society there is prepared to
live by the rules of democracy, law and ethnic
tolerance, all the more so since societies in the
surrounding region embrace those values and are
steadily working to consolidate them. Nobody can
afford to leave Kosovo society behind; the prime
responsibility in this respect lies with the provisional
authorities of the province.

Romania looks forward to the presentation, as
soon as possible, of the action plan for standards
implementation. Of course, standards have already
started to be applied in Kosovo, but we will take the
action plan as a concrete expression of the provisional
authorities' commitment to the process and to their
underlying political responsibilities.

In saying this, I would like to add that there
should be, from the very start, a clear delimitation of
responsibilities between the Provisional Institutions
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). In the end, only the Provisional
Institutions and the people of Kosovo will have to
measure up to the expectations of the Security Council
and of the international community.

Romania stands ready to assist the process of
standards implementation. We also believe that the
European Union's Stabilization and Association
Process Tracking Mechanism has a decisive role as
concerns the "standards before status" policy.

Following the Special Representative's report on
that matter, we urge the Provisional Authorities to give
proper and equal consideration to all areas of the action
plan. We would also like to strongly encourage the
Kosovo Serbs to take part in the formulation and
implementation of the action plan. What this process is
all about is Kosovo's future, in which they have a share
of their own. At this point, let me add - drawing on
from Romania's experience of a transition - that it is
always important for every minority to voice its
concerns and proposals, and that every minority voice
should be heard and be taken into account.

By the middle of next year, the Security Council
will have a better picture of where Kosovo's society
stands. We will not only look for a positive trend,
which we already ascertain in some areas; we will look
for that society to be in a sustainable condition, in
which reconciliation plays a meaningful part. We will
need to know whether reconciliation is possible. And
we will need to see whether Kosovo's society is
functional by itself and in relation to its neighbours. If
not, we will have to go back to work.

Key issues with regard to premises for
reconciliation are direct dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina on practical issues of mutual interest, and
secure and sustainable returns. The preservation of
cultural heritage and religious sites is also of
outstanding symbolic importance. We can never stress
enough that this aspect will have a real impact on
adjusting the mentality and the psychological mood of
the populations involved.

The direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is an absolute priority for implementing
standards and for the prospect of reconciliation. Special
attention should be paid by all parties involved to
ensuring the effective functioning of the working
groups within the framework of the direct dialogue. We
also express our hope that a Serbian Government will
be formed shortly and that it will continue to deliver on
its responsibilities under the direct dialogue.

We believe that participation in that dialogue and
the subsequent measures will prove - if given the
proper chance - that reconciliation is an achievable
goal. As a country of the region and as Chairman of the
South-East European Cooperation Process for the
period 2004-2005, Romania stands ready to contribute
its share to fostering this process.

One final point I would like to make is about
organized crime. This peril is one of the most
competitive forces working against stability and peace
and against plans for the democratic, multi-ethnic
future of Kosovo. We cannot allow private interests to
hinder the efforts of whole societies and States. The
countries of South-East Europe have pledged
cooperation against organized crime, and results can
already be seen. There is a need for more operational
coordination with UNMIK. And the Security Council
should be kept informed of this important matter.

Since you, Ambassador Wang Guangya, have
returned to the Chair, I would like to reiterate what I
said at the beginning of my statement, wishing the best
of success to your presidency and expressing our full
trust that this success will be achieved under your able
and proven guidance.

