Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also like to
thank Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for the work she continues to do on behalf of children
in armed conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Herve
Ladsous and Ms. Yoka Brandt. I welcome Mr. Forest
Whitaker. I had the pleasure of getting to know him
two years ago when I was at UNESCO. I would also
like to thank Sandra Uwiringiyimana for her moving
statement, which reminds us of the importance of what
we are doing here in New York. And I would like to
welcome the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Luxembourg and to express our appreciation for the
role of Luxembourg and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas in
placing the subject of children and armed conflict on
the Council's agenda for debate.

We would like to align ourselves with the statements
to be made on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Human Security Network.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339) notes
numerous violations of the rights of the child in areas
of armed conflict. Allow me to complete the picture on
the situation in the Middle East.

Jordan is surrounded by countries in which
children are mistreated. Over the past four years, the
international community has seen Syrian children being
killed, tortured, displaced, starved and captured by
armed groups, and we have done nothing. The Security
Council has not yet sent a strong enough message to the
perpetrators of such crimes against humanity to ensure
that they are held responsible and punished for their
acts. In May, the situation should have been referred,
pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014), to the International
Criminal Court. That did not happen, which had the
effect of encouraging those violations to spill over
into Jordan. We believe that the Syrian crisis can be
resolved only through a political solution that reflects
the hopes ofthe Syrian people. Only through a peaceful
settlement will we be able to bring the violence against
civilians and children to an end. A political transition
must be put in place. That is our view of the Syrian
crisis.

With respect to the situation in Iraq, there has been
continuing deterioration. Children continue to pay the
steepest price for the war and the conflicts that have
been raging there for years. The suffering of children
has worsened owing to the practices of terrorist groups,
among them the Islamic State. In that regard, Jordan
calls on all sectors of Iraqi society to come together to
denounce the marginalization of any group and create
an inclusive Iraqi Government that responds to the
needs of the Iraqi people. That would undermine the
influence of armed groups in the country and would
enable the return of peace and stability to a country
whose people deserve to enjoy the fruits of their
abundant resources.

Concerning Palestine, for how much longer
will Palestinian children be used as targets? Should
Palestinian children be subjected to murder, attack and
arbitrary detention? How much longer will we remain
silent in the face of such suffering? Our silence must
end. Otherwise, it will come as no surprise if those
children turn out one day to be extremists. I wish in
no way to justify extremism of any form, but it is the
consequence of tyranny, violence, murder, oppression
and the humiliation experienced by Palestinian
children. Israel's latest war against Gaza was the most
brutal violation committed against the Palestinian
people and their children - an act of aggression that
took the lives of 491 child victims, with an additional
3,000 wounded and thousands displaced. The 280,000
civilians who took refuge in schools, 95,000 of them
in schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, need
psychological support. Unexploded ordnance in the
areas of conflict pose a grave danger to children, as
well as a violation of international law. All of that
undermines the human rights of all Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip, especially children.

The Secretary-General's report makes frequent
mention of armed Islamist groups. I would like to point
out that such groups have nothing to do with Islam.
They have hijacked Islam and have killed, tortured,
decapitated and attacked innocent people to sell
oil 4 all in the name ofIslam - but they have distorted
that religion, which is one of tolerance.

In conclusion, our meeting reflects the political
will of the Member States of the Security Council to
protect children in situations of armed conflict. We
stand ready to support the efforts of all countries and
organizations that share that aim.

