Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As this is the first
time I take floor in the Security Council during your
presidency, allow me at the outset of my statement, to
congratulate you, Madam President, and tp express
how pleased I am to see you presiding over the Council
during the month of March. My delegation thanks the
Security Council and the presidency of Luxembourg
for including on its agenda an issue that particularly
affects the Democratic Republic of Congo, namely,
children and armed conflict. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his annual report (S/2013/245) on the issue. My thanks
also go to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and to Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their commitment to the cause of
children.

In one of her annual reports, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict writes that thousands of children
continue to be killed, maimed or abducted, suffer
sexual violence, or are denied access to humanitarian
assistance or health care in many countries. In several
countries, she continues, they have also been used to
commit suicide attacks or to serve as human shields.
That description corresponds exactly to the ordeal
suffered daily by Congolese children due to the presence
of numerous foreign and domestic armed groups that
plunder the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Indeed, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a country that has suffered for more than a decade
of intermittent armed conflicts with the grimmest
of consequences, children are among those civilians
whose rights are most frequently violated. What is
worse, given their immature psychological makeup,
they experience great trauma when they are recruited
as soldiers. That is the case, for example, when they are
forced to kill an adversary in cold blood or a comrade
in arms suspected of collaboration, or when forced to
burn villages or to stand by helplessly as comrades
suffer. All the armed groups operating in the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo recruit boys
and girls as soldiers, messengers, spies or traffickers or
to transport munitions.

Change has been palpable since the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars. However, internal
displacements from ongoing acts of violence have not
completely ceased, given the armed groups that continue
to recruit children, subjecting them to forced labour and
the extraction of natural resources. These children are
also used to grind rocks into gravel in quarries. Once
broken down, coltan is used in electronic devices. The
high level of radioactivity of such substances explains
the frequent respiratory problems, sometimes lethal,
suffered by a great number of Congolese children who
have been transporting and breaking down coltan.

Those who survive are traumatized by acts of
vandalism and barbarism perpetrated by the armed
groups that victimize them. They have had to witness,
powerlessly, horrible scenes of violence in which their
families and friends have been killed before their eyes.
Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by armed
groups have suffered considerable material and moral
damage. I speak on behalf of those children, whose
families, generally in a dire economic situation, would
have liked concrete measures of redress and reparation
to be made for them. From the viewpoint of education,
displaced children living in areas of combat have
virtually no access to education, which leaves them
even more vulnerable to recruitment by armed groups.

Given the scope of the phenomenon, and pursuant
to the recommendations contained in the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, the Congolese authorities have spared no
expense in tackling the challenges. In October 2012, my
Government and the United Nations signed an action
plan with a series of commitments by both parties,
aiming to end the recruitment and use of children by
Congolese armed forces and security services in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as sexual
violence against children.

Progress has been made since the signing of that
action plan. Two directives have been issued by the
Congolese authorities. The first was issued by the
Ministry of National Defence and Veterans Affairs
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo Armed
Forces, recalling the various commitments made by the
Government in the matter and the obligations arising
therefrom. The second was issued by the general
administrator of the Congolese National Intelligence
Agency. It gives the United Nations task force and
child-protection agencies access to intelligence staff,
documents, sites and installations, and authorizes the
release of all children associated with armed groups
into the care of child-protection agencies.

Moreover, two coordination mechanisms have been
created to follow up the implementation of the action
plan. Results have been encouraging. According to
statistics, 2,494 children were removed from armed
groups and forces in June 2013, while 2,824 children,
of whom 365 were girls, were placed in the care of
the transitional support structure. Those numbers fell
through 31 December 2013 and perhaps even more by
today.

Among the wide-ranging actions undertaken by
the Government to address the phenomenon of sexual
violence, I note the law of 20 July 2006. Compared to
the earlier criminal code of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the law brings meaningful change,
including by raising the age limit for those considered
to be victims of sexual violence from 14 to 18 years
old. Practices that were formerly considered to be
lesser crimes - including forced marriage, forced
prostitution or the exploitation of children, sexual
slavery, bestiality and genital mutilation - are now
punished more severely. Moreover, the new law on
sexual violence, includes not only those crimes but also
16 additional crimes under the principle of international
humanitarian law.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is resolved to pursue its campaign to eradicate
this phenomenon. Along those lines, my delegation
takes this opportunity to call upon the foreign and
domestic armed groups still active in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to respond positively
to the invitation of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Congolese armed forces to lay down
their arms and to surrender to Congolese authorities so
that they can be repatriated to their countries, in the
case of foreigners, or inscribed in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, in the
case of Congolese nationals.

My delegation welcomes the commitment of the
Security Council to working to protect children against
grave violations committed during armed conflict.

