Mr. Zannier: The report that the Council has
before it today (S/2009/149) details the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) during the period from 1 November
2008 to 9 March 2009. This has been a very dynamic
period for UNMIK and for Kosovo, one rife with
challenges and milestones. In general, I am pleased to
be able to report to the Council that the situation in
Kosovo remained substantially stable in spite of the
potential for volatility presented by the developments
of the past quarter.

Nevertheless, ethnic tensions persist at several
traditional flashpoints, particularly in and around
northern Mitrovica, and the past few weeks have seen
an alarming escalation of incidents involving the use of
firearms and explosive devices. Fortunately, those
incidents have so far only resulted in property damage,
but there is reason for serious concern. While UNMIK
has continued its efforts to mediate between the
communities, local community leaders need to make
greater efforts to defuse tensions and promote
coexistence and reconciliation.

The last time I was before this Council, on
26 November (6025th meeting), the Council issued a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44) welcoming
the Secretary-General's 24 November report
(S/2008/692), which envisaged the deployment of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) throughout Kosovo under a status-neutral
United Nations umbrella; the reconfiguration of
09-27620

UNMIK's rule of law functions and continuing
consultations with all relevant parties on technical
issues of importance for the peaceful coexistence of
Kosovo's communities. Accordingly, EULEX assumed
full operational responsibility in the rule of law area on
9 December, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) and under the overall authority and within the
status-neutral framework of the United Nations.

Thanks to the close cooperation with UNMIK and
EULEX staff, the deployment of EULEX police
throughout Kosovo and the concomitant stand-down of
UNMIK police was completed smoothly and efficiently
so as to avoid potential conflicts of competencies. On
9 December, as EULEX police deployed throughout
Kosovo, they started to exercise their policing
functions. EULEX judges, prosecutors and other
justice personnel also took on operational
responsibilities as of the same date.

As a result of the deployment of EULEX,
UNMIK was able to step up its reconfiguration and
adjust its structure and profile to allow for an efficient
use of resources in the implementation of its mandate
in the light of the changed circumstances on the
ground. With EULEX having assumed responsibility
for the police and justice functions under resolution
1244 (1999), UNMIK will now be able to effectively
carry out its reconfigured functions with a much lighter
footprint.

Out of a total of 1,288 UNMIK police personnel
on the ground at the beginning of December, 49
UNMIK police officers currently remain in Kosovo,
handling liaison and external representation functions.
There are no longer UNMIK judges or prosecutors
exercising functions in Kosovo courts. However,
UNMIK staff remains actively involved in supporting
the talks regarding the Mitrovica courthouse, which
currently continues to operate on a limited basis with
EULEX international judges and prosecutors.

As anticipated in the November report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/692), a central element of
the reconfigured UNMIK remains the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission
in Kosovo. After the downsizing of UNMIK in the
field, the OSCE, through its extensive field presence,
assumed the responsibility for comprehensive
monitoring throughout Kosovo. In particular, the
OSCE's role in building capacities of local institutions
is crucial in contributing to the effective protection of
09-27620
all people living in Kosovo and thus to fostering
Kosovo's multi-ethnic character.

I am pleased to report that UNMIK has succeeded
in effecting the reconfiguration of its rule of law
elements as envisioned in the Secretary-General's
November report. Furthermore, following the
assumption of operational responsibilities in the rule of
law area by EULEX acting under resolution 1244
(1999), by 1 July 2009, UNMIK will have refocused its
staff on the tasks set out in the Secretary-General's
12 June report (S/2008/354).

I owe a special debt of gratitude to all of
UNMIK's staff - those who will continue to work for
UNMIK after the 30 June and, in particular, those
whose tenure with UNMIK has ended or will end
during the next three months - for the dedication,
professionalism and commitment they have
demonstrated during their tenure with UNMIK.

A centrepiece of UNMIK's reconfigured role, in
line with the Secretary-General's report on Kosovo,
has consisted of consultations with the various
stakeholders on matters affecting the lives of all of
Kosovo's communities.

For instance, during the past three months,
UNMIK representatives have met formally and
informally with relevant stakeholders to discuss
cultural and religious heritage issues. These meetings
revealed that, while Pristina and Belgrade have
different understandings of the nature of the
mechanisms that should serve to protect and preserve
the cultural heritage and patrimony of the Serbian
Orthodox Church in Kosovo, their objectives largely
coincide.

UNMIK has also engaged, together with EULEX,
in further technical consultations with other
stakeholders on issues related to the functioning of the
justice system in northern Kosovo. Opportunities for
reintroducing local judges in court proceedings have
been identified, beginning, in the first instance, with
judges who had been appointed by UNMIK. Positive
practical steps have also been registered in the area of
policing.

However, while progress is continuing on many
fronts, a number of challenges remain.

The process of return of internally displaced
persons saw a very sharp decline in the number of
voluntary returns by members of minority communities
in 2008, with only 664 persons belonging to minority
communities returning to Kosovo last year. While the
international community has been fully supportive of
the returns process, the role of authorities in Pristina
and Belgrade in this respect remains key.

There are still too many missing persons from the
conflict. Notwithstanding our continuing efforts, the
pace of identifications has considerably slowed over
the past few years, from a high of 722 cases in 2005 to
43 cases last year and just one missing person case
closed so far this year. Clearly, much more must be
done. The Pristina-Belgrade technical dialogue
working group on missing persons, chaired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, is one of the
very few forums where Pristina's and Belgrade's
experts meet regularly face to face in an effort to move
a painful and difficult issue forward. However,
cooperation must improve, and politics should be put
aside with the common goal of fulfilling the right of
the families of all missing persons to know the fate of
their loved ones.

The issue of electric power supply continues to
plague the everyday lives of all of Kosovo's residents.
The problem is mainly due to non-payment by many
consumers, including wholesale non-payment by the
Kosovo Serb community. Recently, in an effort to
induce payment, the Kosovo Energy Corporation
(KEK) has allowed breakdowns in the electric power
supply to go unrepaired for periods of a week or more.
Although this policy is affecting all ethnic groups to
different degrees, the issue has been politicized,
leading to demonstrations by angry residents of
Kosovo Serb-inhabited villages, who have recently
clashed with the Kosovo Police when protesters tried
to block traffic on main thoroughfares. UNMIK and
OSCE staff personnel have actively engaged with
village leaders, with municipal officials and with KEK
to calm the situation and promote dialogue, but a
viable and sustainable solution must be found. For this
purpose, the Pristina-Belgrade technical dialogue
working group on energy, which has largely been
dormant for the past two years, should re-engage.

Over the past few weeks, a number of Belgrade
officials have been denied entry into Kosovo by the
Kosovo authorities. This is an issue that, if left
unresolved, is bound to unnecessarily increase
tensions. Constructive engagement by all is necessary
to address and resolve this matter without delay.
When I first addressed the Security Council in
July 2008 (see S/PV.5944), one month after assuming
my duties as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for UNMIK, I stated my fervent hope that the
path we had taken to ensure the continued effectiveness
of UNMIK would allow the United Nations to protect
its legacy in Kosovo while adapting to the changing
needs on the ground in order to ensure conditions for a
peaceful and normal life for all the inhabitants of
Kosovo, as required by UNMIK's mandate under
resolution 1244 (1999). I am satisfied that UNMIK has
managed to recalibrate its structure and profile in line
with the new challenges posed by the situation in
Kosovo and pleased by the progress that has been made
towards advancing the European perspective of the
Western Balkans with the deployment of EULEX.

Yet, much remains to be done. The situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively peaceful during the
past eight months and, while both Pristina and
Belgrade have made noteworthy attempts to maintain
the peace in the face of potentially destabilizing
situations, both have also stopped short of where we
need to be in order to feel confident that Kosovo is
well and truly launched on the path of lasting peace
and prosperity. That goal will only be reached if both
Pristina and Belgrade look first of all to the interests of
all of Kosovo's communities, and beyond their own
legitimate larger political considerations. For its part,
counting on the continued support of the Council,
UNMIK will carry on working together with Belgrade
and Pristina, and with the international community, to
ensure that this goal is reached.

