Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this meeting on the latest
developments in the humanitarian situation in Syria
and commends Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on his comprehensive briefing.

My delegation notes with concern the persistence
of Violence that has resulted in the loss of human
lives in north-east and north-west Syria. Cote d'Ivoire
strongly condemns those attacks on the population
and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, which
contribute to the deterioration of the situation and
hamper efforts to provide vital humanitarian assistance
to those in need.

It should be noted that the fighting thwarts ongoing
mediation initiatives and efforts, including the agreement
signed on 17 October between the United States of
America and Turkey on the safe zone in north-eastern
part of Syria and the memorandum of understanding
signed by Russia and Turkey on 22 October on border
control in Syria. Those agreements, the conclusion of
which my delegation welcomed, made it possible to
stop the offensive against Kurdish forces in north-east
Syria and to significantly reduce hostilities.

My country urges all parties to put an end to violence
against populations and to respect their obligations
to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We also call on all other actors in the
Syrian crisis to proceed with the dialogue, with a View
to achieving de-escalation and a definitive ceasefire, a
necessary precondition for addressing the humanitarian
challenges in the region. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes efforts to ensure the continuation of cross-
border humanitarian deliveries to the thousands of
people affected by the conflict. My delegation therefore
supports the renewal of the mandate of the cross-border
humanitarian aid delivery mechanism.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the
international community once again to maintain its
humanitarian assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates
its support for the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
in his tireless efforts to find a peaceful and lasting
solution to the crisis. We hope that the Geneva talks
launched on 30 October among the Syrian parties will
provide the political space necessary to achieve that
objective, in order to enable the whole region to return
to peace, stability and development.

