Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Jeremie of Serbia and Foreign Minister
Hyseni of Kosovo. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Lamberto Zannier for his
comprehensive briefing. The United Nations
contribution for Kosovo - particularly the Secretary-
General's leadership and Mr. Zannier's personal
commitment - is very much appreciated.

We also highly value the contributions on the
ground by the sister organizations - the European
Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) - to support a multi-
ethnic, democratic Kosovo and the entire Western
Balkans region.
The reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) initiated
by the Secretary-General has now been completed. We
welcome the useful role played by UNMIK in inter-
ethnic mediation. UNMIK is making efforts to mediate
between northern Kosovo and Pristina and also between
Pristina and Belgrade, in cooperation with the United
Nations Office in Belgrade. We are very pleased that
UNMIK's involvement has contributed to the relaxation
of tensions surrounding the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani
reconstruction.

EULEX is also extremely important. We welcome
the operation conducted by EULEX, which has been
carried out very smoothly. Its technical consultation
with Belgrade is also making progress. The attack by a
militant group on EULEX in Pristina was quite
regrettable. Establishing the rule of law in Kosovo is
an urgent task, and we urge all parties to work with
EULEX to achieve effective cooperation.

We are expecting municipal elections on
15 November. If Kosovo is to develop multi-ethnic
communities, it is important to ensure that these
municipal elections are conducted in a free, fair and
transparent manner. People must be allowed to vote
and participate in a free and safe atmosphere. It is our
hope that decentralization will be promoted throughout
Kosovo, including the northern provinces, with broad
local participation.

The tense security situation in northern Kosovo is
a continuing source of concern, and we urge all parties
to extend their cooperation to aid the return of
internally displaced persons and the protection of
ethnic minorities.

The focus of the international community should
be on promoting economic growth and development
and peaceful coexistence in a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We
welcome the fact that Kosovo has become a member of
the World Bank Group and is implementing a new
partnership strategy, including by improving public
subsidies and generating new sources of economic
growth. Japan has extended support to Kosovo through
a human security approach, because integrating a
human-centred approach is particularly relevant in the
northern provinces, with due regard to reducing the
sense of vulnerability among the population. Such an
approach is extremely useful not only in Kosovo but
also in the Western Balkan nations as a whole.
We conducted a bilateral consultation in Pristina
yesterday, and Japan will consider, on the basis of the
outcome, additional assistance to Kosovo. Japan is
committed to helping Kosovo develop as a vibrant
multi-ethnic and fully democratic country, and to
stabilizing the Western Balkan region as a whole. We
will do so in close cooperation with our international
partners, Serbia and other countries in the region.

