Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
you for honouring us with your presence here today,
Mr. Minister, to preside over the Security Council.

I too wish to extend to the Afghan people the
condolences of the people of Bulgaria over the loss of
human life caused by the earthquake in the north-
eastern part of the country.
I thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2002/278). I also thank Ms. Frechette for
introducing the report, and for giving us additional
useful information.

Bulgaria fully supports the statement soon to be
made by Spain on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief comments in
my national capacity.

If the Afghan people's prospects are brighter
today - something that was not expected only six
months ago - it is due in large part to the efforts,
determination and courage of the anti-terrorist coalition
led by the United States. The struggle against
terrorism, in which Bulgaria is proud to participate,
continues today. Its success will also determine the
success of reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. The
United Nations has a full role to play in those efforts,
and we are very grateful to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and
his team, for the remarkable work they have
accomplished thus far.

I would like, at the outset, to say that my country
fully supports the Secretary-General's approach to the
structure of a United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and in particular his intention
to rely on the talents of the Afghan people for the work
of the mission.

We share the view that the question of security
remains of primary importance for the recovery of
Afghanistan. The International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), which includes a Bulgarian contingent,
plays a key role in that regard. We believe that it would
be appropriate for ISAF's mandate to be extended after
the initial six months. I take this opportunity to thank
the United Kingdom once again for its effective
leadership of ISAF. The extension of ISAF's mandate
would be an expression of the international
community's commitment to the Afghan people. In our
view, a careful approach is necessary with regard to
ISAF's territorial expansion beyond Kabul. Such
expansion must take place in tandem with the process
of establishing an Afghan national army and police
force.

Bulgaria welcomes the progress made in the area
of human rights in Afghanistan. Among the events
organized in Kabul in March, we should like to note
the commemoration of International Women's Day and
the first national workshop on human rights. It must be
pointed out, however, that disturbing information has
been reported concerning acts of ethnic intolerance and
repression that require increased vigilance on the part
of the international community.

We share the opinion of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his 28 February letter to Member States,
concerning the urgent need to deliver humanitarian aid,
which has been made even more important by
yesterday's earthquake. In response to the appeal
launched, Bulgaria has done its best to speed the
humanitarian assistance that we pledged at the Tokyo
donor Conference in January.

The fight against drug trafficking is of major
importance for the future of Afghanistan. The
eradication of illicit drugs requires a coherent
programme that ensures the participation of the rural
population. My country is directly affected by that
traffic, because it lies directly on the path of illicit
drugs that flow from Afghanistan to users in Europe
and elsewhere.

Plans for recovery in Afghanistan require optimal
balance and coordination among the various forms of
bilateral and multilateral cooperation. My country is
mobilizing its own potential in order to participate
actively in Afghanistan's recovery.

