Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): I, too, wish to welcome the
presence among us of the Vice-Minister of Territorial
Administration of Angola, General Higino Carneiro. His
presence among us today indicates the importance the
Government of Angola attaches to the role played by the
United Nations in Angola. I am grateful to the
Government and the people of Angola for the warm
reception they accorded me when I visited Angola last
month. Allow me also to recognize the presence in our
meeting today of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye. His
efforts in the peace process have been outstanding and
should be commended by all of us. I should also like to
thank him for all the assistance he extended to me while
I was in Angola last month.

Let me begin by stating that my delegation
welcomes the recent progress made by the parties in
Angola. The agreement reached on 6 March 1998
between the Government of Angola and UNITA on a new
timetable allowed the parties to resume the
implementation of tasks under the Lusaka Protocol.

The promulgation of the law granting special status
to the leader of UNITA, the appointment of the remaining
governors and vice-governors, the cessation of broadcasts
by UNITA's Radio Vorgan and the installation in Luanda
of senior UNITA officials are important tasks that have
been completed.

Still, the process is far from conclusion, and there is
an urgent need for the parties to complete the process. In
particular, the question of disarming the civilian
population, the question of ensuring the security of the
leader of UNITA and, equally important, the question of
concluding the normalization of State administration
throughout the Angolan territory - especially in Andulo
and Bailundo - must be attended to with urgent
determination if the peace process is to succeed.

In addition, in my delegation's View the process of
national reconciliation in Angola cannot be said to have
begun until the leaders of both parties truly initiate

 

regular and direct dialogue with each other. In this regard,
I wish to reiterate the much-repeated appeal for a first
meeting within the territory of Angola between President
Jose Eduardo Dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi. Such a
meeting should go a long way towards creating the
necessary atmosphere for dialogue and national
reconciliation among all the people of Angola and help heal
the wounds of war, suspicion and mistrust.

On the question of the existing sanctions against
UNITA, allow me to say that during my recent visit to
Angola and States of the region - namely, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Namibia, South Africa and
Zambia - plus the countries of Kenya, Cote d'Ivoire and
Togo, I found these measures to be working effectively.
There is political will on the part of the member States to
ensure compliance with the provisions of the Security
Council resolutions. Nevertheless, there are some gaps that
need to be filled by member States in attempting to fully
implement these measures. It would be in the interest of the
Angolan peace process if these measures were made fully
effective.

On the question of the future of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), we fully agree
with the views of the Secretary-General, as contained in his
current report, regarding the extension of the current
mandate for a further period of two months, to end on 30
June 1998. We concur with his recommendation to continue
the drawdown until the military component of MONUA is
completely withdrawn by that date, in the manner described
in that report. We also support the moderate increase in
civilian police observers.

In the course of the next two months, we hope to see
immediate progress by the Angolan parties in implementing
the tasks remaining. We hope that by 30 June 1998 such
progress will help the Security Council determine the future
status of MONUA in Angola, in terms of mandate, size and
structure.

It is for these reasons that my delegation fully agrees
with the elements of the present draft resolution and will
vote in favour of it.

