Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. Basic freedoms
must be upheld in all contexts. That must be the
coherent message of this Council and the international
community in responding to the challenges posed by
the historic changes in the Arab world. Brazil stands in
solidarity with those demonstrating peacefully for
more political participation, improved economic
opportunities, freedom and dignity.

We express concern at the current escalation of
violence in Syria. We condemn the use of force against
unarmed demonstrators wherever it occurs. We hope
that the crisis can be addressed through dialogue. The
legitimate aspirations of the populations in the Arab
world must be addressed through inclusive political
processes, and not by military means. At this stage,
further repression is likely only to produce more
protests and dissent. We expect the Syrian leadership to
pursue the path of dialogue and reform as the most
effective way to de-escalate the situation.

We note efforts at reform made by the Syrian
Government. The lifting of the state of emergency and
other concrete legislative measures are encouraging
steps to address the legitimate aspirations of the
population. We expect such measures to be
implemented without delay. We take this opportunity to
encourage the Syrian Government to engage in a broad,
inclusive political dialogue with all relevant parties.
Reform, not repression, is the way forward.

Regional organizations have a crucial
contribution to make in forging political solutions with
real chances of succeeding and leading to peaceful
transformation. In this connection, I would like to
underscore the vital role of the League of Arab States
in encouraging steps in the right direction.

We are all well aware of the importance of
stability in Syria to the overall stability of the Middle
East. Syria being so central to regional stability, it is all
the more relevant that reforms and meaningful
dialogue be fostered there in a peaceful and stable
environment, as free as possible from tensions and
outside pressures.

