Mr. Chowdhury: I am happy that, finally, the
report of the Panel of Experts appointed by the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1306 (2000), in relation to Sierra Leone, is
being presented at this open meeting ofthe Council.

I thank you, Mr. President, for setting aside a full
day for this meeting, despite the heavy schedule of the
Council as the month of January draws to a close. This
will allow for comments on the report by all interested
countries, which I am sure will take us forward in the
full implementation of the measures imposed by the
Security Council concerning the situation in Sierra
Leone.

Today's meeting is of much significance, as this
is the second time that the Council has considered the
report of a panel consisting of independent experts.
The recent trend in the Council to recommend the
appointment of panels of experts to take an in-depth
look into subjects about which the Council has
inadequate or very little information has been a
welcome and useful practice.

The present Panel was appointed by the
Secretary-General on 2 August 2000, for an initial
period of four months from its effective entry into
operation, to collect information on the possible
violations of the measures imposed by Council
resolution 1171 (1998) and the link between the trade
in diamonds and the trade in arms, as well as to
consider the inadequacy of air traffic control systems in
the region. The Panel commenced its work on 21
August and submitted its report to me on 14 December
last year.

The five members of the Panel, Ambassador
Martin Chungong Ayafor, who acted as the Chairman
of the Panel, Mr. Ian Smillie, Mr. Johan Peleman,
Mr. Harjit Sandhu, and Mr. Atabou Bodian, are here
with me today here at the Security Council table. They
represent expertise encompassing the fields outlined in
the mandate of Council resolution 1306 (2000). This
broad array of expertise has been of immense value in
the discharge of the task given to the Panel. I would
like to express my appreciation to each one of them for
the dedication and thorough professionalism with
which they conducted their work as Panel members
within the given time.

I am happy to note that the Panel has been very
careful with the information it used to substantiate its
findings. On page 15 of the report, the standards of
verification in the investigations carried out by the
Panel are elaborated. The Panel required at least two
credible direct sources of information on an issue
before its inclusion in the report as a finding of the
Panel. Where only one source was available but the
information was thought to be credible and relevant,
the source has been indicated in the report.

The Panel took this approach because the issues
under investigation needed to be looked at carefully
and objectively. It examined how and why Sierra
Leone's conflict diamonds are able to find their way
into the legitimate diamond trade with relative ease. It
examined how weapons reach the Revolutionary
United Front in Sierra Leone, in spite of United
Nations arms embargoes being in place. It examined
the adequacy of the air traffic control system in the
West African region and made recommendations on
ways to improve them. As a result of its investigations,
the Panel has come up with a number of findings.
These were presented, along with the observations and
recommendations of the Panel in its report, in
accordance with Council resolution 1306 (2000), and
can be found in document S/2000/1195.

Following submission, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) considered the report and forwarded it to the
Security Council on 19 December. The Council
subsequently decided to have this meeting today, 25
January, after the Committee had considered the report
further at its meeting on 10 January.

After its first meeting, in August last year, the
Panel, in its four months of work, travelled widely,
meeting Government officials, law enforcement
agencies, United Nations agency representatives,
journalists and members of civil society organizations,
as well as individuals and companies in the private
sector. It examined a large amount of documentation
and statistical data. Together, singly or in groups, Panel
members visited 21 countries in connection with their
assignment, including the relevant countries in West
Africa, as well as all major diamond trading and
polishing centres. Generally, the Panel members
received cooperation and support from the
Governments concerned and the private sector.

The report details the findings of the Panel of
Experts on the three major areas. As regards diamonds,
the Panel collected information contained in part I of
the report, on the illegal exploitation of Sierra Leone
diamonds and its new diamond certification system. It
also collected information on international diamond
statistics and transit countries. Based on its findings,
the Panel has made specific recommendations. I draw
the Security Council's attention to the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 155 through
166 in this regard.

As contained in part II of the report, the Panel
collected information on weapons and related mate'riel,
transport and air traffic control in the West Africa
region. Based on the information it collected, the Panel
arrived at certain conclusions on these areas, which are
contained in paragraphs 252 through 254. The Panel
also made specific recommendations in this regard. I
would draw the Security Council's attention to those
recommendations, which are contained in paragraphs
255 through 269 ofthe report.

In part III of the report, a technical analysis of air
traffic control systems in West Africa has been
included, and ways of improving the system have been
identified. Recommendations stemming from the
analysis have been consolidated in paragraph 269 of
the report.

In addition to these recommendations on three
specific areas, the Panel has offered some concluding
recommendations, contained in paragraphs 271 through
273 ofthe report.

The Panel was not able to investigate in detail
some of the information that came to its attention later
in the course ofits work. A number of such outstanding
matters have been mentioned in the report, in particular
in paragraphs 246 through 251.

In adopting resolution 1306 (2000), in paragraph
20 the Council expressed its readiness to consider
appropriate action on the basis of the report under
consideration. In its report, the Panel has made specific
recommendations, as well as recommendations of a
broader nature. Some of the recommendations are
procedural in nature, while some recommendations on
systemic issues have been made for tightening
implementation of the measures in a broader context.

Apart from the Security Council's proactive role,
international cooperation and solidarity are needed to
realize many of the recommendations. In particular, the
development of a better regulatory framework for the
air traffic control systems in the region cannot be done
without such cooperation, and both technical and
financial assistance are required. I make this point to
underscore that a comprehensive approach is needed to
address the situation in Sierra Leone, an approach that
will also involve actors other than the Council itself.

Follow-up actions on the recommendations is a
very important area that the Security Council must
emphasize. I believe that the Council can adopt various
approaches in considering the recommendations and
determining follow-up actions. All the
recommendations contained in the Panel's report
should get full, due and thorough consideration. The
effort and resources dedicated to this exercise should
not be wasted. The report must not get a proverbial
place on some shelf gathering dust.

I would like to conclude this presentation by
highlighting a passage in which the Panel, during its
visit to Sierra Leone, was reminded of the background
of its mandate and of the human dimension of the
tragedy ofthe people of Sierra Leone. There, thousands
of civilians - many of them children - victims of
unspeakable brutality, face an uncertain future. Tens of
thousands of Sierra Leoneans have lost their lives. Half
a million have become refugees, and three or four
times that number have been displaced.

As we meet today, much of Sierra Leone remains
in rebel hands, and people there live without access to
basic amenities of life - medical assistance, education
or the means to a secure a livelihood. The Panel and
the sanctions Committee, which I chair, remain
cognizant of this vital dimension of the problem and
believe that the formal presentation of the report today
will spur adequate action by the Security Council to
help end the suffering of the people of Sierra Leone
and this decade-long tragedy.

