The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poakre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council.

"On 30 October 2006, the Security Council
heard Mr. Elie Dote, Prime Minister of the
Central African Republic, as well as General
Lamine Cisse, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. It reiterated its full support for
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) and
for the United Nations staff in the Central African
Republic.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Government's efforts to revive dialogue through
meetings with political stakeholders and
representatives of civil society. It calls upon the
Secretary-General to encourage, through
BONUCA, the holding on a regular basis of such
meetings, which are vital to restoring trust among
Central Africans and promoting lasting
reconciliation.
"The Security Council also welcomes the
courageous efforts of the Government to
implement the reforms advocated by the bilateral
partners and international financial institutions
aimed at improving the management of the
national treasury, ensuring transparency in
economic activities and good governance. In that
regard, it calls upon the Central African
Government to continue the reforms and dialogue
with its international partners with a view to
restoring economic growth and reducing poverty
in the country.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the deterioration of the security situation in
the Central African Republic, especially in the
wake of the attacks on the towns of Birao,
Ouanda-Djalle and Sam Ouandja. It expresses
serious concern that instability along the border
areas of Chad, Sudan and the Central African
Republic represents a threat to security and
stability in the Central African Republic and its
neighbours, while noting that Central African
defence and security forces are still unable to
repel the armed groups in the northern and north-
eastern parts of the country.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the territorial integrity of the
Central African Republic. It calls for the adoption
of a subregional approach to stabilize the borders
of the Central African Republic. It urges the
Central African authorities to expedite their
efforts to restructure the armed forces and
enhance their operational capabilities, and
encourages the Multinational Force of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community
(FOMUC) to continue supporting the Central
African armed forces beyond 30 June 2007. It
notes that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has dispatched a fact-finding mission
to Chad and the Central African Republic to
assess how the United Nations might help those
countries address the current instability. The
Security Council looks forward to the findings
and recommendations of the mission.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to reinforce cooperation
between the United Nations and member States of
the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CEMAC) with a view to facilitating
06-62757
and strengthening initiatives aimed at addressing
trans-border insecurity in the subregion and
bringing to an end the violations by armed groups
of the territorial integrity of the Central African
Republic. It also requests the Secretary-General
to provide to it a report on the situation in the
Central African Republic by 31 December 2006.

"The Security Council decides to renew the
mandate of BONUCA for a period of one year,
until 31 December 2007, and invites the
Secretary-General to submit to it the new
06-62757
modalities of the mission of BONUCA for the
new period no later than 30 November 2006."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.

