Mr. Inzko: First, I would like first to respond
to the statement made by the representative of the
Russian Federation. He said that my report is "far from
impartial". I will respond not with my own words but
with those of the Prime Minister of Republika Srpska.
Yesterday, he said that

"[a]s far as the Republika Srpska is concerned,
Mr. Inzko's support is among the best so far. For the
first time, Republika Srpska is not a black sheep in
the view of the High Representative".

Those are the words of the Prime Minister of Republika
Srpska. Yet, I hear from the Russians that I am
not impartial.

As far as NATO is concerned, I will not express my
personal opinion again. Instead, I will recall that there
is a defence law that exists in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that foresees NATO membership and the membership
action plan. Politically, the Republika Srpska has
declared neutrality but the defence law still exists. If
somebody wanted to change Bosnia and Herzegovina's
position they would have to change the defence law.
The defence law was adopted with votes from members
of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats party,
to which Mr. Dodik belongs, and we have the signature
of a previous member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Radmanovie, in support of the
aforementioned defence law. So it is a legal obligation.

As to the report of Republika Srpska, the late
Ambassador Churkin, speaking in a very small
circle, once joked that the report was like a report
Chechnya would send to the Security Council. But,
jokes aside, Dayton does not provide for reports by the
entities. Dayton provides only for reports by the High
Representative. It also provides that foreign affairs
issues are State issues, not regional issues. Under the
original Dayton Accords, foreign affairs, foreign policy
and foreign trade are State-level issues. So entities
cannot send reports. In addition, I wonder whether
this report was sent via the mission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Security Council, because reports
can become official United Nations documents only
through a Member State. Otherwise they are illegal and
do not exist as official documents. That is the case for
this report.

In response to the German and British questions
on the rule of law, I would say that there are several
categories of rule of law. One category is that of
unimplemented decisions or verdicts of international
and local constitutional courts. Such decisions have
simply been ignored for 10 or more years, like those
on Mostar and Sejdic and Finci. Then there is the
outright rejection of certain decisions and verdicts
from international or local tribunals, especially when it
comes to war crimes. Some parties are rejecting outright
the verdicts of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Corruption committed by political parties is also
quite evident in the huge public sector, and I think
we have to address this issue. It is widespread in such
areas as employment and public tenders and bidding.
It is all over the place. Recently, there was a huge
scandal relating to fake diplomas. Germany has already
prohibited nurses from working in Germany if they
have fake diplomas from Bosnia and Herzegovina or
Croatia. If they come from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
certain diplomas are no longer being recognized, but
this is all part of the wider issue of the rule of law.

I think it would be very good if we could have the
presence of foreign judges and prosecutors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina again. I think Albania has asked for
a vetting procedure, and we did have foreign judges
and prosecutors in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past.
Regrettably - and this is my personal opinion - we
allowed them to go home about 10 years ago, but maybe
if they were to act in a monitoring capacity, their return
would not be so bad.

Today, 8 May, we celebrate the liberation of Europe.
I would like to recall that we, in my own country of
Austria, also had a sort of High Representative: the
Allied Forces. It was very helpful. Nazism did not
return because there was an Allied Forces presence.
Democracy was restored - we had not had a parliament
since before the Second World War. In the presence of
the Allied Forces, democracy was strengthened. And
there was also the Marshall Plan. The foreign presence
was therefore beneficial. Further, owing to the presence
of the Allied Forces, certain judicial proceedings were
commenced in Austria against Nazis. It was very good
for our own country to come to terms with our past,
to purify our secret service and to look towards the
future. And now Austria is one of the most successful
countries in the world. But, of course, this presence was
limited. When all of what the Allied Forces wanted to
do was implemented, they withdrew and left Austria,
and we became a fully independent country.

That brings me to the so-called Bonn powers. The
Permanent Representative of Germany might want to
call them Berlin powers. There has been a change in
capitals as well as a change in philosophy. We used
the Bonn Powers exactly 958 times in the past. The
Bonn powers are actually rooted in and extend from
the General Framework Agreement for Peace, and they
make the High Representative the final authority on
the interpretation of the Dayton Accords and the actor
that should facilitate the resolution of difficulties. This
comes from the original Dayton Accords. However, to
activate these Bonn powers, a conference took place
in Bonn in 1997, at which the Peace Implementation
Council under the strong leadership of Foreign
Minister Kinkel, who passed away recently, welcomed
the intention of the High Representative to use final
authority and facilitate the resolution of difficulties in
future much more robustly.

Of course, the first 10 years were very active as
far as High Representatives, including my predecessor,
of course, were concerned. We established many
institutions. There were only three ministries after
Dayton and based on Dayton; now we have nine.
There was no border police. There was no currency.
As the Bosnian delegation mentioned this morning,
the economy is doing quite well, and the country has
perhaps the most stable currency in the Balkans. There
is no inflation. The currency is pegged to the euro, and
it is still called the mark - not the Deutsche mark, but
the convertible mark 4 and it is a very stable currency.
It can be exchanged, sent abroad and so forth. Also,
there was no flag or national anthem. We still do not
have lyrics for the national anthem, but at least there
is a national anthem. There has been a lot of progress,
and when a Common Minister for Defence was
created - initially we had two Ministers for Defence
and three armies, but about 11 years ago, a single
army was created, with one Minister for Defence,
and a defence law, which I mentioned previously, was
adopted - the international community said we would
have to use the Bonn powers less. We will now have to
stress local ownership, because local ownership is the
future anyway.

Regrettably, there has been a retreat on that progress
in the last 10 years. We have not seen the establishment
of very many new institutions, nor have many new laws
been adopted. We mentioned Lord Ashdown earlier.
When he was there, during his four-year tenure, 236
laws were adopted. In the last four years, only about
40 laws have been adopted. I therefore think we should
reconsider our presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Maybe we should enter into a stronger cooperation
arrangement with local leaders, a more robust and
prescriptive cooperation, basing our presence, of
course, on local ownership, and Bonn Powers should
only be exercised as a last resort. When everything else
fails then maybe we should intervene.

Mostar could be a good example. We allowed
local ownership in Mostar more than 10 years ago,
and for some 10 years now we have had a decision by
the Constitutional Court in Mostar that the electoral
law should be changed. But nothing has happened. In
the meantime, we are happy that the mayor is sane.
He is distributing about $30 million a year, which
means $300 million have been distributed in the last
10 years without a municipal council. So local people
have had no opportunity to exercise their most basic
democratic right, namely, the right to vote. Mostar is
the fifth biggest city in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Can
Council members imagine the fifth biggest city in their
countries having no elections or no municipal council
for 10 years?

That is what we have to address in future. We
also should not tolerate what we have to tolerate at the
moment, in particular double standards. For example,
hate speech is not allowed in our countries. In Bosnia,
it is possible to use hate speech because there is no
law prohibiting it. Holocaust denial is not allowed in
our countries; in Bosnia, genocide denial is allowed
because there is no law. But we have genocide laws
specifically referring to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
Belgium, in Canada, in Switzerland and in some other
countries, but not in Bosnia.

As I mentioned earlier, one of the most sacred
principles of civilization - egalite' - is not being
implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina. If one is a
Jewish citizen or a Roma citizen or an ethnic Ukrainian
citizen, that person cannot run for the State Presidency
or for Parliament. This is a great discrimination, and
we are just beginning to look at it. I think we should
have a more proactive approach in future as well as
greater efforts to strengthen the rule of law. Believe me,
I would be very happy ifI could say in one or two years
that we have rule of law and good governance. At that
point, I would be able to close my office, which would
be a happy moment for me, believe me.

We should probably take a fresh look at all the
open issues. We rely on local ownership, with the local
populations working together with us. We saw this
approach worked in the Baltics; in Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania, local ownership worked. In this way, the
wonderful people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
able to build their own future. Otherwise, the exodus
that we have witnessed for the last 10 years - 500,000
people have left Bosnia and Herzegovina - will
continue, which is not good for the country, especially
when the best people are leaving.

I thank the members of the Security Council for
keeping this issue on the Council's agenda. We should
perhaps do a reset and have a fresh look at the issues in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and then, together with local
ownership, we can make a difference.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.
