Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks. In the time that he
spoke, another five rockets were fired from Gaza into
southern Israel, one of which fell on a house. Before I
begin my statement, I would like to thank Ambassador
Gasana for presiding over this important meeting.

As I speak, there is a storm of rockets being fired
by the Hamas terrorist organization in Gaza. Hamas
is intentionally and indiscriminately threatening
the lives of 3.5 million innocent men, women and
children in Israel from the south to the north - from
Beersheba to Tel Aviv and Haifa. In the past three
days, 442 rockets have been fired into Israel. That is
one every 10 minutes. Fifteen seconds is how much
time one has to run for one's life. Imagine having only
15 seconds to find a bomb shelter. Now imagine doing
that with small children, elderly parents or an ailing
friend. A generation of Israeli children is growing up
under the shadow of that threat. Such an abnormal way
of life has become the norm for many Israelis. That is
absolutely unacceptable. No nation, no people and no
Government could tolerate it.

Hamas dragged us into this conflict. On the evening
of 12 June, three Israeli teenagers - Eyal, Gilad and
Naftali - were on their way home from school when
they were kidnapped and murdered by Hamas terrorists.
In the days that followed, Hamas began raining rockets
indiscriminately on our homes and cities. While Israel
showed restraint, Hamas responded with unrestrained
aggression. There were more rockets and more terror
attacks. Some people in this Chamber have criticized
Israel for finally responding to those provocations.
They have accused us of reacting disproportionately.
Asking Israel to show restraint while our cities are
under constant attack is like asking a fire brigade to
battle an inferno with nothing more than buckets of
water.

No country would accept the threats that Israel
faces. We are determined to give Israelis the safety and
security that they deserve. This week, Israel launched
a self-defence operation, called Protective Edge, to
counter the attacks, to defend our citizens and to
secure for them a life without a constant threat. The
goal of our operation is to remove the threat posed by
Hamas by dismantling its military infrastructure and to
restore calm in Israel. We are not looking for a band-aid
solution that will allow Hamas to rest and regroup. We
are not going to give them so-called time out so that
they can replenish their rocket supplies and hit us again
in a few weeks.

Israel is taking great measures to avoid harming
innocent civilians. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
warn the Palestinians in Gaza of imminent strikes. At the
same time, Hamas instructs those civilians to stand on
the roofs of those buildings and to act as human shields.
Hamas exploits our concern for human life by hiding in
Palestinian homes, schools and mosques and by using
the basement of a hospital in Gaza as its headquarters.
They are committing a double war crime, targeting
Israeli civilians while hiding behind Palestinian
civilians. Hamas is targeting the supply lines of its
own people. It is firing rockets at an electrical plant in
Ashkelon that is keeping the lights on for the citizens
of Gaza. Earlier this week, Hamas blew up a tunnel
near the Kerem Shalom crossing, and it has been firing
rockets and missiles at this critical entry point. Let me
be clear. Hamas is targeting the only crossing through
which food, medicine and other essentials enter Gaza.
That is how much it really cares about its own people.
Despite the attacks, Israel is keeping the crossing open,
and on Tuesday and Wednesday 242 truckloads of
goods were delivered into the Gaza Strip.

Members of this body have repeatedly criticized
Israel for restricting the entry of construction materials
into Gaza. Let me explain what that cement and steel
are being used for. They are certainly not being used to
build schools, kindergartens or homes. They are being
used to build rockets that Hamas shoots indiscriminately
at Israeli schools, kindergartens and homes. They are
being used to build terror tunnels that Hamas uses to
kidnap Israelis.

Over the past few years, Hamas has built up a
massive military machine with 10,000 rockets. Israel
is now acting to dismantle that machine. Hamas is
determined to escalate the situation with an arsenal it
has acquired courtesy of one of the world's primary
sponsors of terrorism, Iran. In March, Iran was caught
red-handed trying to transfer long-range missiles into
Gaza. Those missiles have a range of 160 kilometres
and can hit Israel's largest population centres. Hamas
must understand that it cannot target Israeli civilians.
Just this morning, on one of our highways, the IDF
stopped a car that was packed with explosives, en route
to carrying out a suicide attack. Earlier this week,
terrorists infiltrated Israel from the sea on a mission to
attack a nearby kibbutz.

I would like to remind the Council that the terrorist
group behind those attacks has a seat in the Palestinian
unity Government. Hamas is recognized internationally
as a terrorist organization by many countries, including
members of the Security Council - the same Hamas
that does not recognize Israel and promotes a genocidal
agenda by seeking Israel's destruction. Its Charter
states clearly that Israel exists and will continue to exist
until Islam obliterates it. Hamas is practising what it
preaches. It has sent suicide bombers into our shopping
centres, buses and cafes. It has brainwashed an entire
generation of Palestinian children and sent thousands
ofyoung people to terrorist training camps. Since 2013,
it has attempted to kidnap 64 Israelis.

Members of the international community have
embraced this Fatah-Hamas partnership, even though
Hamas has not changed its tune or acted in concert with
the Quartet principles. It has not recognized Israel,
renounced violence or accepted previous agreements.
Nonetheless, the international community has been
willing to buy into this bad deal, and now Israeli citizens
are paying the price. It is time for the international
community to right this wrong and make it clear to
Hamas that unity does not equal impunity.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian observer sits in this
Chamber and has the audacity to shield Hamas even as
that terror organization uses its own people as human
shields. In his remarks, he did not mention a single
one of the rockets fired into Israel - 442 rockets, and
he does not say a word. His silence is as deafening as
the rockets exploding in Israel right now. Through his
choice of words, the Palestinian observer has become
the mouthpiece of Hamas. Since when does a terror
organization get a seat and a voice in the United
Nations?

For years, we have called on the international
community to condemn the rocket fire. We have
been met with silence. For years, we spoke about the
thousands of rockets that Hamas was smuggling into
Gaza. Everyone thought we were exaggerating and said
not a word. For years, we warned of the impending
escalation and were ignored. Now that the rockets are
landing in our backyard and the terrorists are on our
doorstep, it is time for the international community to
finally recognize Hamas for what it really is - a terrorist
organization that should be denounced, dismantled and
delegitimized.

Unlike our enemies, Israel believes in the infinite
value of human life. The Bible says, "I have set before
you life and death.... therefore choose life." The Jewish
people always choose life. Yet that is not what we see
on the other side. In 2005, Israel evacuated from Gaza
and in the process uprooted 12,000 Israelis from their
homes. The Palestinians had the opportunity to build a
prosperous and peaceful society. Instead of building the
Palestinian people up, they have committed to tearing
Israel down. Instead of choosing life, they celebrate
death. In Gaza, there are public squares and hospitals
named after terrorists. Visit a Gaza school and there are
children dressed up as suicide bombers and chanting
death threats to Israel. Visit the home of Abu Aysha's
mother, and she will say how proud she is that her son
was behind the kidnapping and murder of Eyal, Gilad
and Naftali. A culture that celebrates martyrdom and
murder is a culture that will always be at war with itself
and with its neighbours.

Israel is at the forefront of the free world in
fighting radical Islamic terrorism. The threat posed by
terrorism is a global one - the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Hizbullah and
Hamas. From Abuja to Fallujah, terrorists are attacking
our schools and skyscrapers, our homes and hospitals,
our malls and embassies. No nation is immune. If
the international community wants the nations of the
world to stand with it in the battle against terrorism
tomorrow, it must stand with Israel today. The call
from our capitals must be loud and clear - opposing
terrorism in one place means opposing it in every place.

It is our cities, homes and families that are under fire
right now. I ask each and every person in this Chamber
what they would do if it was their family under attack.
What would they expect their own Governments to do?
There is only one responsible course of action for the
Council - it is to condemn Hamas, condemn terrorism
and condemn the rocket fire. It must call on President
Abbas to dissolve the unity Government and support
Israel's right to defend itself. That is the only way to
achieve peace in our region.

