Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank the
Peruvian presidency for responding quickly to the
request for the holding of this meeting, and we would
like to express our appreciation to Russia for making
the request. It would have been a serious dereliction of
duty on the part of the Council ifit had failed to meet in
the light of what transpired yesterday.

We also thank the Secretary- General for his briefing
and his presence today. For those of us who are elected
members of the Security Council, the responsibility is
indeed extremely heavy, to the point ofbeing unbearable.
Let us not forget that we are here representing 193
countries, to which, like permanent members, we have
made solemn promises that are generally encapsulated
in the Charter of the United Nations. For those of us who
are members of the African Union, an organization that
for obvious historical reasons attaches huge importance
to scrupulous adherence to the principles of the
Charter, the obligation that we have to tell the truth and
to stand up and be counted for peace is also enormously
heavy - all the more so when the parties involved,
from our own national perspective, are friends.

It was only yesterday that the Secretary-General
urged Member States to act responsibility in these
dangerous circumstances and stressed the need to
avoid the serious situation from spiralling out of
control (see S/PV.8231); indeed, he repeated the
same sentiment today. We have also been repeatedly
expressing our concern that the dynamic in Syria could
lead to devastating consequences not only nationally,
but regionally and internationally. No doubt, the strike
undertaken by the three countries yesterday appears
not to have led to the situation spiralling out of control.
We do not take that lightly, even though it might be
difficult to be consoled by that fact in the light of the
potential danger we still face.

That is why we call for maximum restraint, the
exercise of wisdom and a quick return to dialogue among
the major powers that have enormous influence on the
current situation in Syria. As we stressed yesterday
and previously, it is absolutely vital to resume the
path of diplomacy. The alternative is without a doubt
catastrophic beyond our imagination. We hope that no
one wants to see that happen, but it could if we do not
act together with a huge sense of urgency to defuse the
current tension and reduce further military escalation.
By no means do we overlook the genesis of this
tragedy we are facing. It has to do with the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Douma. At least, that is
what ratcheted up the tension, leading to what took
place yesterday, which is difficult to defend as being
consistent with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. But there is also one point that makes it
difficult for us to understand what took place yesterday.
The Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is arriving,
or, as just said by the Secretary-General, has already
arrived in Syria to investigate the alleged use of
chemical weapons, which is the cause of all this tension.

In the light ofthat, you must excuse us, Mr. President,
if we were a little perplexed. While the priority of
the time is clearly to avert the further escalation of
the latest development, we are not underestimating
the importance of ensuring accountability for any
confirmed use of chemical weapons in Syria. In that
regard, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission should be
allowed to conduct a thorough investigation to establish
the facts related to the alleged chemical weapons attack
in Douma. The sustainable way to end impunity, which
we believe is extremely important, to deter and stop
the use of chemicals as weapons is through united
and concerted action, including through an attribution
mechanism that the Council could and must set up.

That has become all the more critical now, when,
as we all know, truth is becoming very difficult to
establish. An opportunity has been created for parties
and even individuals to claim the veracity of their own
facts. We know that we are all disappointed by the
current deadlock, but that should not justify overlooking
the obligation to adhere to the principles of the Charter.

Let me conclude by referring to what the
Secretary-General said yesterday. I wanted to refer to
it again because it reflects the truth and is, therefore,
worth repeating:

"[T]he Cold War is back with a vengeance -but with
a difference. The mechanisms and the safeguards
to manage the risks of escalation that existed in the
past no longer seem to be present." (S/PV823], p. 2)

That is why we must appeal to the members of the
Security Council, especially the Permanent Five, to
help create a situation where diplomacy would have the
upper hand and the primacy ofpolitics will be our guide
for coming out of what is a troubled moment in our
recent history. The Geneva process and Special Envoy

de Mistura need the unqualified support ofthe Council.
