Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia welcomes the briefing by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Mr
Said Djinnit, and thanks him for the arduous efforts
that he and his team have made to meet the challenges
of maintaining peace and security in the region.

In recent years, owing to multidimensional factors,
namely, wars of decolonialization, the arbitrary or
artificial nature of borders established in colonies,
the serious conflicts spawned by the Cold War, which
included wars ofsecession and conflicting state interests
and civil wars caused by economic factors and fuelled by
external actors, an environment replete with conflicts
and wars has emerged in the brotherly continent of
Africa. Such multidimensional factors were mentioned
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his report
to the Security Council (S/l998/318), published in April
1998, on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
The report cited natural resources as the main cause of
conflict. They have been and will continue to be key
determinants in the spread of socioeconomic conflicts
through the financing of armed groups and the control
of countries and their populations.

The Great Lakes region, which is one of the
world's richest in natural resources, is an example
of an environment created by large multinationals
and international consortiums that undermine State
capacity by encouraging the purchase of diamonds,
copper, cobalt, coltan and other resources that are
mined illegally by armed groups, which fuels wars by
providing such groups with the means to perpetuate
conflict. In that regard, Bolivia voices its concern about
the illegal activities of armed groups in the region, such
as the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda,
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Lord's Resistance
Army and the reappearance of former members of the
Mouvement du 23 mars, as well as inter-ethnic conflicts
in various areas of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which all undermine efforts to foster stability
and security.

At the same time, insecurity and violence have
continued to heighten tensions in the region, resulting
in many deaths. During the reporting period of the
Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2017/208),
published in March, Burundi's Environment Minister
was murdered at the beginning of 2017, and in Uganda,
on the border with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, a clash occurred between security forces and
local militia groups, which left at least 87 people dead.

We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the region, which makes the conflicts
increasingly complex. There are more than
6 million internally displaced persons and 3.5 million
refugees - considered to be the most vulnerable
population groups. Despite the major conflict,
Bolivia is optimistic about the outcome of efforts by
regional and international associations, whose goal
is to provide ongoing and coordinated support for the
implementation of agreements that have been brokered
primarily in order to build on the Nairobi Declarations,
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which are all connected to the United Nations Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017. The
priority is to encourage dialogue, the neutralization of
armed groups, the promotion of the rights of women
and young people, and civil-society participation. We
highlight the progress made in preparing for elections in
the brotherly countries of Angola, Kenya, Rwanda and,
in particular, the promise by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that presidential elections will be held at
the end of 2017 in an inclusive political process.

In conclusion, with regard to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the countries
of the Great Lakes region, we encourage all parties and
the international community, as a whole, to continue
to assist with technical support and economic and
humanitarian cooperation by pooling their efforts to
achieve stability and lasting peace through a process of
disarmament, dialogue, reconciliation and reintegration.

