Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing on the recent developments in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Since the peace process was interrupted in 2010,
the Palestinian cause has experienced an historic and
decisive turning point, requiring the international
community as represented by the Council to intervene to
ensure the resumption of the peace process in the region
and to expedite progress towards a comprehensive and
lasting peace, which is the only guarantee of security
and stability for all the peoples of the region.

The visit to the region by President Barack Obama
and the initiatives of John Kerry offer a glimmer of
hope for a reinvigorated peace process between the
Palestinian and the Israelis aimed at achieving the two-
State solution. We welcome that visit and the ensuing
initiatives. We wish those initiatives every success
in helping to reinvigorate the peace process and the
negotiations.

In that regard, allow me to recall once again that
the Arab side has repreatedly, and most recently at the
Arab League Summit held in Doha in March, proven
its committment to a lasting and fair peace in the
Middle East as a strategic option, and to the principles
of the peace process and, in particular, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the significance of which has been restated at
successive League of Arab States Summits held since
2000.

Experience has shown us that the flexibility shown
by the Arabs and the Palestinians has unfortunately been
stymied by the ongoing settlement and colonization
activities, in particular in the city of Jerusalem. This
poses a serious threat, preventing an internationally
acceptable solution, as settlement activities have been
roundly and consistently condemned and rejected by the
international community. This practice infringes upon
international law, flouts Security Council resolutions,
and prevents the establishment of an environment
conducive to the resumption of negotiations.

We are all aware that the city of East Jerusalem has
been the primary target of the settlement policy, which
seeks to alter the geographic, cultural and demographic
composition ofa city that is ofkey symbolic significance
to all practitioners of holy religions. Its nature cannot
be modified. The city cannot be isolated from Palestine.

The Kingdom of Morocco chairs the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.
We call once again on the international community to
shoulder its full historic responsibility to bring to an
end to the violations of the sacred nature of holy sites,
be they Christian or Muslim, and to ensure respect for
the status of the city of Jerusalem as a territory for the
coexistence of all holy religions.
The occupied Palestinian territory is facing dire
economic circumstances. The further deterioration of
the economic situation could endanger the economic
gains made to date by the Palestinian Authority, thereby
jeopardizing the creation ofa Palestinian State. We can
only welcome the efforts that have been made to resolve
this situation and to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

Once again, we call for an end to the blockade that
has been imposed on Gaza since 2006. It is a form of
collective punishment imposed on more than 1.6 million
Palestinian, including more than 1 million refugees. We
underscore once again the importance of ensuring that
the ceasefire agreed last November is not violated in
order to ensure that the lives of innocent civilians are
protected. That agreement preserves the security of all
parties concerned, without exception.
Moreover, we call upon the Palestinian factions
to fully abide by the national reconciliation process
in Palestine. The unity of the Palestinian State is a
prerequisite for ensuring that the Palestinian interests
are upheld in the negotiations and that peace is achieved.

With regard to the issue of Palestinian prisoners,
we again call upon Israel to put an end to the tragic
fates of thousands of prisoners in its jails, including the
sick, those on hunger strike, children and those under
administrative detention.

We support the ongoing Palestinian determination
to achieve international peace through negotiation.
However, the region cannot endure a further failure in
the peace process. That is why, today more than ever
before, all parties must do their utmost to attain a two-
State solution based on a political plan that is clear and
through credible negotiations within a specific time
frame and in accordance with a well-defined mechanism
that will allow for the achievement of a two-State
solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders. We hope
that 2013 will be the year of a political settlement that
will finally enable the Palestinian people to forge their
own independent and viable State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel.

As a non-permanent member of the Council, the
Kingdom of Morocco shall support all regional and
international efforts to revive the peace process and
fulfil the hopes of all the peoples of the region for are
a Middle East where peace, prosperity and security
prevail. Let us do our utmost to ensure that the Israeli
Government also demonstrates political willingness to
contribute, as it has done in the past, to the creation of
a comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East, in
accordance with the parameters recognized by all.

We have focused on the Palestinian issue because
it lies at the heart of the Israeli-Arab conflict. We fear
that the lack of a solution will lead to tragedies for the
future of present and coming generations, which would
tarnish the Organization.

We shall never forget the ongoing occupation by
Israel of the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon and
we call upon Israel once again to withdraw from those
territories so that a lasting and comprehensive peace
may be achieved in the region.

Again, we restate our concern with regard to the
situation affecting the brotherly Syrian people and its
humanitarian impact. We are convinced that all forms
of violence must cease and that the Council must be
united in action in order to create an environment
conducive to international efforts aimed at putting an
end to the killings and to achieve a solution that will
meet the aspirations of the Syrian people to freedom
and coexistence among all its ethnic and religious
components with a view to ensuring respect for Syrian
national and territorial unity.

Once again allow me to recall our position, which is
based on Lebanon's stability and the unity of its people.
We commend the nationalist spirit of responsibility
demonstrated by all the groups of Lebanese people
in order to uphold the national sovereignty and
territorial unity of Lebanon. We are certain that the
Lebanese authorities are fully able, through dialogue
and wisdom, to resolve pending matters and to reach
agreement on the formation of a new Government so
that the legislative elections can be held pursuant to
Lebanon's Constitution.

