Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): The delegation of Costa Rica takes special
satisfaction from the Security Council's holding of this
formal meeting to discuss the situation in Haiti and to
adopt the draft resolution that will establish the new
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti.

Some years ago, when forces hostile to freedom and
democracy flouted the will of the Haitian people and
destroyed the constitutional order in that country, the
United Nations responded with immediacy and solidarity,
unanimously condemning such illegitimate actions. When
its support was needed, the Council gave timely approval
to the establishment of a peacekeeping mission to support
pluralistic democracy and the Government that had been
freely chosen by the Haitian people at the polls.

Due to the particular nature of political
developments in Haiti, the armed forces of that Caribbean

 

country have played a negative, repressive and disingenuous
role with respect to the aspirations of the people. For that
reason, Costa Rica has been of the view that an essential
prerequisite for the consolidation of peace and national
reconciliation in Haiti is demilitarization, the elimination of
the armed forces and the creation of an apolitical and
professional civilian police force.

The establishment of democratic peace in Haiti is also
inextricably linked to the rule of law and, especially, the
existence and functioning of a strong, independent and
efficient judiciary with the necessary capacity to combat
impunity and respond to the challenge of guaranteeing and
promoting respect for the human rights of the population.
This is one of the main factors for guaranteeing the
political and institutional capacity of the Haitian State to
give a prompt, timely, independent and full response to its
inhabitants' longing for justice. That has been the focus of
particular international attention, and we trust that the
material support that this Organization has been giving to
the process of strengthening the administration of justice in
Haiti can be maintained.

One other essential aspect to consider is the fact that
the existence and durability of peace in Haiti are based on
the need to promote a true process of sustainable
development and equity. This is frequently a commonplace
in diplomatic and political discourse, but in the case of
Haiti, it is an imperative and urgent matter that requires our
attention.

We cannot ignore the worrying international figures
contained in international statistics. Haiti has the highest
poverty index in the western hemisphere, and on the basis
of more general factors, it ranks last among the countries of
the region in the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Human Development Index. We will not be able
to say that peace in Haiti has been consolidated and firmly
established so long as its inhabitants do not enjoy fair
conditions of economic development and social justice. In
this regard, Costa Rica views with special concern the fact
that in the last year the international community has
reduced its economic assistance to Haiti. We wish to appeal
clearly for this trend to be reversed, and we trust that
initiatives such as the UNDP "Haiti 2012" initiative will
enjoy sufficient material support from cooperating countries.

The draft resolution before us, which my delegation is
honoured to co-sponsor, is a timely response by the
Security Council to the present situation in Haiti.

The operations of the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti in the process of the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police demonstrated the need and
justification for international support in this area.
Therefore, we are sure that in the future the security and
stability provided by the Haitian National Police will
ensure conditions in which the process of judicial reform
can continue and will mark out an appropriate setting for
the process of economic revitalization.

Nonetheless, this entire effort will be pointless if the
Haitian political class does not show a true sense of
responsibility and determination to assume its obligations
in the area of national reconciliation. Costa Rica, having
brotherly relations with Haiti, appeals to the political
leaders of that country to put aside confrontation and
division and to work in unity and solidarity for peace,
democracy, progress and equity for all Haitians.

In this context, my delegation fully supports the
Secretary-General's initiative to establish the new United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti on an exceptional
basis. As expressed in the report, the Mission will be
entrusted with helping the Government of Haiti in the
professionalization of the national Police in that fraternal
country.

