Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
scheduling this public meeting on the situation in East
Timor. Let me begin by thanking Mr. Annabi for
introducing the latest report of the Secretary-General
and for his additional remarks.

The Secretary-General's report covers a number
of significant developments in East Timor over the last
six months. We take great pleasure in acknowledging
once again the crucial role that the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
is playing in confronting the numerous challenges
facing the territory of East Timor under the creditable
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira de Mello. We heard
from him last month about the idea of broadening the
participation in governance of the East Timorese
leadership. We support this initiative, as we have
always advocated Timorese ownership of the
development efforts. We welcome, therefore, the
creation of the National Council that replaces the
National Consultative Council. This is a significant
development on the path to democratic and
representative governance.

While the vibrant nature of political expression is
nothing unexpected for the people of East Timor, who
are passing through turbulent times, we would like to
sound a word of caution for the leaders and opinion-
makers: they should take the utmost care not to allow
intolerance of political expression and religious and
ethnic sensitivities to take root. We say this because we
notice certain tendencies in these directions. We would
fully endorse UNTAET initiatives in the areas of civic
and political education and establishment of the rule of
law.

We also note with satisfaction that UNTAET's
policy of information and communication is being
strengthened, which we believe is crucial not only to
enhance confidence in UNTAET activities, but also to
inculcate in the East Timorese population respect for
others' rights. The role of close consultation with
interlocutors, with regard to tolerance of the views of
other political groups, is indisputable. It would be a
cruel irony if yesterday's minority failed to adopt a
culture of tolerance towards today's minority and
resorted to an attitude of intimidation.

As in our last meeting, we have heard about the
continuing problem of militia activity. In the last few
weeks UNTAET positions have been attacked, and very
recently a peacekeeper was shot dead. We take this
opportunity to express our sincere condolences to his
bereaved family and salute his courage and
commitment to a noble cause. We convey our
condolences to the Government of New Zealand, the
country from which this peacekeeper came. We are
very much concerned at this dangerous trend, which
has the potential of undoing the good work done so far
by UNTAET and the goodwill and cooperation that the
Indonesian Government has shown. We recognize the
determined efforts being made by the Indonesian
Government in this regard. Clearly, there is need to do
much more in order to terminate, once and for all, the
continuing militia activity in the areas bordering East
Timor. We are confident that the Indonesian
Government will put a high priority on this aspect and
take all necessary steps.
We are also very concerned at the recent spate of
attacks on the property and personnel of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). Their safety and security is uppermost in
our mind, as we feel that they are playing a pivotal role
in the whole process of ensuring a rapid return of the
refugees to East Timor. It is incumbent on the
Indonesian authorities to ensure the safety of all aid
workers in West Timor and to secure the refugee camps
against the incessant attacks of the armed elements.
The recurrence of these incidents does not augur well
for the stalled repatriation process. It is also not in the
interest of the Government of Indonesia to allow its
commitment to falter due to the criminal activities of
the militia and their accomplices. The other issue that
has not been attended to is that of payment of pensions
to the civil servants. We invite the Indonesian
authorities to take necessary steps soon to reach a
solution. This would give a long awaited fillip to the
repatriation of refugees.

We encourage the ongoing process of
investigation of human rights violations that occurred
in the wake of the referendum last year. We deeply
appreciate the efforts being made by the office of the
Indonesian Attorney-General. We hope that all
concerned will endeavour not to allow any delay in this
process.

Before concluding, let me touch upon the issue of
transition to independence. We have said earlier that
realistic benchmarks, and not an arbitrary time-frame,
should be the guiding factor. Bangladesh believes that
the process of transition will be slow and long. To our
mind, haste should be avoided. Consultation with the
national leadership, as well as regular feedback to the
Security Council, would be our proposal in the setting
of those benchmarks. We consider it very important
that the people of East Timor, through their own
leadership, perceive these benchmarks as milestones in
their quest for national development that can
rejuvenate, and not dampen, their spirits.

