Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to express my gratitude to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
Farid Zarif for his comprehensive briefing. I would also
like to welcome Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, Prime Minister
of Serbia, and Mr.Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Kosovo. I thank them for their statements.

The announcement that elections for the presidency
ofthe Kosovo Assembly would be held on 8 December is
a sign that political tensions in Kosovo have eased. The
subsequent constitutional steps to be taken, specifically
the election of a new President and the members of a
new Cabinet, are further indications ofKosovo's serious
commitment to a democratic constitution and civilized
path forward. The level of political maturity enjoyed
by the politicians of Kosovo is reflected in the way
they have handled the constitutional tasks before them
and is cause for optimism in the future of the country.
Although the announcement was made rather late, the
lengthy consultations among the various party blocs on
the accompanying complications did eventually led to a
more stable political environment.

In that context, Jordan commends the role of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo and the way it dealt
with the complications referred to it following the
announcement of the results of the most recent elections
for the Assembly of Kosovo, which led eventually to the
formation of alliances among the winning parties. The
spirit of professionalism exhibited by the Court in its
dealing with the complications was clear-cut evidence
of the major progress achieved in the administrative
system in Kosovo.

Security and stability in the region can be achieved
only through good neighbourly relations built on
the basis of mutual respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of each State and on the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States. We therefore emphasize the important need to
make progress on the implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement between the two neighbouring States
of Kosovo and Serbia. We also welcome the continued
technical discussions between the two countries,
especially during the recent elections in Kosovo. We
reiterate our call for the high-level dialogue under the
auspices of the European Union to continue as soon as
possible.

I would like to welcome what was mentioned by the
Prime Minister of Serbia regarding the willingness of
his country to resolve the conflict peacefully through
dialogue and the readiness to engage in negotiations
with Pristina to that end.

Jordan commends the continued development
and progress achieved by Kosovo in various areas,
especially when it comes to the rule of law and human
rights. We urge Kosovo to continue on that path.
We reaffirm the importance of the activities of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in
assisting the country in consolidating rule-of-law and
justice institutions. We call on the authorities to step up
efforts to achieve comprehensive reconciliation among
all sectors of society in Kosovo and to give particular
attention to the treatment of all citizens on an equal
basis in accordance with the law. We also urge them to
protect the rights of minorities effectively, in particular
those of the Serbian minority. The State of Kosovo must
also try to prevent attacks against holy sites belonging
to any religious group or sect.

Since its independence, Kosovo has taken major
strides towards strengthening its international standing.
To date, 108 States Members of the United Nations have

recognized Kosovo. Jordan therefore calls for Kosovo's
accession to the various international organizations and
forums to be facilitated. We also support the proposal
to lengthen the period between progress reports of
the Secretary-General on UNMIK, in the light of the
stability of the situation Kosovo.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation to the
Head and the personnel of UNMIK for their efforts in
carrying out their mandate.

