The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2016/999, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic ofKorea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America
and Uruguay.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2321 (2016).

I now give the floor to His Excellency the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


