Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting. China highly commends
France, as President of the Council for the month of
March, for guiding the Council's work to a successful
conclusion.

The Council has had a busy schedule this month;
it adopted nine resolutions, including resolution 2206
(2015) on the reports of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan and South Sudan, and issued eight presidential
statements, including those on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PRST/2015/7 and S/PRST/2015/8).
I would like to focus on three points pertaining to the
work of the Council this month.

First, the situation in the Sudan and South Sudan
has been a priority issue on the Council's agenda for
the month of March. With regard to South Sudan, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
has made the decision to establish a new mechanism for
consultations and to push for a new round of political
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. We call
on the international community to remain firm, resolute
and patient and to continue to push for the effective
ceasefire and cessation of violence between the
parties to the conflict, who must work rapidly, through
negotiations, towards consensus on such important
issues as the structure of the transitional Government,
and cooperate actively with the mediation efforts of
IGAD and others. The international community should
also attach importance to easing the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan.

At the same time, maintaining the overall stability
of the relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan is in the common interest of the Sudan, South
Sudan, and the countries of the region. China urges
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
comply with the relevant agreements and Security
Council resolutions, avoid unilateral actions that may
exacerbate conflict, and jointly maintain the overall
stability of the region. We commend the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan for its
continued mediation efforts and good offices; we hope
that it will pursue such efforts.

Secondly, with regard to the issue of Afghanistan,
this month the Security Council adopted resolution
2210 (2015), extending the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
China commends the facilitator of that resolution,
Spain, for its efforts in that regard. China notes that
the Government of Afghanistan anticipates assuming
greater responsibility in its national reconstruction and
economic and social development. That is in conformity
with the fundamental principle of Afghan leadership
and ownership of the resolution of the issue. The
international community should proactively adapt to
that new normal, wherein the Afghan Government and
people will play a leading role in their own economic
and social development. China supports that active role
that the United Nations continues to play in the Afghan
issue, and UNAMA's efforts to resolve the issue. At the
same time, China believes that the UNAMA mandate
should be further improved and refined in light of
the needs of the transition process taking place in
Afghanistan, thereby ensuring that UNAMA can better
support and coordinate with the Afghan Government in
its efforts to achieve national reconciliation and rebuild
the State.

Thirdly, with regard to cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, this month the Security Council
mission successfully visited Central African Republic
and Burundi. The Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council held their ninth
annual consultation at African Union headquarters
in Ethiopia, and issued a joint communique. China
commends France for its coordination in that regard.
China encourages the Security Council to continue
to play the role required of it, and to facilitate a
smooth election in countries such as Central African
Republic and Burundi within the year. China hopes
that the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council will further strengthen their
cooperation in a joint effort to maintain peace and
stability in Africa.

Lastly, I wish Jordan success in the presidency of
the Security Council in the month of April.

