Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): Security and
development, in the context of nation-building and the
maintenance of international peace and security, are
two sides of the same coin. Nations cannot prosper
without internal security and stability. A nation facing
the collapse of its national security, and subsequently
its economy, becomes a threat not only to its people,
but to the region as a whole. The world has seen such
tragedies in the past. We should not allow these
tragedies to recur.

In addressing the need for development, with
security being the utmost prerequisite, the Security
Council can play a vital role. Peacekeeping missions
mandated by the Security Council, in tandem with the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the other
development agencies of the United Nations system,
should be equipped with development components.
While peacekeepers carry out their mandated
peacekeeping tasks, the Peacebuilding Commission,
together with the other development agencies of the
United Nations system, can work on projects and
activities that generate employment and income. Such
efforts, when successfully implemented, can help to
sustain the peace and stability of the State.

The world today is witness to internal strife faced
by member nations, which is caused mainly by the
rising price of food, the high rate of unemployment
among young people, and poverty. The spectre of high
oil prices and the sudden rise in the price of
commodities that we witnessed in the summer of 2008
are back. The price of wheat has shot up by almost 80
per cent in the past six months, while the price of rice
has increased by almost 50 per cent in the same period.
These increases have resulted in high inflation rates in
many countries. The developing world is again facing
the brunt of this jump in staple food prices. This rising
cost of living impacts heavily on the internal stability
of the most vulnerable least developed and developing
countries.

We are of the view that the Security Council can
play a role through its horizon-scanning consultations.
In tandem with the PBC, the Economic and Social
Council, the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and other relevant agencies of the
United Nations system, the Council can examine and
analyse the prevailing scenarios, and come up with
suggestions and proposals on ways for affected
Member States to tackle those sources of instability.
Recent events in the Middle East show how a sudden
rise in the price of food, combined with widespread
unemployment, can destabilize nations.

To conclude, Malaysia strongly believes that
political stability is sine qua non to achieving
economic development and prosperity. Stable and
prosperous nations can bring about regional and global
peace. The Security Council can play a major role in
this regard.

