Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his valuable briefing on recent developments in the
Middle East peace process.

Our participation in this meeting is of special
importance to us because it is the first we are attending
on the Palestinian issue during our non-permanent
membership of the Security Council. It is a cause that
represents one of the priorities for Kuwaiti foreign
policy, in line with our principled, firm and historical
position in support ofthe Palestinian people, their rights
and their struggle to put an end to Israeli occupation
and to achieve all of their legitimate political rights and
establish their independent State on their territory, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is incumbent upon us, as members of the Security
Council and emanating from our responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, to insist on
the implementation of the Council's resolutions, which
are binding upon all Member States, as per Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations. We must not allow
any party to any conflict to shirk the implementation
of those resolutions by invoking numerous excuses that
are mainly unrealistic, reveal a lack of political will and
show disregard for United Nations resolutions and for
international legitimacy. Israel, the occupying Power,
is in material breach of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Israel continues to
pursue its aggressive policies, unilateral measures
and provocations that run counter to Security Council
resolutions and international conventions.
Israel's violations occur as a result ofthe absence of
any call or serious demand by the Security Council upon
it to end its continued acts of aggression and to abide by
its international obligations as the occupying Power, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The arrests, the demolition of homes, the destruction
of property and the unprecedented expansion in
the building of illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, have
led to the forced eviction of Palestinian civilians and
casualties. Those actions have become a daily routine
for the Palestinian people.

The Palestinian question is basically embodied in
the occupation, of which the international community is
seized. The aim is to end the occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories in order to resolve the issue through
a two-State solution, within the 4 June 1967 borders. To
that end, there exist manifold initiatives agreements, and
international conventions. Security Council resolutions
have become an integral part of international law, which
is indispensable in international relations. In that regard,
we welcome the role played by the General Assembly
and the Security Council last month in demanding an
end to the occupation, rejecting all unilateral measures,
reaffirming the importance of a two-State solution and
calling for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the principle of land for peace, the road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

In addition, the United Nations has reaffirmed the
basic principles pertaining to this conflict, including
the need to respect the special status of Jerusalem and
nullifying any measure aimed at changing its status
without an agreement that arises from a comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016). That is why the
adoption of any unilateral measure or any attempt to
impose a new fait accompli is a de facto violation of
international law and of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Such measures constitute a very dangerous
development in the situation, the repercussions of which
will only further exacerbate feelings of frustrations,
which in turn will fuel extremism and directly affect
regional security and stability. It is neither realistic
nor acceptable to believe that unilateral decisions will
succeed in resolving this conflict.

In discussing the Palestinian question, we must
mention some shining moments that serve to underscore
the pivotal role of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, which offer all forms of support and assistance
to the Palestinian people, who have ajust and righteous
cause and have lived under Israeli occupation for over
50 years.

That is why it is appropriate to mention the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA), one of the oldest and most
successful United Nations agencies in practical terms.
It contributed, and continues to contribute, to stability
in the Middle East. The State of Kuwait highlights the
need for all donor States to commit to providing the
necessary funding to UNRWA in order to enable it
continue providing its vital services to the refugees and
to maintain the nature of its work and activities, which
are humanitarian and devoid of any politicization. In
that regard, we reiterate our support for UNRWA's
activities, to which we have pledged $7.9 million in
the past two months. We would also like to thank the
donor States that recently took the initiative to submit
their contributions so as to shrink the deficit in the
agency's budget.

Kuwait reiterates its solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people in defending their just cause and
legitimate rights, including their historic and well-
grounded rights in Jerusalem, which are guaranteed by
the relevant international resolutions. We underscore
that East Jerusalem is the capital of the State of
Palestine, and call on States to recognize the State of
Palestine, and occupied East Jerusalem as its capital.
We support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the
State of Palestine at the national and international
levels in order to entrench its sovereignty over Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territory.

In conclusion, I should like to announce that the
State of Kuwait, during its presidency of the Security
Council next month, intends to convene an Arria
Formula meeting, in cooperation with a group of
Security Council members, to discuss the status of
the Palestinian people after 50 years of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory.

