Mr. Pohan (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
extending the Indonesian delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for submitting his report on protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations, and to you, Mr. President, for
convening the meeting today on this issue.

In our View, this is an issue of critical importance to
the international community, particularly in this post-cold-
war era when refugees, peacekeepers and humanitarian
assistance personnel in conflict situations sometimes risk
their security and even their life. Indonesia has noted
various aspects of the report, especially those relating to
the protection of personnel, which warrant our serious
consideration. The report also defines the role of the
international community in preventing the risk of
humanitarian catastrophe due either to economic
difficulties or to a shortage of basic humanitarian
necessities.

Indonesia has in the past not only supported
concerted international efforts in alleviating the misery of
people caught up in conflicts but also has contributed to
numerous peacekeeping operations and related activities.
In this context, the United Nations, in the interests of
objectivity and impartiality, should play a greater role as
the coordinator of humanitarian assistance and should
base its activities on the guiding principles contained in
General Assembly resolution 46/182. It is our view that
many of the issues included in the Security Council's
agenda have a humanitarian dimension, where refugees
and other displaced persons are the victims of conflicts

 

and the environment is always more hostile when they are
denied humanitarian assistance and protection.

Refugees, displaced persons and other civilians in
conflict situations have a fundamental right under
international humanitarian law to humanitarian assistance.
Therefore, it is a daunting yet sacred task for humanitarian
workers and their agencies to ensure the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance. As is stated in paragraph 2 of the
annex to General Assembly resolution 46/ 182,

"Humanitarian assistance must be provided in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality

and impartiality".

In our perception, humanity implies humanitarian action to
relieve suffering and to introduce fundamental values -
namely, life and human dignity - while neutrality implies
a refusal to take sides in hostilities, and impartiality implies
providing individuals with their basic needs, irrespective of
their affiliation with any group or factions.

Hence, a prerequisite for effective humanitarian action
is respect for these principles and the imperative of
alleviating human suffering by mitigating the effects of
conflict. Failure to uphold such principles will put human
lives, including those of humanitarian workers, in jeopardy.
In the same vein, the use of humanitarian assistance could
also be a tool for the parties concerned to achieve political
objectives. For us, the political objective should be to
defuse the conflict while maintaining the impartiality of
humanitarian actions. In order to remain effective and
preserve their independence and neutrality, humanitarian
actions should be kept distinct from political or military
activities.

My delegation views the relationship and cooperation
between peacekeeping and humanitarian operations as
complex. They are also undoubtedly complementary.
However, as clearly expressed by the heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Countries at their recent
meeting in Durban, South Africa, it is essential to make a
distinction between humanitarian action and United Nations
peacekeeping and peace enforcement, which is a View also
shared by numerous humanitarian agencies.

In situations where decisions would be taken by the
Security Council to deploy humanitarian operations, the
Council should consider measures for the protection of
humanitarian workers and also take steps to ensure the
impartiality of humanitarian agencies.

We would like also to stress that while humanitarian
assistance is being extended, concerns for the respect of
a country's national laws should be taken into account.
Paragraph 16 of the report refers to the fact that States
deny access and defend such actions by invoking the
principle of national sovereignty in matters deemed
essentially within their domestic jurisdiction. We believe
that it is essential to recognize the sacrosanct principles of
independence and territorial integrity, which do not
absolve States from fulfilling their responsibilities to
refugees and others in conflict situations.

Nonetheless, the international community should
ensure that victims receive the assistance and protection
they need to safeguard their lives. Humanitarian personnel
should respect the national laws of those countries in
which they are operating in order to allow them to
perform efficiently their task of assisting the affected
civilian population, including refugees and internally
displaced persons.
The Indonesian delegation would like once again to
convey its appreciation for the Secretary-General's report
and pledges its cooperation to achieve the objectives
contained therein and to ensure the smooth and effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the safety of
personnel.

