Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We endorse the words of gratitude expressed
to you, Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. We are pleased to welcome the participation in

our discussion of the Vice-Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Faustino
Imbali. We listened very carefully to his statement,
which provided an in-depth analysis of the situation in
the country, the Government's policy and the tasks
facing the people of Guinea-Bissau. We should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement.

It is remarkable that today we are discussing not
only the problems of Guinea-Bissau, but the broader
problem of ensuring stable post-conflict peace-
building. Finding a way to resolve these problems is
extremely important from the perspective of a long-
term political settlement, including all the main
elements, ranging from the demobilization of former
combatants to the social and economic aspects, as well
as from the practical point of view, particularly as
regards the role of the United Nations in Guinea-
Bissau. In this connection, I should like to stress the
particular importance of coordinating activities within
the United Nations system. Such activities must be
directed towards the targeted resolution of social
problems so as to overcome the consequences of the
cr151s.

The development of events in Guinea-Bissau
provides a good illustration of the ideas that I have just
expressed. We share the concern of the international
community about the recent political crisis in the
country and, together with other members of the
Council, we appeal to all the social and political forces
in Guinea-Bissau to act solely within the bounds of the
Constitution.

With regard to the continued presence of the
United Nations in this African country, we believe that
the presence of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau is particularly
important. We believe that that Office should continue
to play its important initiating role of coordinator.

