Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this very timely debate. It is
difficult to believe that this is the first time the Council
is discussing human rights outside of the context of
a specific human rights situation or peacekeeping
operation. However, there is always a first time for
everything in life.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Today's meeting actually fits perfectly with our
holistic vision of security, in which peace, sustainable
development and the respect for human rights reinforce
one another. That is also consistent with the growing
attention the Council devotes to human rights with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. There are different opinions as to whether
human rights falls within the scope of Council action.
While fully respecting the different mandates ofrelevant
United Nations bodies, it is hard to deny the crucial
relevance of human rights in daily conflict prevention,
conflict management and post-conflict scenarios.

With respect to prevention, human rights abuses
are often the most effective warning sign of instability,
especially when they escalate into atrocity crimes.
Many examples have already been highlighted by my
colleague in the Council. I would just like to raise an
example. The global study on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) demonstrated that increasing
levels of domestic violence and the vulnerability of
women to gender-based violence, within and outside
the home, often reflected growing tensions and
militarization in a society. Such issues can be a valuable
indicator and source of information ifused as part of an
early warning mechanism for preventive action.

Turning to conflict management, human rights
violations are often among the root causes of conflict
and almost invariably constitute one of its most
prominent aspects. That is particularly true today,
with non-State armed groups resorting to gross human
rights violations in war. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and its affiliates, for instance, are using sexual
violence as a terrorist tactic to advance their strategic
and ideological objectives. That is why the Council is
recognizing the victims of sexual violence as victims
of terrorism. Children are increasingly employed as
soldiers. For that reason, the Council has the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict.

During Italy's previous term in the Security
Council in 2008, the Council adopted resolution 1820
(2008), which was the first to recognize the connection
between international security and sexual violence.
Today, we should look into the trafficking of human
beings, as well as trafficking in and the destruction of
cultural heritage as ways to undermine the fundamental
rights of individuals and communities with respect to
long-term conflict and instability.

With regard to post-conflict situations, the Security
Council has often been mindful of human rights
violations when articulating its response, deciding
peacekeeping operations mandates or adopting
sanctions. Against that backdrop, notwithstanding
the primary responsibility of States to respect human
rights, we believe that the Council has a role to play,
in synergy with United Nations bodies tasked with the
monitoring of human rights, in particular the Human
Rights Council. In that regard, allow me to make some
operational suggestions.

First, prevention requires information. The Security
Council should, together with the Human Rights
Council and other involved actors, devise a more
systematic use of human rights-related information
as an early-warning mechanism and a crucial element
in sustainable, long-term armed-conflict prevention
efforts. Only when the issue becomes second nature
can we be equipped to effectively prevent and tackle
crisis situations. We support the Human Rights Up
Front initiative, which aimed to establish a change in
mind set, to mainstream human rights in all our work,
including that of the Security Council, as well as in
the Framework of Analysis, which aims to assess the
risk of crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and ethnic cleansing, from an early-
warning perspective.

We therefore believe that information provided
to the Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
is extremely useful to better tackle crises we already
follow and to obtain meaningful insight into countries
that are not on the agenda of the Security Council. Since
situations may deteriorate and escalate into violence,
they should brief the Council on a more regular basis.
Like other countries, Italy has joined the declaration on
the reinforcement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Human Rights Council. It is one of the
objectives for our candidature to the Human Rights
Council for the 2019-2021 term. For instance, we would
welcome regular briefings by the President of the
Human Rights Council to the Security Council.

Two other informative tools at the disposal of the
Council are visiting missions and the Arria formula.
Visiting missions should include a human rights focus,
as was the case last March when the mission to the
Lake Chad basin monitored the human rights situation
of displaced people, women, children, and victims of
sexual violence. I was there and was truly affected by
what I witnessed. That formula provides the Council
with additional information and interaction with civil
society. We look forward to the meeting with the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic to be held this Friday.

Turning now to the second operational measure,
when reacting to conflict the Security Council should
provide peacekeeping operations with a strong human-
rights mandate. As is often the case, sanctions or other
tools are used to address persistent patterns of human
rights violations. We support the inclusion of sexual
violence as a separate criterion for sanctions in the
most recent renewal of sanctions in the Central African
Republic. A more systematic use of sanctions, rather
than a case-by-case basis, against individuals that have
committed gross human rights violations could be also
a strong deterrent in preventing new atrocities.

Lastly, with regard to accountability for the most
serious crimes, this kind of action may seem to come
too late after conflicts erupt and large-scale crimes are
committed. However, if the Council acts consistently
in bringing perpetrators to justice, justice itself can
become a relevant and decisive tool for preventing
human rights violations. Useful examples of such an
approach can be found in the International Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, established
by the Council, and of course in the work of the
International Criminal Court. Accountability for the
crimes committed in Syria should be established and
their perpetrators brought to justice. We understand that
at times Member States feel that such efforts are a form
of interference and undermine national sovereignty.
But what really threatens State sovereignty is violence
and conflict, and the Council also has to help Member
States to prevent them from recurring.

In conclusion, is there any situation on the agenda
of the Security Council that does not include serious
violations of human rights? The Council has a wide
array of tools at its disposal for maintaining peace and
security and preventing and responding to gross human
rights violations, including the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group,
and the French-Mexican initiative on restraint in the
use of the veto. Ultimately, the Security Council's unity
is the crucial factor in achieving its core objective, the
protection of civilians.

