Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish to join others in
thanking Ambassador Mufioz for his highly
informative oral report, which we fully support. I
would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Richard Barrett, the Coordinator of the Monitoring
Team, and to express our appreciation for the
comprehensive and lucid report prepared by the Team.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by Ambassador van den Berg of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I shall
confine myself to a few brief comments.

We should focus the assessment of the work of
our Committee around the worrisome conclusions
drawn by the Monitoring Team and highlighted in
Ambassador's Mufioz's report, according to which the
threat from Al Qaeda-related terrorism remains as great
as ever. Al Qaeda, although significantly affected by
the decisive actions taken against it by the international
community, not only has survived but also has
continued to engage in criminal, indiscriminate attacks
around the world.

Today we are deliberating in the looming shadow
of the commemoration of the third anniversary of the
attacks of 11 September 2001. The grief of so many
bereaved families, the shock of a nation and the
distinct feeling that the camp of the peace-loving has
deadly enemies are all very much present with us
today. Indeed, the United Nations and the Security
Council have come a long way in the three years that
have elapsed in helping the international community to
strengthen and organize its response to modern-day
terror. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
those who have chaired or served them as members or
supporters deserve our limitless praise for that.
However, there is much more to accomplish and
much more to be learned from the experience so far
gained at the level of the Security Council and much
more to be acted upon in addressing identified gaps or
shortcomings. Reviewing our progress and adjusting
our response to the evolving menace with which we are
confronted are constant imperatives and permanent
challenges. And herein, I believe, lies the main reason
why I can safely say that Ambassador Munoz and his
1267 Committee fully live up to the high expectations
placed on them.

As the Security Council assumes a leading role in
the fight against terrorism and Al Qaeda, it must
constantly reconfirm its ability to deliver on its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter.
Effectiveness, cooperation and assistance are the key
parameters of that complex undertaking. Given the
changes in the nature of the threat posed by Al Qaeda,
effectiveness means continuous adaptation on the part
of the Council and the 1267 Committee to those
changes, including by constantly refining the sanctions
regime and by ensuring its proper and full
implementation. Romania, in its capacity as Vice-Chair
of the Committee, stands ready to actively participate
in efforts to identify the most appropriate solutions in
that respect. It is in that context that we would like to
express, on a preliminary basis, our appreciation for
the set of recommendations put forward by the
Monitoring Team, which are currently under scrutiny
by the members of the Committee.

Al Qaeda's target is the international community
as a whole, and the threat represented by Al Qaeda is
therefore global. As the past year's attacks have
demonstrated, no country in the world is immune any
longer to terrorism. Terrorism strikes indiscriminately
from New York to Madrid and Bali and from Moscow
to Istanbul and Beslan. Effectively combating this
scourge - in particular the acts committed by this
gruesome terrorist network - requires a global
response and active participation by all United Nations
Members.

Full cooperation by Member States in strictly
implementing the sanctions imposed by resolution
1526 (2004) must be supplemented by close
cooperation among the 1267 Committee and other
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council - in
particular the CTC, its newly established Executive
Directorate and the Committee established by Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004), as well as other
relevant international agencies and organizations. In
welcoming the progress in strengthening the
cooperation between the 1267 Committee and the CTC,
I would like to assure Ambassador Mufioz of my entire
readiness to discuss, in my capacity as Chairman of the
1540 Committee, possible synergies among our
Committees.

As stated repeatedly within the Council, in
fighting terrorism, the international community is as
strong as its weakest link. It is therefore in the global
interest to ensure that every single Member of the
United Nations is able and willing to put in place all
the necessary measures for effectively combating this
scourge. In order to achieve that goal, it is therefore
vital that assistance be provided to the most vulnerable
countries, including by continuing the practice of on-
site visits.

Finally, I would like to extend Romania's deepest
sympathy and heartfelt condolences to the people and
Governments of Indonesia and Australia and to the
families of the victims of the most recent outrageous
terrorist attack committed on 9 September against the
Australian embassy in Jakarta. This is, sadly, yet
another proof of the fact that the fight against terrorism
is far from over and that it has to remain a top priority
of the Security Council.

