Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor ofthe
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her valuable
briefing on her eighteenth report to the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We renew
our support for the efforts of the ICC to achieve justice
and combat impunity under international law.

We commend the ongoing role of the Office of
the Prosecutor despite the many challenges it faces in
fulfilling its responsibilities to track down and bring
to justice the perpetrators of crimes and violations
under difficult and tenuous security conditions in
Libya, along with the military operations that have
been ongoing around the capital of Tripoli since the
beginning of April. We share Ms. Bensouda's concern
about the increasing frequency of armed clashes that
have led to the deaths and injuries of many people and
the displacement of thousands of civilians from the
areas of clashes.

We also commend the important role of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) at the
helm of which is the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame
who presented a three-step proposal. We reaffirm our
support for his efforts, and we hope that they yield
results soon. We call once again on the Libyan parties
to show restraint, respect international humanitarian
law, not target civilians or civilian infrastructure and
resume the political dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations.

We also express our concern with regard to the
observations made in the report of the Prosecutor in
connection with the suffering of migrants in detention
centres, which constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law and has been exacerbated by the
recent launch of military operations and the mounting
activities of the terrorist group of Da'esh in many parts
of Libya.

We reiterate our position that the primary
responsibility for achieving justice across Libya falls
on the shoulders of the Libyan authorities by exercising
their sovereign jurisdiction, pursuant to article 1 of
the Rome Statute. The ICC must take into account
Libya's national criminal jurisdiction concerning cases
under the consideration of Libyan courts to achieve
complementarity between the ICC, which complements
national criminaljurisdiction, and the Libyanjudiciary.

We recognize the scope of the security challenges
in Libya affecting the work of Court experts in carrying
out the necessary investigations, and we welcome
the assistance provided by States, international and
regional organizations, civil society organizations
and the relevant Libyan authorities and UNSMIL to
the Office of the ICC Prosecutor. That will contribute
to increasing the effectiveness of the investigations
carried out by the Office in fulfilling its mandate.

