The coronavirus disease pandemic serves to underscore the importance of adequate governance of the security sector. Security institutions around the world have to perform beyond their mandates to support pandemic response. However, for countries emerging from conflicts the situation is more complex, as their security institutions are often weak and lack the capacities to address those challenges. Therefore, security sector reform (SSR) is crucial for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Effective, professional and accountable security institutions are key to addressing immediate security challenges, preventing the recurrence of conflict and providing enabling environments for development. With that in mind, allow me to make the following points. First, security sector reform must be nationally led and owned and must address specific national needs and contexts. There is no one-size-fits-all formula. It is therefore essential that host countries take a leading role in the planning and implementation of the reform. Equally important is the participation of all relevant stakeholders, including civil society and women. A nationally led, owned and inclusive process is key to the long-term success of security sector reform. Secondly, the United Nations role in supporting SSR in conflict-affected countries must be scaled up. Most United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political missions are now mandated to support security sector reform. The Security Council should ensure that its mandates are clear, realistic and achievable. To implement the mandate effectively, peacekeeping missions and special political missions must be provided with adequate resources and capacities. We also support strengthening the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as the main platform to harness comprehensive support for SSR. The synergy between the Security Council and the PBC needs to be strengthened, particularly during transition phases. The United Nations must also enhance coordination among different actors on the ground to ensure a coherent strategy to support SSR. Thirdly, partnership with all relevant stakeholders is key. The United Nations cannot work alone. Regional organizations can play an important role, particularly by bringing regional perspectives and best practices. Partnership with international financial institutions should also be strengthened to ensure adequate and sustainable financing for security sector reform. Member States can also make a contribution by providing technical assistance, as well as the sharing of experience and best practices. Indonesia has its own experience in successfully reforming its security sector, as part of a broader political reform and democratization in the early 2000s. We are keen to share our experience and best practices, including through our membership in the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform. Our peacekeepers, for instance, are actively involved in implementing missions' mandates to support SSR in host countries. Beyond peacekeeping, we have also supported capacity-building in the area of security and the rule of law, through bilateral mechanisms as well as South-South and triangular cooperation. Therefore, we have provided training and capacity- building programmes for the police of Palestine, Afghanistan and countries in the South Pacific. In conclusion, building and reforming the security sector is a long-term undertaking. Its success will require national ownership and strong support by the international community. Rest assured that Indonesia remains committed to being a true partner to support peacebuilding and sustaining peace through security sector reform.
