Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend to you, Sir, my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to wish you every
success in your work. I also thank your predecessor,
the Ambassador of France, who presided over the work
of the Council last month.

The Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Galaydh, has
honoured the Council with his presence today, and we
welcome him.

The people of Somalia have suffered much as a
result of 10 years of civil war. International military
intervention was needed to restore peace. We regret
that such international efforts have not succeeded in
realizing the Somali people's search for peace. Some
political forces in Somalia have largely ensured the
failure of any attempt by international forces to
establish peace and create a coalition Government that
would include all political factions.

Following the Somalia National Peace
Conference, held at Arta, Djibouti, in which the
Government of Qatar participated, we saw the
formation of the Transitional National Government
(TNG), led by President Abdikassim Salad Hassan.
Now, we all look forward to supporting that young
Government; we hope it will be able to establish unity
and extend its authority throughout Somali territory,
thus serving as the sole legitimate Government. That
would restore peace and security, and, under its new
leadership, the Government would be able to bring
together all parties and factions and convince them to
join in a governing coalition.

We know that the task facing President Abdikassim
Salad Hassan - the restoration of peace and security -
is an extremely difficult one in View of the present
situation in Somalia. The long civil war has had
negative social repercussions in Somalia, including the
fragmentation of civil society. It is no easy matter to
consolidate national unity in Somalia, especially given
the meagre resources available to the Government.

Somalia still needs the international community's
support for its fledgling Government. We consider it
important that, through the Security Council and the
United Nations in general, the international community
should come to that Government's assistance. We must
take the first step: asking the Representative of the
Secretary-General to examine the situation in Somalia
and then closely to follow developments in all their
aspects. The task is also to ensure coordination among
neighbouring countries and among relevant regional
and international organizations.

My delegation urges the Security Council to call
for respect for the territorial integrity of Somalia and to
secure commitments from other countries to refrain
from all interference in Somalia's internal affairs and
from encouraging secessionist factions whose aim is to
undermine the security and stability of Somalia. My
delegation believes that if the status quo continues and
if the international community fails to support the new
Government, Somalia could become a haven for
fugitives trying to evade justice. Indeed, we must
eliminate all such sanctuaries and safe havens. That -
like what is now taking place in Afghanistan i would
be painful for the entire world.

I wish in conclusion to express our hope that the
Security Council will shoulder its responsibility to
return the fraternal country of Somalia to normalcy,
and that it will make every possible effort to send a
mission to that country to report on progress towards
the restoration of peace and to help Somalia become a
valued member of the international community.

