Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): It is my special pleasure
to address the Council today in the first meeting of
2014 on the Kosovo issue and to present the positive
progress made in Kosovo during the past three months.
In particular, that includes the second round of the
first local elections throughout the entire territory of
the Republic of Kosovo, the establishment of local
municipalities in northern Kosovo and the European
Union (EU) integration process, as well as the recent
results in the bilateral process to normalize relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.

Let me start by warmly commending the continuing
efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for peace
and progress in Kosovo and the Balkans. I would also
like to congratulate the new members to the Security
Council, namely, Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and
Nigeria.

The holding of free elections throughout the
entire territory of Kosovo on the basis of Kosovo's
legislation - which were organized in a fair and
transparent manner, thereby upholding the highest
international standards - is the best sign that Kosovo
could sent to the democratic world and the friends and
supporters of democracy in Kosovo. The Kosovo police,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Election
Observation Mission and local actors were in charge of
that undertaking. Their efforts brought about notable
results for Kosovar democracy.

The mayors were sworn in at the inaugural meeting
of the municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo in
accordance with the laws and the Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo. The electoral results and the will
of the people were respected. That demonstrated that
the important stage of functioning municipal bodies
had been successfully completed and that it was
accomplished in accordance with the laws and the
Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo, as well as the
Brussels Agreement of 19 April 2013.

Unfortunately, the elected mayor of the municipality
of North Mitrovica failed to take the oath of office in
accordance with the laws of Kosovo. Consequently, he
has lost the mandate and, in accordance with the law on
local elections, the President of the Republic of Kosovo
has called a new mayoral election in North Mitrovica,
which is expected to be held on 23 February of this year.

All preparations have been made for this process,
and we expect that the citizens of northern Mitrovica
will come out to vote and elect a local leader who will
be ready to accept and respect the laws of Kosovo.

On 16 January, an unfortunate and tragic death cast
a shadow over the post-election process. The murder
of Assemblyman Dimitrije Janicijevic, the Serbian
Independent Liberal Party candidate for mayor of
northern Mitrovica, shocked the people of Kosovo.
Without prejudging the outcome of the investigation,
let me say that it is my belief that this may have been a
premeditated murder by those circles that are attempting
to further hold hostage Kosovo Serb citizens who want
to become part of and contribute to the institutions
of the Republic of Kosovo - an attack on those who
recognize reality and who strive to work for a better
life.

The Kosovo Government and all relevant institutions
have condemned that criminal act - the murder of the
Assemblyman - and we have reached out to console
the family in these difficult days. We deem this act of
violence intolerable, and it is for this reason that we
have asked the relevant authorities to investigate the
case and bring the perpetrators to justice.

Positive trends of economic and financial stability
have continued in the Republic of Kosovo, as reflected
in the 2014 budget. The budget accurately reflects our
sustainable resources and the goal of increasing social
welfare. The budget of the Republic of Kosovo for
2014 is in line with the directives of the International
Monetary Fund and predicts economic growth of over
4 per cent, which is one of the highest in the region.
At the same time, through membership in the global
financial mechanisms, it has become possible to obtain
development loans that are gradually opening the way
for the private sector to take the lead in economic
growth.

A series of agreements for the elimination of double
taxation, the protection and promotion of investments,
economic cooperation and customs have been or are
expected to be signed this year with various countries.
These achievements have been noted in the respective
World Bank reports.

Political stability and the prospect of European
integration have benefited the economy. In mentioning
Kosovo's European agenda, let me thank here the
European Parliament, which on 16 January adopted
a resolution introduced by the European Parliament's
rapporteur for Kosovo, Mrs. Ulrike Lunacek. The
resolution was adopted overwhelmingly by members of
the European Parliament of all political groupings.

The resolution welcomes the achievements and
results that Kosovo has registered in its six-year
journey as an independent and sovereign country. It
recognized the progress made in building a State for
all citizens, regardless of their ethnicity or faith, on the
path towards European integration.

Kosovo was also congratulated for having
achieved a number of important political reforms by
administrative and economic authorities, as well as
for the harmonization of its local legislation with the
European Union. That is one of the criteria required
for meeting the conditions for visa liberalization
and building the capacity to address the priorities of
the European integration process arising from the
feasibility study of the European Commission.

As a result of those achievements, the European
Parliament's resolution gives Kosovo great political
support and calls on five European Union - Spain,
Greece, Romania, Slovakia and Cyprus - to recognize
the Republic of Kosovo as an independent and sovereign
country. The resolution also expresses support for the
further advancement of the visa liberalization process
and negotiations on the stabilization and association
agreement process, urging the European Union to
open the door for the full integration of Kosovo.
The integration of the Republic of Kosovo into the
European Union is our primary goal; it is the only way
of modernizing and consolidating the region into the
European family.

We are currently conducting negotiations with
the European Commission to determine the content
of the stabilization and association agreement and
ensure the free movement of our citizens in the
European Union Schengen zone as two complementary
contractual processes for Kosovo. The successful
development of negotiations with the European Union
and the achievement of the stabilization and association
agreement, expected to be concluded by spring, remain
high on our governance agenda.
A few days after this meeting of the Security
Council, the Republic of Kosovo will celebrate the
sixth anniversary of its declaration of independence,
already recognized by 105 countries from all over the
world. I would like to thank all of the countries that
have recognized Kosovo, and I call on other countries,
including members of the Council that have not yet
recognized Kosovo, to take this step and join the
democratic world in support of Kosovo as an equal
and full member of the international community. Such
formal recognition of Kosovo would make a direct
contribution to the strengthening of peace and stability
in the region and beyond.

On this path of integration, the Kosovo Government
wishes to thank the secretariat of the Regional School
of Public Administration, based in Montenegro, and
the member States of the organization in the region
for Kosovo's membership. We recognize that Kosovo's
membership in various regional and international
organizations will help in further strengthening
regional cooperation as an important precondition for
EU membership.

Finally, the isolation for more than two decades
of Kosovo athletes has partially ended, since the
International Federation of Football Association,
after meeting with leaders of the football federations
of Kosovo and Serbia, has reached a consensus that
enables the Republic of Kosovo to play international
matches. We consider this as an important first step
towards full membership in the sports mechanisms of
European and world football.

We have seen even better developments with
respect to the Executive Committee of the European
Handball Federation, which now allows Kosovo to play
international matches without any conditions.

