Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Today, as the line
between international and internal armed conflicts
becomes more blurred, vulnerable groups are
deliberately and systematically targeted during the
many conflicts facing us. The international community
has the primary responsibility to step up all its efforts
to strengthen respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Hungary aligns itself with the position to be
expressed on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect.

We would like to thank the Polish presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this very important
open debate.

Hungary believes that the best way to protect
civilians is by preventing armed conflicts. We devote
special attention to the principle of the responsibility
to protect, as it is a core element of prevention. We
must pay persistent attention to the warning signs of
potential atrocity crimes, particularly serious violations
of human rights in certain areas.

Hungary strongly supports utilizing the prevention
mechanism of the Human Rights Council. As a
member of the Council, one of our priorities is to
work towards the prevention of such atrocity crimes
and the promotion of the already existing tools of the
international community. Accountability and ending
impunity are key to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In that context, we need to set up an effective
accountability mechanism by enhancing the capacities
of national institutions. Our attention must focus on
empowering victims of armed conflicts.

At the international level, Hungary supports the
work of the International Criminal Court, as well as
that of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
As the ultimate guarantor of international peace
and security, the Security Council has a major role in
preventing and in adequately responding to violations
against civilians in armed conflicts. Hungary is
a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We would like to encourage
all Member States to sign the ACT code of conduct,
which calls for refraining voluntarily from the use of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of mass atrocities,
genocides, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Hungary attaches great importance to the
protection of women and children. We support
international initiatives aimed at combating sexual
violence in conflict. I would like to stress that women
and girls are especially threatened by rape, forced
marriage and sexual slavery. Their protection, return
and safe reintegration into their communities, as
well as the elimination of any related stigma, can be
successful only in partnership with local communities
and moderate religious leaders. Nor can we forget about
the children born to survivors of rape. Ensuring birth
registration and acceptance by family and community
is key in that regard.

One of the most outrageous violations of
international humanitarian law is the increase in
attacks on civilian infrastructure such as health-care
facilities and schools. Attacks on education, including
on students, particularly female students, teachers and
schools can have a dramatic impact on the lives of
children, dashing their hopes for a better future.

Ensuring respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, especially as concerns women,
children and their empowerment, is vital in bringing
about long-term stability, peace and reconciliation,
and creating an environment conducive to sustainable
social and economic development.

