Mr. Annabi: I shall begin with the questions asked by
the Ambassador of the Netherlands. As regards the
reference in paragraph 26 of the report to the launching of
a community rehabilitation and reintegration programme
last month, this refers to a number of projects which
include training in vocational skills and employment
opportunities through the promotion of small businesses and
small business credits, accelerated eduction programmes
and programmes designed to encourage literacy, as well as
social counselling programmes to people who may have
suffered during the civil war. These projects are to be
financed through the World Bank and the African
Development Bank.

As regards the reference in paragraph 48 to the
establishment of mechanisms to allow the Government and
people of Sierra Leone to reap the benefits of the country's
strategic resources, I apologize for the somewhat cryptic
sentence. What it really means - and this is something that
is shared by everyone - is that we would very much like
to see the benefits that have been reaped from the diamond
exploitation and have been used to prosecute the war now
used to support the peace process and the development and
reconstruction process.

The Commission for the Management of Strategic
Resources, National Reconstruction and Development,
which is chaired by Foday Sankoh, has been formally
established, but the problem is that it has not really
started working. It has not yet adopted a proper plan of
action or programme of work. It has not started to follow
up on the Government's own efforts in terms of taxation,
legislation and various measures that are needed to
control the diamond exploitation activities to ensure that
these resources can be effectively put to use to support
the peace process and the reconstruction process.

In response to the questions of the Ambassador of
Jamaica regarding the national commission on strategic
resources, I am not sure whether the reference by the
Ambassador of Jamaica to hearings refers to hearings of
the commission itself - I indicated that the commission
had not started its work - or to the hearings held
recently in the Sierra Leone Parliament. Foday Sankoh
and Johnny Paul Koroma were both invited to attend
hearings of the national Parliament. Mr. Koroma did
attend, as requested by the Parliament, but Mr. Sankoh
did not come and did not respond to the invitation
extended to him.

Regarding the deployment of civilian police
personnel, we hope to deploy - as members of the
Council will recall - some 60 civilian police officers. I
must say that we have offers for perhaps half of that
number at this point. So additional offers would be
welcome, and of course we will start deploying those
civilian police officers from countries that have made
these offers on the understanding that we need to keep an
acceptable geographical balance in this regard. So we will
start the deployment soon and hope to receive in the
meantime additional offers from interested Member
States.

The Ambassador of Jamaica also expressed concern
about the withdrawal of two humanitarian organizations
from Kabala and another location in the northern part of
the country. While it is true that these two organizations
have withdrawn as a result of the attacks by
Revolutionary United Front elements against them on 7
May, my humanitarian colleagues have asked me to stress
that humanitarian operations, which have been recently
established in Makeni, are continuing and that further
work is being undertaken to expand humanitarian
assistance wherever access becomes possible.

In regard to your own questions, Sir, on the
incorporation of the ECOMOG troops, we have currently

 

three ECOWAS countries who were participating in
ECOMOG and are now providing troops to UNAMSIL:
Nigeria, Guinea and Ghana. As you know, initially two
Nigerian battalions were inducted into UNAMSIL. An
additional two other battalions and a tank company are also
in the process of being incorporated into UNAMSIL. A
battalion from Ghana and a battalion from Guinea have
been inducted. We are working actively with these
contributors, both here and in the field, to ensure that the
equipment shortfalls are met as soon as possible, so that
these troops are fully equipped to perform the mandate
given to them by the Security Council.

I think that the contingent for which the incorporation
has been less smooth, perhaps, was the battalion from
Guinea, which was not deployed as expeditiously as we had
hoped. As you know, as this battalion was on its way to
join UNAMSIL it allowed RUF elements to take away a
large part of its weapons and equipment. So we are
working on all these issues to try to improve the capacity
of UNAMSIL to meet the challenges before it.

As regards the Sierra Leone police, it is a fact that
their activities remain limited to the western part of the
country. The police force in Sierra Leone suffered greatly
from the war, and it is not that easy to recreate a police
force. Nevertheless, the police are active in the western part
of the country, as well as in Freetown. They very much
lack the necessary equipment and other facilities that they
need to be able to fulfil their tasks. Any support that may
be provided by individual donors would be very much
appreciated.

We hope that as access throughout the country
improves and as security conditions improve, the police will
be able to deploy further, with the help of the important
programme of assistance that is being provided by the
Commonwealth Police Task Force and by the UNAMSIL
civilian police advisors that will deploy to support and
advise the Sierra Leone police in their work.

I would like to thank the members of the Council for
their understanding and support regarding the reporting
schedule. We will therefore, with the Council's
concurrence, submit the next report to the Council by 7
May, which is exactly 60 days from the last one. We will
do this on the understanding, of course, that we will always
be ready, on a regular basis, to provide oral updates or
briefings to the Council on any significant developments
that may occur.

In this connection, and to conclude, I would like to
mention that Mr. Miyet, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations - who is currently on an
important mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to prepare for the deployment of the operation
authorized by the Council at the end of last month - will
also visit Freetown, as part of his current trip to Africa.
We expect him to arrive there over the weekend. The
point of his visit is to take a firsthand look at the work of
UNAMSIL and meet with all the parties concerned and
see what we can all do together to further this peace
process and improve its chances of success.

