Mr. Pascoe: As a new year begins - one in
which we hope there will be some progress in Middle
East peacemaking - several immediate challenges are
present. Israeli-Palestinian negotiations remain at a
deadlock. Developments in both the occupied
Palestinian territory and in Lebanon have heightened
tensions in the reporting period.

On the Israeli-Palestinian track, we appreciate
and support United States efforts to engage in parallel
talks on substance with the parties. United States
Envoy Mitchell visited the region in late December,
and Israeli and Palestinian negotiators held separate
consultations with the United States in Washington,
D.C., earlier this month. I would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General's call on the parties to seriously
engage on final status issues, and welcome United
States intentions to be a proactive participant offering
ideas and proposals when appropriate. We also
appreciate the diplomatic efforts of a number of other
world leaders who have recently visited the region.

However, the target dates supported by the
Quartet for reaching an Israeli-Palestinian framework
agreement on permanent status and for completion of
the Palestinian Authority's two-year State-building
programme will be upon us in eight to nine months
from now. In this regard, the viability of the political
process and the credibility of the Quartet are also at
stake this year. We are seriously concerned at the
continuing lack of progress in the search for a
negotiated settlement. Peace and Palestinian statehood
cannot be further delayed.

Quartet members will meet in Munich on
5 February. The Secretary-General also recently
underlined to League of Arab States Secretary-General
Amre Moussa his commitment to ensuring close
coordination, and efforts are continuing to convene a
11-21051
meeting between the Quartet and the Arab League
Follow-Up Committee. We take note of the Arab
League position lending support to the position of
President Abbas on settlements and its call for the
provision of parameters by the United States and the
Quartet to facilitate a negotiated endgame based on the
1967 lines.

During the reporting period, a further number of
Latin American countries extended recognition to a
State of Palestine based on the 1967 lines. During his
visit to the occupied Palestinian territory yesterday,
President Medvedev reiterated the Russian
Federation's long-standing support to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to an independent State
with its capital in East Jerusalem.

Further settlement expansion in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, continues to undermine trust
and prejudices final status discussions. The sharp
increase in Israeli settlement construction activity
recorded at the end of the settlement moratorium on
26 September 2010 has continued, with construction
work beginning on up to 2,000 units in the West Bank
since that time.

On 9 January, the Secretary-General issued a
statement deploring the demolition of Shepherd's Hotel
in the heart of a Palestinian neighbourhood in East
Jerusalem. The Secretary-General expressed deep
regret regarding Israel's failure to heed growing
international concern over the expansion of illegal
settlements. We are also worried about plans being
developed to expand the Gilo settlement in East
Jerusalem, near Bethlehem. I reiterate the Secretary-
General's call on Israel to freeze all settlement activity
in conformity with international law and the Road
Map.

Despite mounting challenges on the ground, the
Palestinian Authority continues to make strides in its
State-building agenda. We alert donors to an estimated
$100-million shortfall in external financing of
recurrent expenditures of the Palestinian Authority
from last year. The Palestinian Authority continues to
seek to reduce its reliance on this financing, but it is
nevertheless vital that donors continue to provide
predictable, adequate and timely support.

The Palestinian Authority has continued its
efforts to promote security in Area A. We also note
positively a recent decision to cease bringing civilians
before Palestinian Authority military tribunals. We
11-21051

believe that Israel can and must do more to enable
Palestinian efforts to improve both security and
economic conditions by easing restrictions on
movement and access and facilitating Palestinian
Authority efforts in Area C.

We note that Israeli security forces conducted 486
search operations in the West Bank. While we are
cognizant of the security concerns that Israel cites in
the context of these actions, we believe that they
seriously undermine the Palestinian Authority when the
strategic goal should be the opposite. Eighty-seven
Palestinians were injured and 251 arrested in Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) actions. However, most worrying
were the deaths of four Palestinians in separate
incidents, which warrant more transparent
investigations and measures of accountability from
Israel. The authorities must take greater precautions to
ensure the protection of the civilian population under
occupation and refrain from excessive use of force.

The most serious incidents include the killing of
an unarmed man at a checkpoint on 2 January and of a
65 year-old man in his bed during an incursion in
Hebron on 7 January, aimed at arresting alleged Hamas
militants released by Palestinian security forces the day
before for lack of evidence. In addition, a Palestinian
woman died on 31 December after inhaling tear gas
used by the IDF to disperse demonstrators protesting
the barrier. A Palestinian man was also shot and killed
at a checkpoint on 8 January; Israeli soldiers reported
the discovery of two pipe bombs and a knife on his
body. Some 43 others were arrested while protesting the
barrier during the reporting period, and an anti-barrier
Israeli activist was sentenced to 16 months in jail. In
addition, 13 Palestinians were injured by Israeli
settlers. Four settlers and seven members of the Israeli
forces were injured by Palestinians during the reporting
period.

On 12 January, a Palestinian involved in
organizing protests against Israeli settlements in
Silwan was expelled for four months to the West Bank.
The fate of three Hamas-affiliated Palestinian
legislators from East Jerusalem who have taken refuge
in a compound of the International Committee of the
Red Cross since July remains unresolved, while a
legislator earlier transferred to Ramallah has not been
allowed to return. We continue to be concerned about
the human rights situation of Palestinian East
Jerusalemites and to oppose any measures of forcible
transfer. On 4 January, the Israeli authorities
3
announced the arrest of two Palestinian East
J erusalemites in connection with an alleged plot to fire
a missile into the Jerusalem football stadium.

During the reporting period, 30 Palestinian
structures were demolished in East Jerusalem and 41 in
Area C of the West Bank, displacing 148 Palestinians.
This is worrying and gives rise to serious humanitarian
concerns, while contributing to heightened tensions. I
am also concerned by the difficulties faced by
impoverished Palestinian communities in Area C that
have no adequate access to basic services because of
problems in obtaining permission from the IDF to
develop infrastructure in their areas. The Humanitarian
Coordinator has supported a humanitarian response
plan to meet a first set of urgent needs in education,
water and shelter in Area C, which has received limited
facilitation by the Israeli authorities thus far.

We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza,
including a recent increase in tensions. Palestinian
militants fired 31 rockets and 47 mortar shells into
Israel - which represents approximately a four-fold
increase from the previous reporting period - while
Israel conducted 11 incursions and 26 air strikes in
Gaza. On 21 December, an Israeli child was wounded
after a rocket landed near a kindergarten, while two
foreign workers in Israel were wounded by a mortar on
8 January. Four Palestinian civilians, including persons
apparently accessing lands in the Israeli-declared
buffer zone for civilian purposes, were killed by Israeli
fire. Eleven Palestinian militants were also killed.
Nineteen Palestinian civilians and 15 Palestinian
militants were injured. An Israeli soldier was killed and
four others were wounded by friendly fire during a
clash with Palestinians on 7 January.

We condemn the indiscriminate firing of
projectiles towards Israeli civilian areas by Palestinian
militants. We equally stress that all parties must refrain
from actions contrary to international humanitarian law
that target or endanger civilians. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process was active during the reporting
period to promote a restoration of calm. Egyptian
authorities have urged Hamas to put an end to violence.
The de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza recently stated
publicly their commitment to maintaining calm, and
claimed that there is inter-factional agreement on this.
All responsible parties should cease acts of violence. A
new outbreak of major hostilities would be devastating,
and must be avoided.
We can report no progress in efforts to further
Palestinian reconciliation. We continue to monitor
internal tensions.

A fundamental goal of the United Nations
continues to be the revitalization of Gaza's economy
and the search for an end to the Israeli closure policy
within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009). Import
and export levels have improved from the period before
Israel's 2010 policy adjustment, but are still
significantly below pre-2007 levels. On United Nations
projects, on 6 January, Israel approved an additional
$26.4 million in projects of the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), including seven additional UNRWA
schools. That brings the total portfolio of approved
United Nations projects to $136.4 million.

Looking ahead, the scaling-up of the scope of
goods allowed for export and the scale at which they
are permitted to exit the Strip remains a key priority.
The United Nations will also continue to put forward
new programmes of work to the Government of Israel
that complement those already presented, including
programming to revitalize the private sector and
rehabilitate public health infrastructure. These are
already under active discussion with Israeli authorities.
We appreciate the strong support of the Palestinian
Authority for these efforts. We continue to engage
Israeli authorities on the need to ensure sufficient
crossings capacity.

Allow me to reiterate our continuing concern at
the detention by Hamas of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
and to once again appeal for his release and for
humanitarian access to be granted without further
delay. We continue to follow the situation of
Palestinian prisoners, including women and children
and persons held without trial, and underline the
importance of progress in prisoner releases by Israel.

We regret the lack of progress in the effort to
promote peace between Israel and Syria, despite
continuing contacts by diplomatic actors, including
reportedly French and United States envoys. While the
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has remained
stable in spite of continued settlement activity, the
resolution of the conflict between these two countries
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions is
critical for regional stability, and an essential part of
realizing the vision of the Arab Peace Initiative.
11-21051
Please allow me now turn to developments in
Lebanon, where the political crisis provoked by
divergent views over the Special Tribunal for Lebanon
has continued to deepen. On 12 January, the
resignation of 10 cabinet ministers from the opposition,
along with one minister from President Sleiman's bloc,
forced the collapse of the Government of national
unity. The Secretary-General called for continuing
dialogue among the parties and respect for the
Constitution and the laws of Lebanon, while
emphasizing the importance of preserving calm. The
Secretary-General also reiterated his full support for
the independent work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon.

On 13 January, President Sleiman issued a
statement accepting the resignation of the ministers but
requesting that the Government continue functioning in
a caretaker capacity. The President announced that he
would conduct parliamentary consultations to
designate a new Prime Minister. The consultations,
originally scheduled for 17 January, were postponed
until 24 January. Let me comment here that it is
essential for all Lebanese leaders to continue to address
the current political situation through dialogue, within
the parameters established by the Constitution of
Lebanon.

A trilateral meeting was held in Damascus on
17 January to discuss the situation in Lebanon, which
was attended by Syrian President Al-Assad, Turkish
Prime Minister Erdogan and Emir Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani of Qatar. On the following day, the
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Qatar, together
with the Foreign Minister of Turkey, held a series of
meetings with all concerned parties in Beirut.

On 17 January, the Prosecutor of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon announced that he had submitted
an indictment and supporting materials to the pre-trial
judge for his review on that day. The content of the
indictments would remain confidential at this stage. In
that regard, the Secretary-General noted that the filing
of an indictment by the Prosecutor was in pursuit of the
Special Tribunal's mandate to end impunity for the
terrible crimes that took the life of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 others, and related
attacks. The Secretary-General reiterated his call on all
parties to refrain from attempts to interfere in, or to
influence, the work of the Special Tribunal, underlining
that the independent judicial process should not be
11-21051
linked with any political debate and that it was
important not to prejudge its outcome.

In the early hours of 18 January, organized groups
of unarmed men - reportedly from Hizbullah -
deployed in various parts of Beirut for several hours.
They withdrew before 8 a.m., without causing further
disruption to normal life and business in the city. The
Lebanese Army eventually deployed personnel in
several locations of Beirut, citing the need to reassure
citizens.

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon was
generally calm and stable. Almost daily intrusions into
Lebanese airspace by aircraft of the Israel Defense
Forces, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006), have
continued in high numbers.

Preserving the stability of Lebanon and ensuring
an end to impunity there is essential, if only because
the Lebanese themselves have a right to both. But it is
also critical to the broader fate of a region that needs,
more than anything else, all elements to be conducive
for progress towards comprehensive peace.

Efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians to
engage seriously on final status issues will be at the top
of the agenda when the Quartet meets in Munich. Our
collective task remains to spare no effort to support the
search for a negotiated solution that will end the
occupation that began in 1967 and end the conflict,
establishing an independent and viable Palestinian
State with Jerusalem emerging as the capital of two
States living side by side in peace and security. We will
continue to do all we can to promote dialogue and
preserve the stability and security of the region as a
whole, in pursuit of the comprehensive regional peace
envisaged in the Madrid terms of reference, the
relevant resolutions of the Council and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

