Ms. Rice (United States of America): I welcome
Foreign Minister Rassoul back to the Council and thank
him for his remarks. I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kubis again for all that he does
and for his briefing. I want to extend, through him,
our thanks again to the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations country team for their dedicated work
under very difficult circumstances.

Since we last met (see S/PV.6793), the international
community has further demonstrated its commitment to
the Afghan people beyond 2014. As recent events have
shown, the transition is on track and our commitment
to Afghanistan is enduring. On 7 July, President Obama
officially designated Afghanistan a major non-NATO
ally of the United States. That is a powerful symbol of
our commitment to Afghanistan's future. Afghanistan
and its international partners have charted a responsible
transition, which will transfer full responsibility for
security back to Afghanistan.

The Afghan National Security Forces continue to
grow in size and capability. Those Forces remain on
track to reach 352,000 personnel later this year. Two
thirds of all those who serve in uniform defending
Afghanistan are now Afghans, and over half the Afghan
population is protected by a predominantly Afghan
force. We look forward to the full implementation of the
third tranche of the transition later this year, at which
point 75 per cent of the Afghan population, including
every provincial capital, will be in the transition
process. As pledged at the NATO Summit in Chicago
in May, the international community will support the
Afghan National Security Forces beyond 2014.

While we applaud such developments, we
recognize that many challenges remain, including
so-called insider attacks. The reasons for those attacks
vary, but we are working closely with the Government
ofAfghanistan on a range of measures to stop them. We
have not and will not allow such attacks to undermine
international efforts to strengthen the Afghan National
Security Forces and put them increasingly in the lead.

We know Afghanistan's security depends not only
on strong capable security forces, but also on the Afghan
people's access to economic opportunity and their
belief that their Government is effectively serving their
needs. The international community's total pledges in
Tokyo of $16 billion in economic assistance through
2015 meet the World Bank's estimate of Afghanistan's
requirements, just as Chicago met its security
requirements. That assistance will help Afghanistan
to attract private sector investment and to usher in a
transformation decade, marked less by aid and more by
trade, all in a framework of mutual accountability and
shared responsibility.

We welcome President Karzai's decree last
month aimed at tackling corruption in Afghanistan's
institutions and his recent comments on reforming the
justice sector. Both are necessary to strengthen the rule
of law and to attract more trade and investment.

Nothing offers a more credible alternative to
insurgency than the jobs and opportunities that
accompany foreign investment and the expansion of
markets. As Afghanistan develops, we see it at the
centre of a region whose integration will bring greater
prosperity for Afghans and their neighbours. That
new Silk Road is already emerging. Electricity from
Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan is powering Afghan
businesses. Trains are running on a new rail line from
the Uzbek border to Mazar-e Sharif. One day, the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline
could ship billions of dollars worth of natural gas from
Central Asia across Afghanistan to South Asia.

The help of Afghanistan's neighbours and near
neighbours is necessary for Afghanistan to become
secure, stable and prosperous. We are pleased to see
that Vision beginning to come to fruition through the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan and various
regional and trade agreements.

To be sustainable, improved security and greater
economic development must rest on a foundation
of good governance. Credible and broadly inclusive
elections in 2014 and 2015 will bolster the legitimacy
of the Government in Kabul, vest Afghans in its
success, and send a message to all Afghan factions that
their interests are better advanced through political
participation than violence.

The protection of the rights of Afghan women is
essential to Afghanistan's future. We strongly condemn
all violence against women and are troubled by recent
reports that underscore the seriousness of the problem.
The United States continues to work with the Afghan
Government, civil society and the international
community to increase awareness of women's rights,
prevent the abuse and detention of women and girls
and hold the perpetrators of such violence accountable.
We support the United Nations and Afghanistan's
continuing efforts to establish and to expand the
protection and shelter services for victimized women.

United Nations support for the Afghan people and
the country's transition has been indispensable. From
supporting regional diplomacy and the political process
to coordinating between the Afghan Government and
donors and implementing the agreements of the Kabul
process and the Tokyo Framework, UNAMA will
continue to play a critical role in Afghanistan moving
forward.

The United States appreciates the United Nations
development and humanitarian assistance contributions
in Afghanistan, as exemplified by the important work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the solutions strategy for Afghan
refugees. We look forward on further discussions on
how the United Nations role will evolve to support
the Afghan people following the security transition.
We trust that UNAMA will consult closely with the
Government of Afghanistan, Council members and
regional partners as it continues planning.

It is the Afghan people, their leaders and the region
who must ultimately make the hard choices that will
shape their future.

As they do, the United States will continue to
support them and welcome the valuable contributions
of the United Nations in shaping this process.

