The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Costa Rica.

My delegation is pleased to support the extension of
the oil-for-food programme for an additional period of
180 days, and has therefore lent its support to the draft
resolution we have just adopted, which takes into account
the important and positive recommendations and
comments made by the Secretary-General in his most
recent and valuable report.

The aim of this programme, which is unique in its
magnitude and importance in the history of the United
Nations, is to alleviate Iraq's difficult humanitarian
situation. The very serious health and nutrition conditions
besetting the Iraqi population compel the Security Council
to take effective and urgent action.

While it is true that sanctions are not the only cause
of the difficult humanitarian situation facing the people of
Iraq, and that the Government and the political and
military authorities of that country are to a large extent
responsible, there is no doubt that the existence of
sanctions has an impact on measures that the Iraqi
authorities should themselves take to resolve the
humanitarian problem once and for all.

In the context of the legal regime established by the
Charter, sanctions regimes constitute a legitimate means
of collective defence for the international community.
Costa Rica is aware of the responsibility and risks
involved in using such regimes, especially when sanctions
affect the humanitarian situation of civilian populations.
In this connection, the actions of the Security Council
must be guided first and foremost by an awareness of
such humanitarian situations.

 

In the specific case of Iraq, Costa Rica believes that
in View of the serious humanitarian situation in that country
the Council will have to give positive consideration to
whether current revenues, as well as increased revenues, are
adequate to meet the priority humanitarian needs of the
Iraqi people. In this regard, we believe that the resolution
just adopted represents for the United Nations an important
step towards improving the humanitarian situation. In this
connection, we attach the utmost importance to the
supplementary report - expected by late January - that
the Secretary-General is to present in order to evaluate and
decide upon the situation. In the same context, the
sanctions Committee and the Secretariat must redouble
efforts to improve and make truly efficient the process of
approving and processing contracts, as well as the supply
of foodstuffs, medicines and related items for the Iraqi
people.

We are very pleased by the unanimity of the
Security Council in favour of the resolution, which is
essentially humanitarian in nature.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.55 pm.
