Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, we would like to thank the Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging,
for his briefing, which once again highlighted the grave
humanitarian situation in Syria and the risk of further
deterioration if the regime launches a large-scale
offensive in Idlib. It should be recalled that violence
begets violence and that deadly cycle must cease. In
that regard, I would like to make four points.

First, France is very concerned about the signs of
a large-scale military offensive in Idlib. Such military
action continues to undermine hopes for an end to the
crisis and could spark another humanitarian tragedy
in northern Syria, coupled with a migrant crisis in
Turkey. The protection of civilians and infrastructure
must be guaranteed, as the lives of 2.2 million people
are at stake. Such violence would also exacerbate
threats to regional security as it would cause jihadist
combatants, including those in the Idlib region, to
disperse. The increased bombings of recent weeks
must cease immediately. Together, we must dissuade
the Syrian regime from carrying out its strategy of
crushing opposition and, in particular, using chemical
weapons. That is the message France, along with its
American and British partners, conveyed last week.
In that regard, maintaining dialogue is essential and
President Emmanuel Macron is in close contact with
President Erdogan and President Putin on that issue.
We call on the guarantors of the Idlib de-escalation
area to maintain the ceasefire and to fully respect and
ensure respect for humanitarian law.

Secondly, more broadly, full, immediate and
unhindered access must be guaranteed throughout
Syria. Humanitarian workers must have safe access
to all those in need, including in eastern Ghouta and
Quneitra. France deplores the fact that no genuine
progress has been achieved in that area, including in
priority zones where control has changed hands. Only

11 per cent of convoy needs identified by the United
Nations have been covered in July and August, which is
insufficient and unacceptable. We recall that assistance
provided by the cross-border convoys authorized
by resolution 2393 (2017) is crucial. The assistance
provided via Turkey is vital and no alternative exists
for providing daily assistance to approximately
2 million people in north-western Syria. We also call
for increased aid through Al-Yarubiyeh, between Iraq
and Syria.
Thirdly, with regard to the return of refugees, at
present conditions for their safe, dignified and voluntary
return regrettably do not exist. If they should decide
to return to Syria, their safety cannot be guaranteed.
Since January, there have been nearly 1 million
additional internally displaced persons. Those who
return are vulnerable to expropriation, abuses, forced
recruitment and even persecution by the regime. Law
No. 10 makes the displacement of people irreversible
and is part ofa demographic engineering strategy. It is a
major hindrance to the return of refugees and displaced
people. Like our European Union partners collectively,
we request a repeal of the law, reparations and in-depth
work on the restitution of property and conscription.

Fourthly and lastly, I recall that the humanitarian
situation will enjoy no long-term improvement without
credible and irreversible progress in a United Nations-
led political process. To date, the Syrian regime has
demonstrated no willingness to negotiate a political
transition. Without a political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), national reconciliation will not
take place and the majority of refugees will not return.
We also recall very explicitly that without a genuine
political transition, the States members and institutions
of the European Union will not fund reconstruction.

In conclusion, we are at a crossroads on the path to
a serious process that will lead to an inclusive political
solution. France is working to bring together the parties
to the conflict. The announcement by Mr. Staffan de
Mistura on the formation of a constitutional committee
is an opportunity we must take to ensure progress
towards a political solution. France will continue its
efforts to protect Syrian civilians and to ensure that the
political process leads to genuine constitutional change
and free, transparent and inclusive elections.

