Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for providing me with the
opportunity to participate in today's Security Council
debate.

(Spoke in English)

At the outset, allow me to state, in our capacity as
Chair of the Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, that the 38 States members of the Group of
Friends, representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations, reaffirm in the strongest terms their
support for the work of the Security Council to ensure
the full protection of children from the grave violations
committed against them in armed conflicts. Since the
adoption of the first resolution on that specific issue
in 1999 (resolution 1261 (l999)), the Council has
established a unique and robust system of protection
through no less than eight consensus resolutions and
countless presidential statements.

The Group of Friends welcomes the recent
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and looks forward to working
closely with her and her office. The contributions of
the Special Representative to the work of the Security
Council are fundamental to its work. We call on the
Security Council to ensure that she regularly and
directly briefs the Council and its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, including on emerging
situations such as Libya, Syria, the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Mali.
(spoke in French)

The Group of Friends also welcomes the recent
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2012/261). Reporting on an annual
basis ensures that the Council is regularly seized of this
matter and better able to protect children affected by
armed conflict and hold perpetrators accountable. The
Group of Friends firmly believes that the Secretary-
General must continue to provide an annual report on
children and armed conflict to the Council, including
the two annexes therein that list the parties that recruit
or use children, kill or maim them, commit rape or
other forms of sexual violence against them or engage
in attacks on schools or hospitals. The listing of
perpetrators, the monitoring and reporting mechanism
on children and armed conflict established by resolution
1612 (2005), the dialogues and resulting action plans,
the efforts of the Special Representative, and the work
of UNICEF, working groups and various other partners
in the field, form the well-established international
framework to better protect the world's children caught
in conflict.

Finally, the Group of Friends believes that the issue
of persistent perpetrators is one of the fundamental
challenges for this protection framework. More than
half of the parties on the Secretary-General's list are
chronic violators of children's rights. To put it another
way, they have been on the list for more than five years.
The Group of Friends urges the Security Council to take
action to ensure that grave Violations against children
are punished by sanctions.

(Spoke in English)

In an international environment, where persistent
perpetrators of serious crimes against children affected
by conflict are not held to account, the Council must
protect the framework for action it has established and
strengthen it.

I will now speak in my national capacity.

This year's report of the Secretary-General
continues to document grave violations and abuses
being committed against girls and boys, including the
killing and maiming ofchildren, rape as a weapon ofwar
and attacks on schools and hospitals. Such despicable
actions must be stopped. Canada remains deeply
committed to the work of the Security Council on this
issue. Since the establishment of the groundbreaking and
comprehensive monitoring and reporting mechanism,
and the adoption last year of resolution 1998 (2011), the
data and evidence for grave violations against children
have improved. As a result, more perpetrators have been
held accountable, including with respect to attacks on
schools and hospitals. Canada encourages the Council
to continue to strengthen the existing mechanisms,
abide by its obligations and address the remaining
accountability gaps at the global and country level.

(spoke in French)

In the light of the situation of children in Syria,
it is clear, as mentioned in the report, that additional
steps must be taken. Canada is deeply concerned about
the reports from that country of gratuitous killings,
torture, sexual violence and the use of children as
human shields. We again urge the Council and the
international community to stand together against
such acts. Unfortunately, Syria is only one example of
countries Where such violence reigns.

Canada is also deeply concerned about the growing
number of persistent perpetrators committing grave
violations against children. Of the 52 parties named in
the Secretary-General's report, 32 have been listed for
more than five years. We must do more to hold both
State and non-State actors accountable.

(spoke in English)

In that regard, we commend the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Cote d'Ivoire, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan for including grave violations
against children as part of their sanctions criteria. We
urge the Security Council and its relevant sanctions
committees to take tangible steps to systematically
impose sanctions and targeted measures aimed at
holding perpetrators accountable for committing grave
atrocities such as the killing and rape of girls and boys.

In conclusion, Canada welcomes the actions taken
by many countries this year. They include the signing
of an action plan on the recruitment and use of children

by the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
Similarly, we look forward to the signing of an action
plan by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we call on other States to follow
suit. Action plans provide a structured approach and
impetus to parties to conflict aimed at ensuring the
release of children and an end to the practice of their
recruitment and use within a deadline. The impact of
such plans is evident, for instance, in the progress that
has been made in Sri Lanka, Nepal and Uganda in the
past few years, leading to the release and reintegration
of thousands of children.

