Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Sir, I too wish to pay tribute to the manner in which you
and your delegation have discharged your responsibilities in
guiding the Council during the month of August.

During the discussions the Council held on 4 August
last on the situation in Sierra Leone following the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), my
delegation expressed its appreciation at the positive
developments in the situation in that country.

Today, as the Council prepares to vote on the draft
resolution before it, I merely wish to reiterate my
delegation's satisfaction at the welcome events that have
recently occurred in Sierra Leone, in particular the signing
of the Peace Agreement between the Government and the
rebels and the adoption of the laws to implement that
Agreement. I refer, inter alia, to the amnesty laws, the
transformation of the Revolutionary United Front into a
political party, the lofty responsibilities conferred upon
Corporal Sankoh and the establishment of bodies charged
with monitoring the implementation of the Agreement and
examining related disputes.

At its first meeting, held in Freetown on 7 August last,
the Joint Committee for the implementation of the Lome
Peace Agreement also welcomed these positive
occurrences. They were the outcome of the mobilization
and joint efforts of, and the difficult choices made by, the
international community, President Kabbah and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), to which we pay well-
deserved tribute.

My delegation is aware that major challenges still lie
ahead for the full and final normalization of the situation in
Sierra Leone, and we welcome the draft resolution that we
are about to adopt. We are counting on the assistance of
donors and the international community to provide
considerable support for efforts directed at the consolidation
of peace, in particular the tasks of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, as well as the humanitarian
aspects. The United Nations will have a major role to play
in mobilizing that support. We are in favour of starting up
this crucial stage of the process of implementation of the
Peace Agreement in order to avoid any further
complications.

Naturally, in this respect the cooperation of the parties
with the United Nations and ECOMOG is absolutely
essential, as is ongoing logistical support for ECOMOG. In
support of all of these efforts, my delegation expresses its
hope that Corporal Sankoh and his comrades will take the
opportunity offered to them by the Lome Agreement to
give the people of Sierra Leone the peace and freedom to
which they so justly aspire.

