Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I wish to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and for having convened this debate, as well as to congratulate all the new members of the Security Council. The United Nations is commemorating 75 years since its founding. The United Nations was founded, as per the opening sentence of the Charter, with a vision to "save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". That responsibility ultimately lies with the Security Council. The Security Council sits with that burden. That burden could not be clearer in relation to developments in the Middle East over the past few days. The Security Council has since its founding influenced international peace and security. When it acts with speed, it always prevents conflict. When its members act in concert, it saves many thousands of lives. When the Council fails to agree, conflicts become protracted, women and children suffer the most and many lives are lost - it is that simple. There is a wide range of issues that demand the Council's attention - the heightened tensions in the Middle East; international terrorism; risks arising from new technologies; nuclear proliferation; and the 13 existing peace operations. The Secretary-General, in his briefings this week, spoke about geopolitical fractures and the growing tide of nationalism that is harming multilateralism. He spoke about growing mistrust in the United Nations. I could not agree with him more. All these challenges mean we need a Council that is decisive; that demonstrates purpose and urgency; and that exercises flexibility and creativity but ultimately acts within the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Regional organizations play an_ increasingly critical role in assisting the Security Council in its peace and security responsibilities. They understand local dynamics. They have connections and a growing capacity to play a critical role in the prevention of conflicts and building peace. The Pacific has provided an excellent demonstration of that role in assisting a fellow member of the Pacific Islands Forum - Solomon Islands - to transition out of conflict. Going forward, that link needs to be strengthened. At the time the Charter was agreed, Fiji was not a free country; we acquired our independence twenty- five years later. We are proud to share the fiftieth anniversary of our independence with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year; both are equally important to us. Not all the current challenges could have been imagined by the framers of our Charter. Today the world faces a new war of a type that the drafters of the Charter could not have imagined 75 years ago. The Pacific Island Forum leaders have declared climate crisis as the gravest security threat facing the Pacific islands. We started 2020 with the tragic expression of that grave challenge: the bushfires across Australia tell us we are at war with the planet. The majority of United Nations peace operations are today in regions that face some type of climate-induced stress: water stress, food insecurity, destroyed livelihoods - all are consequences of climate change that fuel intra- and inter-State conflicts. It does not take a rocket scientist to tell us that stresses that are caused by the climate crisis, whether on land or sea, are fuel for international terrorism and extremists. Our biodiversity, oceans, forests and lands are threatened by global warming. There are no front lines. There are no safe areas. The melting glaciers in the North, the dying coral reefs of blue Pacific in the South, the charred biodiversity across Australia are all frontlines in the climate crisis. Yet the gravest threat to peace and security comes from the slow-onset impacts of the climate crisis - one impact after another, repeated year in, year out, can transform stable States into unstable and fragile States. Nowhere is that felt more intensely than in small States. The founders of the United Nations, opening the Charter with their vision "to save successive generations from the scourge of war", showed great foresight. They did not limit or constrain the meaning of war in a definition based on guns and weapons. The climate crisis has all the intrinsic features of war - it kills human beings; water, food and insecurities are weaponized in climate-induced conflicts; and as in all wars, women and children bear the brunt of suffering and pain - and we are losing this war. To win the climate war may seem like an impossible proposition, but at the General Assembly, Nelson Mandela reminds us every day that it always seems impossible until it is done. As we mark our seventy-fifth anniversary, it is time to recommit ourselves to our Charter. It is time to raise our climate ambition, to rekindle our multilateral spirit and apply ourselves collectively to tackle what Fiji's Prime Minister describes as the battle of our lives.
