Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Representative of Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and for the important work that he is doing. We warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia. The peace process has continued to move forward through a challenging period. We encourage everyone to continue those efforts on the path to peace and prosperity. We welcome the first local and departmental elections since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the first with the participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comin (FARC) and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia- Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), which marks an important step forward. The role of the local and departmental authorities is critical to the success of Colombia's peacebuilding efforts. It is the opportunity for the newly elected local authorities to align themselves with the peace process and advance the implementation of the peace agreement. We acknowledge the Government-initiated national conversation on different sectors and themes. We encourage seeing dialogue as a platform to build more consensus and maintain momentum in the society. We note positively that the vast majority of former fighters remain engaged and committed to the Final Agreement and continue working to reintegrate into civilian life, despite continued uncertainties and attacks against them. It is important to emphasize that risks and challenges still remain and require more attention and action. As a result of the increased urbanizationof demobilization, the majority of ex-combatants now live in civilian communities where it is more difficult to track them and ensure that they can access services and the same benefits as other citizens. We are deeply concerned about the security situation and the rising levels of violence against community leaders, human rights advocates and former combatants. Those individuals are at the forefront of implementing the peace agreement and violence towards them represents a fundamental threat to its success. The year 2019 was the most violent year for former combatants - a record 77 of whom were killed. We also remain concerned about the reports of violence targeting women's political participation. It is important to ensure the security of all parts of the country, especially for the most vulnerable. We encourage the Colombian Government to continue to make use of all established mechanisms. The National Commission on Security Guarantees, a body established in the peace agreement with the mandate of seeking solutions to ongoing protection challenges, should be used to develop a policy on the dismantling of criminal organizations and their support networks. We reiterate the need to prioritize prevention, early warning and collective protection measures, which should take into consideration the particular needs of the potential victims, such as indigenous people and Afro-Colombian communities, and should have a gender-sensitive approach. Progress is needed in other areas of the agreement. We encourage everyone to continue that valuable work though transitional justice mechanisms that provide truth, justice and reconciliation for victims - decisive elements for sustainable peace and _ long-lasting development. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace is a pillar of transitional justice and respect for its independence and autonomy must be ensured. We are pleased to see the progress that the Colombian Government has made and would like to express Estonia's strong support for the comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement. The support of the international community, including the Security Council, remains critical.
