Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. We should also like to express our thanks to
Ambassador Valdivieso, Permanent Representative of
Colombia, for the important preparatory efforts that
were undertaken for this meeting. In addition, my
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on small arms (S/2002/ 1053). Finally, let
me express my gratitude and appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Dhanapala for presenting the report.

Today's world faces many challenges that require
a collective response by the international community to
ensure the primacy of justice, peace and the rule of law.
Even after the end of the cold war, we continue to
witness a world of murder, destruction, widespread
injustice and tyranny, where aggressors continue to act
with impunity and where some stand silent in the face
of the crime of occupation and the related crime of
genocide. Our common endeavour to build a better
world must be based on the rules of international law,
on the purposes and principles of the Charter and on
the resolutions of international legitimacy.

In the light of that understanding - which Syria
is making every effort to reinforce - we all believe
that the illicit trade in small weapons and light arms
threatens the lives of innocents. It has led to the murder
of hundreds of thousands of children, women and
elderly persons as is clear in the statistics provided in
paragraph 4 of the report of the Secretary-General on
small arms.

What is required from all States, particularly
those that manufacture such weapons, is to make every
possible effort through effective international
cooperation to put an end to this tragedy. It is also
important to point out that the international community,
in its endeavour to combat the illicit trade in such
weapons, must deal with all States on an equal footing,
without double standards or discrimination based on
political considerations. Such double standards allow
some countries to use such weapons with the resultant
bloodshed, destruction and threats to the sovereignty
and national territorial integrity of States in one region
while such weapons are prohibited in other regions,
despite the great similarity in circumstances.

We also believe that it is necessary, indeed
fundamental, for our continuing principled support of
the struggle of peoples to end foreign occupation with
its concomitant injustice, oppression,
underdevelopment and destruction. It is important not
to form a line behind a small group that is acting to
change international principles of freedom and human
rights, and that is trying to use such changed principles
in the service of narrow interests under the general
rubric of international terrorism.

The final document of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in July
2001, affirms the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and the need to refrain
from intervening in their internal affairs, as well as the
individual and collective right to self-defence as
provided by Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The implicit right of States to acquire weapons to
defend themselves and to establish their own defence
systems is a fundamental issue that cannot be
overstepped.

Consideration of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons must not divert attention from the
genuine roots of conflict in many parts of the world.
Many of the conflicts where such weapons are used
find their roots in national, social and economic
conditions inherited from colonial times or stemming
from foreign occupation. This is the situation in Africa,
the Middle East and many other States, particularly in
developing States. Such conditions ineluctably lead to
disputes that may well turn into military conflicts.

Considering the issue of small weapons and
combating the illicit trade in such weapons can in no
way mean setting aside the priorities set out by the
United Nations in the field of disarmament. Such
priorities were clearly and unanimously set out in the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, the first special session devoted to
disarmament, in 1978, which affirmed that the utmost
priority must be given to nuclear disarmament and the
more destructive weapons of mass destruction than to
conventional weapons.

Syria, which continues to make every effort to
defend the life, security and dignity of its citizens, is
keen on ensuring that small and light weapons remain
nothing more than a means to ensure the security and
future of its citizens. In this regard, the Syrian
Government has enacted legislation and adopted a
number of measures to ensure that such weapons do
not fall in the wrong hands. The right to carry such
weapons is entrusted only to those agencies responsible
for protecting the security and safety of citizens. In this
context, let me refer to the fact that in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the crime rate stemming from the illicit trade
in small and light weapons is one of the lowest in the
world.

In View of the importance of regional and
international cooperation and interaction in facing up
to the issue of illicit trade in small and light weapons,
the Syrian Arab Republic has signed a large number of
agreements with sisterly and friendly States in order to
suppress the illicit trade of such weapons and maintain
our common security. Syria has also signed a number
of important international agreements in this regard.

The Syrian Government gives great importance to
setting ways and means to assist the Security Council
in dealing with the issue of the trafficking of small and
light arms. The following are among the important
aspects that may be stressed in the Council's
consideration of the issue.

First, the Security Council could encourage
initiatives aimed at mobilizing resources and expertise
in order to enhance the implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. It could provide assistance
to States upon their request to help in the
implementation of that Programme of Action. In this
regard, let me reaffirm what has been stated in many of
the statements at the beginning of this meeting
regarding the need for all States to respect the
sanctions imposed on States that allow the flow of
small and light weapons to other States.

Secondly, the Security Council must continue to
reaffirm the following rights. First is the inherited,
historical and inalienable right to self-defence, whether
individually or collectively, according to the provisions
of Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. Second is
the right of every State to manufacture small arms and
light weapons and to import and acquire such weapons
in order to defend itself and satisfy its security needs
while ensuring that such weapons do not fall into the
wrong hands.

Thirdly, there is the right of peoples to struggle
by all means possible and in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter in order to
achieve self-determination and liberate their land from
occupation.

In conclusion, let me stress that the Syrian
delegation will cooperate with the other members of
the Security Council in preparing the draft presidential
statement in order to satisfy the requirements and the
tasks entrusted to this Council in preventing the spread
of small and light weapons.

