Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency for convening this
high-level meeting. We also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Amano for their informative briefings.

At the outset, we would like to acknowledge the
valuable role that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) plays in providing assistance to States
for the safe use of nuclear energy for development and
peaceful purposes. We are grateful for the strengthened
relations between our nation and the IAEA, especially
in the implementation of cooperative projects. Through
its Ministry of Energy and Mines, the Dominican
Republic is currently a partner in two national and
47 regional projects with the IAEA that are in their
completion and implementation stages.

The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm
commitment to the obligations outlined in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
and its three fundamental pillars of disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. The full implementation of those three pillars
represents the key route to achieving a world free of
nuclear weapons and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We commend the progress that has been made in
the framework of non-proliferation, including the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action with Iran. Its adoption
and continued effective implementation to this day,
in spite of setbacks, is a convincing testament to the
success that multilateralism and dialogue can achieve.
We hope that Iran, the States parties to the agreement
and other Member States will refrain from taking steps
that undermine the agreement and the confidence
placed in it.

That is why we urge that similar concrete and
practical action be taken on disarmament, the pillar
of the Treaty that has seen no significant progress. We
believe that the only guarantee against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons is their complete elimination
and prohibition, in a transparent, verifiable and
irreversible manner. That is why we became a signatory
to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons,
adopted in July 2017. The Treaty is the logical and
necessary result of the deep concern that NPT member
States have expressed about the potentially catastrophic
humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear
weapons. It also strengthens the NPT and represents an
urgent multilateral response to the erosion of bilateral
treaties and the threat posed by efforts to modernize
nuclear weapons, which could lead to a new nuclear
arms race. In that regard, we note with concern the recent
suspension of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty. We hope that the parties will be able to resume
the dialogue and arrive at reasonable conclusions.

One element that strengthens the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime is the establishment of nuclear-
weapon-free zones. Thanks to our experience of being
part of the densely populated area declared as the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone through the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, we can confirm that the establishment

of such zones brings us closer to achieving general
and complete disarmament and promotes peace and
regional and international stability.

In that connection, we hope that during the next
review of the NPT we will be able to definitively
agree on the holding of a conference on a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East, in accordance
with what was agreed in the final document of the
2010 Review Conference. We also encourage the
States parties to the NPT to keep their commitments,
in particular those outlined in article VI of the Treaty,
which call for negotiations with a View to general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international supervision.

We believe that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty complements the NPT. We therefore call
on the annex 2 States to the Treaty that have not yet
ratified it to do so for its entry into force. Likewise,
the expeditious negotiation of a legally binding,
non-discriminatory instrument banning the production
of fissile material cannot be postponed.

In conclusion, we believe it is inconsistent for us to
aspire to live in a peaceful world and, at the same time,
allow the existence of nuclear weapons. Such weapons
pose a threat to collective security, the development
of our nations and the environment. Their use runs
counter to the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

For the Dominican Republic, there is a clear
relationship between disarmament and development.
We believe that it is undesirable to allocate excessive
resources to the maintenance and development of new
nuclear-weapon technologies instead of using those
funds to meet basic human needs.

