Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Mr. President, your great
country, France, is well known for its contribution to
refining the art of diplomacy. You therefore have the full
confidence and support of my delegation as you discharge

 

the responsibilities of President of the Council for this
month. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt, for the excellent manner in which he
deployed a combination of ancient and contemporary
Egyptian political skills to guide the work of the Council
last month.

Every single day that goes by matters a great deal to
the people of Angola, and for the prospects for durable
peace in that country. The dawn of a new day without
cease-fire violations and innocent lives lost reinforces the
hope of a war-weary people for a better tomorrow. The
Government of Angola and UNITA have a historic
opportunity to put an end to the civil war that has brought
their country to the brink of self-destruction. Botswana is
satisfied with the progress made by the Government of
Angola in the implementation of its commitments. We
encourage the Government to continue to take decisive
steps and exercise exemplary leadership in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

The time has come for UNITA to recognize that as a
party to the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol it
has a duty and an obligation to implement its own
commitments expeditiously and in full. The peace process
requires partnership, trust and good faith. UNITA took
great risks in waging war against the Government of
Angola, and it almost destroyed the country; it must now
faithfully and constructively take risks to participate
vigorously in establishing peace in Angola. We therefore
call upon UNITA expeditiously to quarter the remaining
troops and hand over to the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), without further delay,
all arms and ammunition, especially the heavy military
equipment which has been so obviously absent from the
items handed over to UNAVEM. III to date. We fully share
the Secretary-General's view that unless the heavy weapons
are handed over, the quartering will not be complete. The
recent successful conclusion of the military talks should
make it easier for UNITA to find its way, and should
enable it to exercise greater flexibility in the resolution of
the remaining issues.

The next few weeks will be crucial in the
consolidation of the peace process and in making sure it
becomes irreversible. Botswana attaches the utmost
importance to the formation of a Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation. We strongly believe that such a
Government would have a salutary effect on the overall
peace process. In this respect, UNITA members of
Parliament should take their rightful places in the National
Assembly, as this would have a positive effect on the talks
on constitutional issues. In the same vein, we support the
Secretary-General's observation that the question of the
post of Vice-President for Mr. Savimbi should be
resolved at the earliest possible opportunity. A meeting
between President dos Santos and the leader of UNITA
therefore has the full encouragement of my delegation, as
such a meeting may speed up Mr. Savimbi's decision
finally to assume his responsibilities in the national
Government.

While the international community continues to
apply pressure on the Government of Angola and UNITA
to meet the obligations they have freely entered into, it is
necessary for us all to bear in mind the desperate need for
the provision to the Government and people of Angola of
financial resources necessary to support, buttress and
sustain the peace process in that war-ravaged country.
The reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Angolan
economy is a key element in underpinning the peace
process. Assistance is urgently needed now as the process
of demobilization and social reintegration gets under way.
It is essential that the demobilized ex-combatants be
assisted in becoming productive members of Angolan
society. It is important to give particular attention to this
aspect of the Angolan peace process, as it has the
potential to haunt the country in the years ahead if
neglected.

As we extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III to 11
October 1996, I wish to conclude by expressing the strong
desire of my country to see the next three months used
productively to establish a solid foundation for lasting
peace in Angola so that, when the Council considers the
next report of the Secretary-General in October, which
will be the beginning of the rainy season in southern
Africa, the people of Angola will be looking forward to
tilling the soil of their land and planting their crops
without fear of resumed warfare under the cover of the
sprouting bushes.

