Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on successfully
presiding over the Security Council this month and
convening this meeting on mediation. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General and the Archbishop of
Canterbury for their valuable briefings this morning.

I associate myself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Turkey on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Mediation.
As we all know, mediation has always been an
integral part of diplomacy and the settlement of
disputes, while negotiation, mediation, arbitration and
reconciliation are the first choices when it comes to
dealing with disputes. Their importance is enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Mediation
is not a substitute for other tools for preventing
conflicts but rather a complement to them as part of
a comprehensive strategy for preventing, resolving
and managing disputes. Beyond that, we also have to
address the root causes of disputes, while recognizing
how peace, security, development and human rights are
all linked. In recent years the international community
has become more aware of those facts and of the
importance of prioritizing preventive diplomacy and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through
mediation. Every two years, for example, the General
Assembly adopts a resolution on mediation submitted
by Turkey and Finland and sponsored by a large group
of countries, including the State of Qatar. The report
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations has
focused on the fact that peacekeeping mandates must
work to help achieve political solutions to crises.

At the same time, it is encouraging that there are
developments in mediation's arrangements and tools at
various levels that are essential in order to stay abreast
ofthe changing nature oftoday's conflicts and threats to
international peace and security. We are also encouraged
by the increasing number of mediation actors. There
have been progress and practical achievements on the
mediation agenda at the United Nations, especially since
the establishment in the Secretariat of the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers in support of mediation
efforts worldwide. We commend the Secretary-General
for prioritizing preventive diplomacy and mediation
and for his efforts to enhance the performance of the
United Nations in that regard, including his initiative to
establish the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.
We also underscore the important role of civil society
and the private sector in this area. In many instances
the success of mediation strategies relies on identifying
and engaging the right stakeholders. Moreover, it
is important to engage women and young people in
peacebuilding and mediation efforts to help to ensure
their efficiency and sustainability.

The State of Qatar has unique mediation
experience, especially in the Arab and Islamic world.
Our mediation efforts have often led to the successful
settlement of disputes or to avoiding further escalation,
and the Council has recognized and supported them.
Integrity and inclusiveness are among the factors that
help mediation to succeed. We have no special purpose
in mediating except to ensure successful dialogue and
reconciliation in the settlement of a dispute. We must
also take into account the ways in which conflicts
differ and recognize the specific traits of each case.
It is the parties to a conflict who have the primary
responsibility for resolving it. They must recognize the
joint interest they all have in achieving reconciliation
and settling their disputes.

The State of Qatar is interested in mediation
because it lies at the heart of the maintenance of peace
and security and the peaceful resolution of conflict. We
also believe that it is important to support and sustain
peace, and we therefore contributed to the preparations
for the General Assembly's high-level meeting in
April on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (see A/72/PV.83). We have chosen to join the international
community in confronting our shared challenges,
and we will continue to do so at the regional and
international levels, despite the unfair blockade and
illegal unilateral measures that have been imposed on
Qatar since 5 June 2017. We will continue to honour
our obligations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, and we will work
on resolving conflicts through peaceful means. We
therefore reiterate our appreciation for the mediation
efforts headed by His Highness the Amir of our sister
State of Kuwait aimed at resolving the crisis in the Gulf
and thereby enhancing the security and stability of the
region and peace and security internationally.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar hopes that the
Security Council will continue to support all actors and
stakeholders in the area of mediation in order to prevent
and resolve conflicts and ensure that they do not recur,
with a view to sparing future generations the threats
and woes of such conflicts.

