Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
place on record our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's open debate, which is very
timely and gives us an opportunity to discuss the
situation in Somalia comprehensively. I would also like
in particular to thank the Secretary-General for setting
the coordinates and tone for our discussion today. Our
thanks also go to Ambassador Diarra, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union.

The Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, deserves our special appreciation
for his comprehensive outline of the achievements of
the Transitional Federal Government (TF G) thus far, as
well as its plans for the immediate future. I draw
inspiration in particular from the Prime Minister's
expressed determination to regain his land, his identity
and his dignity from the extremists. I would like to
assure the Prime Minister of India's continued
commitment to supporting every meaningful effort
aimed at furthering peace, reconstruction and
institution-building in Somalia.

In keeping with discussions held earlier this week
in Mogadishu by our Ambassador, including with the
Prime Minister, we will examine ways of intensifying
our cooperation aimed at building capacity in the
various areas identified by the Prime Minister in
dealing with the scourge of piracy.

India and Somalia are linked by two millenniums
of shared history and culture. We are neighbours across
the sea. In recent times, Mogadishu, Kismayo and
other Somali cities have had thriving Indian
communities. Even today, India is home to many
Somalis. Indian teachers are fondly remembered by
many Somalis. In recent times, as Somalia fell into
difficult circumstances, India contributed significant
numbers of peacekeepers and naval and air assets to
the Unified Task Force and to the United Nations
Operation in Somalia II. The work of Indian medical
units among the civilian population is still recalled. We
also remain active in the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia, while continuing existing
measures to protect our seafarers and maritime
commerce.

The peace and security issues confronting
Somalia, as well as the immediate and greater region,
are matters that concern us all. I join in commending
the TFG forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for their recent successes. I also
take note of the Secretary-General's assessment that
that effort is currently fragile and needs to be
supported, and we have every intention of doing so.

We extend our sincere condolences on the
sacrifices that have been made. We have had reports of
the trying circumstances in which the various
contingents operate. We also wish to record our
appreciation for the good work being done by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. The
Council should examine the recommendations made by
the African Union and others for supporting AMISOM
and Somalia and its people.

However, international efforts to re-establish
security in Somalia will not be successful so long as
Al-Shabaab continues to generate internal resources for
its activities. We would therefore like to see TFG
forces control Kismayo port so that port earnings are
not misappropriated by Al-Shabaab. Simultaneously,
all stakeholders should undertake serious efforts to cut
off arms supplies to Al-Shabaab.

It is important to break any nexus between
domestic destabilizing forces and external support
agencies that is intended to introduce outside
combatants or arms and ammunition. That requires
effective monitoring of existing sanctions and a
common commitment to honour them.

The drought in Somalia and in neighbouring
countries has assumed alarming proportions in lands
that even in normal times are not adequately blessed
with water resources. We would be prepared to work
with the TFG to assist the Somali people in this regard.

One of the unfortunate outcomes of the larger and
ongoing tragedy in Somalia is piracy. It has not only
had a destabilizing effect on global and regional trade
and security, but has also brought about much suffering
to seafarers and their families. The recent killing of
four United States citizens by the pirates is only an
example, and we strongly condemn that.

As I mentioned in the Council's debate on
25 January 2011 (see S/PV.6473), Somali pirates are
operating further and further from the Somali coast.
Recent incidents of piracy have taken place about
250 nautical miles away from the Indian coast. The
shift of attacks to the south and east of the Indian
Ocean reflects the pirates' ability to adapt to bypass the

11-2583]
security corridor established by naval forces and to
extend their reach to approximately 1,000 to 1,200
miles from Somali Coast. The Indian Navy and Coast
Guard have stepped up their vigil against pirates in
India's exclusive economic zone. They have recently
neutralized two mother ships being used by the pirates.

The issue of sailors taken hostage by pirates and
their plight is one that the Security Council has not
addressed. My delegation feels that the ways and
means to address this issue require the most urgent and
serious consideration of the United Nations.

The International Maritime Bureau reported that
in 2010 alone, 1,016 sailors of all nationalities were
taken hostage by Somali pirates, and 638 of them
remain hostages. It is a matter of serious concern for us
that 53 Indian nationals aboard the hijacked ships are
being held captive by pirates. The hostages are
generally from working-class backgrounds and are
often the only bread-winners of their families. The
primary responsibility for the release of hostages lies
with the owners of the ships concerned. In many cases
it has been observed, regrettably, that those ship
owners do not take responsibility or display adequate
interest in securing the release of the sailors in their
employ. In many circumstances sailors must endure
very harsh conditions under captivity and are often
tortured by their captors.

My delegation views this issue with the greatest
concern. Democracies in particular are sensitive to
public opinion and are impacted by a public sense of
need to act on the adverse situations faced by their
citizens. There has to be more effective action that the
international community can collectively take. I was
encouraged by the remarks of my Russian colleague
and look forward to receiving details of his initiative
on piracy and to being able to support it.

India has been fully engaged in the efforts of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and
we will continue to work with other countries. The
Indian Navy has been undertaking anti-piracy patrols
in the Gulf of Aden since October 2008.

We will work with Somali authorities and support
the work of the African Union and this Council in a
constructive manner. We are happy that even through
trying times, bilateral cooperation programmes such as
the Pan-African e-Network are being successfully
implemented in Somalia. We look forward also to a
visit by the Deputy Prime Minister for Planning and

11-2583]
International Cooperation, His Excellency
Mr. Abdiweli Ali. We will remain engaged with
Somalia.

