Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): The
French delegation had the honour and the
responsibility of preparing the text of the resolution
that has just been adopted by the Security Council.
Over time, the Security Council has developed a
largely unified view on resolving the conflict in C6te
d'Ivoire, as my delegation noted here last week (see S/PV.6168) after the introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/344). I am pleased to note
that that unified view was formally reaffirmed today by
the unanimous adoption of resolution 1880 (2009).

The Security Council is united in extending the
mandate of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) for six months, encouraging the
force to do its utmost to support the organizing of a
free, fair, open and transparent presidential election on
the planned date, which is now its priority. Our Council
is also united in reaffirming the certification role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
should confirm each stage of the electoral process.
Finally, above all, the Security Council is united in
demanding that the Ivorian parties this time honour
their commitments, and that the first round of the
presidential elections indeed be held on 29 November,
as they themselves decided last May.

I would like to develop that last element, which
seems to us essential. In sending that message to the
Ivorian parties, the Security Council by no means
underestimates the difficulties inherent to the
preparation of good elections, but it notes that it is up
to the Ivorian parties and the main candidates
themselves to find and to show the political will to
remove the various obstacles. The presidential and
legislative elections have indeed been postponed for
too long. With delay after delay - from January to
November 2008, then from November 2008 to
November 2009 - the prospect for the elections has
only become more distant.

The Security Council, in particular France from
among the Council members, which deploys troops on
09-43294
the ground in support of the United Nations and has
provided significant direct and indirect aid to Cote
d'Ivoire, has been quiet for too long. Those delays
have consequences. They unjustly punish the Ivorian
population by delaying an end to the crisis and by
prolonging a state of instability that is dangerous to
Cote d'Ivoire and the subregion. They also have a
cause - the lack or insufficiency of political will -
and are, unfortunately, once again sending us a warning
signal. Contradictory signals, rumours and signs of
tension are mounting.

France is convinced that, if they find the
necessary political will, the Ivorian actors still have the
ability to keep their commitments, with the support of
the international community. In any case, they must
know that they are held to their word by the Security
Council and will be judged on their acts. In that spirit,
in the coming weeks, the Council will closely follow,
in particular, the publication of the provisional
electoral list and the final electoral list and the support
of the Facilitator and the representative of the
Secretary-General.

The Council will not let itself be tricked by
technical ploys. If the 29 November elections are to be
delayed, the parties responsible will be clearly
identified, and the Security Council will draw the
necessary conclusions.

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore, for his
determined action in favour of peace.
09-43294

The Ouagadougou process has enabled Cote
d'Ivoire to make significant progress. I should like to
refer to two examples that are of particular importance.
The first was the smooth dismantling of the zone of
confidence, which had cut the country in two. The
absence of armed incidents since the closing of the last
UNOCI observation post, on 30 July 2008, attests to
the ability of former enemies to live together. The
second was the completion of the process to register
more than 6.5 million voters, on 30 June. That
constitutes a republican response to one of the root
causes of the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire that has lasted
since 2002.

That progress is a cause for hope. However, it
will be meaningless if Ivorian political actors once
again squander an opportunity to emerge from the
crisis. The Security Council will consider this issue on
a regular basis. We have specifically asked the
Secretary-General to inform us in early September on
the publication of the provisional electoral list. The
Ivorian people deserve for 29 November 2009 to be
honoured. They can count on the Security Council, as
well as on France, to demonstrate great support and
vigilance.

