At the outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Estonia, Sven Jiirgenson, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also extend my sincere thanks to the Dominican Republic's Special Envoy to the Security Council, Jose Singer Weisinger, for his able management of the Council's work last month. I would also extend my gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing. Allow me now to deliver the following statement on behalf of the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mustafa Al-Khadhimi. "The challenges that Iraq faces in various fields, be they economic, security, health or social, are great, but they are no greater than our willingness to address them. All Iraqis, from Basra to Kurdistan, will work together to achieve stability and overcome these challenges. In this regard, I would recall our experience in fighting together to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), also known as Da'esh. "Members of my Government are aware of the many difficulties we are facing: a pandemic that could overwhelm a health system that had suffered long years of neglect and maldevelopment, an economic crisis that has been exacerbated by our dependence on oil, and a trust gap among several sectors of Iraqi society, in particular young people and public institutions, which has led to a large wave of protests since October 2019. "We understand that taking up the responsibility to form a Government and lead the country in conditions such as these is not a privilege, but a test of our faith in our country and its people, and it is one from which we cannot shy away. My Government was formed in response to a political crisis, but it aspires to be a Government that brings about solutions. We will address the urgent problems. As I stated when I first announced my Government's programme, which has since been approved by the Iraqi Parliament, we believe that, in order to achieve the goal of finding solutions, some steps should be taken in advance. "First of all, the sovereignty of the State must be preserved and honoured. Secondly, the rule of law must be strengthened, and the State must reclaim full control over the country's armed forces. Thirdly, we must work to prevent foreign Powers from transferring their conflicts and rivalries into Iraq, which has threatened our stability, and from using Iraq as a base to attack other countries. Iraq's sovereignty and independence are crucial to the stability and security of the region, which we think can be enhanced by establishing friendly relations with all countries. "T believe it is important to briefly expand on the other priorities of my Government, as follows. The Government pledges to use all of the State's capabilities to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including supporting the specialized task force and providing medicines and medical equipment to the public, in addition to being open to international support and experience in this regard, as well as establishing a modern health- care system with a forward-looking vision. "The Government pledges to enforce State authority by controlling the possession of arms and restricting possession of arms to Government and military institutions, and by enforcing the rule of law. "The Government pledges to draft a special budget law that will tackle the current economic crisis and the plummeting of oil prices. This law should address the problems of all governorates, including those in the south, which have suffered deprivation, and those that have been destroyed by Da'esh, as well as in the Kurdistan region, focusing in general on the diversity of income sources. "The Government pledges to initiate a frank and responsible national dialogue with all components of society in order to address the demands set forth by the peaceful protest movement and apply its national priorities. In addition, the Government will launch a comprehensive fact-finding and accountability campaign with respect to the violent incidents that accompanied the protests, so that those involved in shedding Iraqi blood may be prosecuted and so that martyrs' families and the wounded may receive due care. "The Government pledges to protect Iraq's sovereignty and security and formulate a shared national vision to negotiate the presence of foreign forces in Iraq. This vision will operate within the framework of protecting the country's security and continuing the fight against terrorism. "The Government pledges to combat corruption by adopting legal mechanisms and practical steps to ensure protecting public assets, promoting the role of judicial institutions and recovering public funds inside and outside Iraq. "The Government pledges to promote the values of citizenship and respect for religious, ethnic and national diversity in Iraq, rejecting any kind of religious, sectarian or nationality-based discrimination among citizens. "With the intention of taking action on the aforementioned priorities, the Government, at its first Cabinet meeting, which took place on 9 May, adopted the following orders: to immediately release pension payments; to establish a truth-finding committee to investigate the violence perpetrated against peaceful demonstrators and bring redress to those who were harmed, hold perpetrators accountable and compensate the families of the martyrs and wounded persons; to release, in coordination with the Supreme Judicial Council, all detainees who participated in the demonstrations of October; to establish an experts committee to evaluate and provide recommendations on developing a legal framework for elections, present recommendations on the completion or amendment of the national electoral law and the best practices for supporting the Independent High Electoral Commission in organizing an early election; and to establish a special committee to prepare for the strategic dialogue with the United States of America in line with the goal of preserving Iraq national sovereignty. "Fighting and countering terrorism is at the core of my Government's security strategy as well as its purpose in paving the way for the reconstruction of liberated cities and the return of displaced citizens. To this end, we will lead negotiations with the global coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham on the presence of the international troops in Iraq, based on a shared and inclusive national vision. "Traq welcomes all efforts undertaken so far to repatriate family members of foreign terrorist fighters and urges other countries to accept the return of their non-convicted citizens. There is an urgent need for concerted efforts to be made to rehabilitate and integrate victims of terrorism, especially in the areas that have been recovered. "Iraq confirms its strong commitment to establishing friendly relations and cooperation with our neighbours and the international community as a whole. In this context, cooperation with Kuwait remains one of Iraq's top priorities. A large part of our effort centres around finding the missing Kuwaiti persons as well as finalizing and fulfilling our obligations towards their bereaved families. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence continues its efforts to excavate the remains at the sites at Samawah, Khamisiyah, Al-Radhwania, Karbala, Salman Pak and Al-Burjusiya. At the same time, Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and the State of Kuwait to accelerate the process to announce the results of the DNA tests of the remains of 47 missing persons found and handed over in August 2019. "The ongoing and painstaking search efforts have led to the discovery of a new set of Kuwaiti archives. The Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs was supposed to deliver those archives by April but, owing to the conditions occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic, the delivery has been postponed. "With regard to compensation, a payment of $440 million was made on 28 April, which leaves an outstanding balance of $2.8 billion. This precarious situation puts Iraq in an extremely difficult position that no Government can maintain without international cooperation and solidarity. In these difficult circumstances, the formation of the new Government is further proof of the success of democracy in Iraq, where power was peacefully handed over in line with the Constitution. "Accordingly, we aspire to having the Security Council support Iraq by helping the new Government achieve its priorities in the following ways: condemning violations of Iraq's sovereignty by any Member State and preventing such acts in future; supporting the newly formed Government to address its principal challenges, especially with regard to COVID-19 and the economic and financial crisis; and actively cooperating with Iraq in the war against terrorism, in which Iraq still stands at the front line. "Iraq commends the support being received from the international community and reiterates that helping the country preserve its national sovereignty will be a cornerstone of the success of the new Government. "T extend my special appreciation to the Secretary-General for his supportive positions towards Iraq, and we hope that the international community will continue to support the people of my country in achieving a stable and prosperous Iraq. I offer special thanks to the Head of UNAMI and her team for their tireless efforts over the last 12 months. We look forward to the Security Council renewing the UNAMI mandate for another year."
