Mr. Staur (Denmark): Let me join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for this timely debate. At
the outset, let me also align myself and my
Government with the statement just made by the
representative of the European Union.

Like others, Denmark is very concerned about the
worsening situation in Somalia. The country has been
without a central Government for two decades.
Mogadishu is the scene of continued battles between
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG), supported
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
and Al-Shabaab. Most of southern and central Somalia
11-25878

is controlled by Al-Shabaab, which seriously limits the
space for addressing what is probably the greatest
humanitarian crisis in the world today. The
deteriorating humanitarian situation is a particular
cause for concern. The conflict has disastrous
consequences for the population, and the potential to
further destabilize the situation in the Horn of Africa.
Negative implications could be felt also in Europe.

At the end of the day, a lasting solution to the
crisis in Somalia must be political. It is imperative that
the international community come together under the
leadership of the United Nations, both through the
Security Council and through the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga.

Denmark strongly supports the Special
Representative's efforts. We urge, first and foremost,
that the United Nations assist the TFG as a matter of
priority in finalizing its political strategy, which is
needed to frame military efforts, as well as to engage
Somali groups, including the private sector, religious
leaders, Somali civil society, women and the diaspora.
Secondly, we urge the United Nations to push ahead
with stronger integration in order to ensure better
coordination across the many and complex United
Nations efforts in Somalia. We are aware that the task
is difficult and the environment risky. Yet there may be
possibilities for strengthening the presence of the
United Nations in more stable areas, such as Hargeisa
or Garowe.

International efforts must be underpinned by a
process, led by Africans themselves, in the African
Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other relevant forums. A
comprehensive solution must include Somalia's
neighbours and the other countries in the wider Horn of
Africa.

Through AMISOM, the AU is doing a
commendable job in securing the TFG in Mogadishu,
but a military track cannot stand alone. A broad
political solution that embraces a new constitution for
Somalia is also needed. Like others, we have been
concerned about the lack of progress made on the
political track by the TFG. The Parliament's recent
unilateral prolongation of its mandate was not helpful
to bolstering its credibility. A further prolongation
beyond the present year is not acceptable. In order to
improve the legitimacy of any new institutional
9

arrangement after 2011, the Transitional Federal
Institutions must be reformed and the constitutional
process must be broadened.

We deplore the loss of opportunities to exploit
divisions within Al-Shabaab and other armed groups.
We urge the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to work with the TFG to restore its credibility
and reach out to the groups outside the Djibouti
process, including in particular the regions, the private
sector, the diaspora and non-governmental
organizations.

Denmark, as a considerable seafaring nation with
important interests in safe and open seas, considers the
fight against piracy to be a high priority. Piracy off the
coast of Somalia has reached an alarming scale and
poses a threat to world trade and economic recovery.
Not least, the East African economies are at risk, with
piracy threatening important trade routes in the region.
Denmark has been a very active partner in the fight
against piracy since the maritime military operations
kicked off in 2008. At the moment, we are contributing
a vessel to NATO's Operation Ocean Shield. In spite of
the valuable contribution of the naval forces to the
fight against piracy delivered, it is clear that military
efforts cannot stand alone. A lasting solution to the
piracy problem can be found only - only - on land.

The legal issues pertaining to piracy are thorny.
Denmark works actively to strengthen international
legal efforts to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia,
in particular through the Danish chairmanship of
Working Group 2 of the international Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. Ensuring that pirates
are prosecuted is a cornerstone of the international
fight against piracy. We are therefore pleased with the
latest figures, which show that 820 pirates are in fact
being prosecuted in 16 States. At the same time, it is
important to continue exploring the legal aspects of
post-trial transfers of sentenced Somali individuals
back to Somalia for incarceration. The establishment of
prison facilities on the ground in Somalia is a key
factor in that regard.

Finally, I take this opportunity to inform the
Council that my Government has recently revised its
Somalia policy. The new policy embraces a whole-of-
Government approach across the areas of defence,
diplomacy and development, and provides a Danish
envelope for humanitarian and development assistance
amounting to more than $70 million over the next four
10

years. On top of that are funds set aside for
stabilization purposes, in addition to our naval
contribution to the international fight against piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

