Mr. Touray (Gambia): Almost 10 years ago, Pan Am
flight 103 was brought down over Lockerbie, in Scotland,
killing all 259 passengers and 11 other people. Since then
the families of the deceased from this tragedy endured
untold grief as they waited for justice to be meted out.
Three years later, the Security Council came up with three
resolutions requiring Libya to produce the two persons
accused of the bombing of the Pan Am flight for trial in the
United Kingdom or in the United States, failing which
sanctions were imposed against Libya.

Libya has been under excruciating sanctions for seven
years. These sanctions have brought untold suffering to the
Libyan people - especially to women and children - and
have virtually crippled its aviation infrastructure. The
Petrovsky report attests to this fact.

On numerous occasions in the Security Council, we
have advocated a speedy resolution to the impasse that was
created by the imposition of the sanctions. We have always
emphasized that a solution agreeable to both parties would
be mutually beneficial, as justice would be done for the
bereaved persons and Libya would be relieved of the bite
of the sanctions.

In a bid to find a solution to this impasse, the
Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab States
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries came up with
an initiative that would allay the fears of the Libyan
authorities for a just and fair trial and would also ensure
justice to the bereaved persons for the crimes done. This
initiative resulted in the proposal that a trial be held in a
third country - in the Kingdom of the Netherlands - by
Scottish judges and according to Scots law and procedure.
The Libyan authorities have since indicated their acceptance
of this proposal on several occasions. The latest was on 26
August 1998.

The draft resolution under consideration today is a
historic one. It is historic because it is setting the stage for
the possibility of the resumption of normal life in Libya
without sanctions and of opening the doors for Libya to

 

regain its rightful place in the international community. It
is also historic because for the first time in international
legal affairs a court would sit out of its jurisdiction. The
decision by the United Kingdom and the United States of
America to go down this road must be cheered as a
heroic move geared towards putting to rest a problem that
has bedevilled us all for 10 years. It is a bending-over-
backwards to accommodate an initiative which is far from
ordinary.

The Gambia, being one of the main advocates of the
initiative, congratulates the Governments of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of the
United States of America for their understanding and
cooperation in these difficult times.

The time for justice has come. The time for making
good on promises made in the past is also here. My
delegation, having had friendly and fraternal ties with
Libya, has no doubts that it is good at keeping promises.
We have no doubt that it will comply with its obligations,
as it has always done.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

