Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Since the first ministerial meeting of the Security
Council on Africa was held in September of last year, the
international community, including the United Nations, has
shown greater interest in and attached greater importance to
Africa. This is a new and gratifying development that
should be recognized.

In recent years the overall situation in Africa has been
moving towards relaxation. The pursuit of peace, stability,
development and cooperation has become the mainstream
in the development of the continent. Thanks to the positive
efforts of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
other regional organizations, as well as the African
countries concerned, some of the hot spots and conflicts
have been resolved or alleviated. However, since last May
local conflicts have broken out one after another in Africa,
with adverse impacts on unity, stability, security and
development in the regions and countries concerned, and
arousing the anxiety and concern of the international
community.

Given the great number of its countries, Africa is an
important political force in international affairs that cannot
be neglected. Endowed with abundant natural resources, it
is a promising continent with limitless potential in
international economic development. Peace and stability in
Africa are part and parcel of peace, stability and
development in the world. Without stability in Africa, there
will be no global peace; without development in Africa,
there will be no prosperity in the world. Members of the
international community, and developed countries in
particular, have an obligation to promote stability in
Africa, and, more important, to help African countries to
shake off poverty and developing their economy.

We are deeply concerned about the recent constant
conflicts in Africa. It is our sincere hope that the relevant
African countries will, in the spirit of national
reconciliation, take into consideration the fundamental and
long-term interests of their States and peoples, and
properly settle their disputes through negotiations on the
basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence, avoid
conflicts, iron out their differences and join hands in a
concerted effort to contribute to peace and stability in
Africa.

We support African countries in their own choice of
political systems and development paths in the light of
their respective national conditions. As the conditions
vary from one country to another, there is no ready and
single model of development applicable to all African
countries. Their own choice must be respected.

We are of the view that the Security Council has an
inescapable responsibility and obligation to maintain
peace and security in Africa. The United Nations should
strengthen its coordination and cooperation with the OAU
in resolving the conflicts in Africa. It should earnestly
consider the reasonable propositions and legitimate
demands of the African countries, and support their
efforts to maintain regional peace and security and defend
their State sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Last April, Secretary-General Kofi Annan submitted
a report entitled "The causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa". We appreciate his efforts to accelerate the
settlement of the conflicts in Africa and to promote peace
and development on the African continent.

We call upon the international community to further
support and respect the efforts of the regional
organizations of Africa to prevent and resolve conflicts,
and to provide Africa's security and peacekeeping
mechanism with the necessary material and financial
assistance, with no political conditions of any kind
attached.

As one of the permanent members of the Security
Council, China has always attached importance to peace
and development in Africa. China has always stood by the

 

African countries in their legitimate demands and
reasonable propositions, supported their endeavours to
maintain political stability and promote economic growth
and their useful efforts aimed at enhancing African unity
and regional cooperation. In recent years, China has
actively supported the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa. It sent a senior official to attend the
United Nations high-level special conference on Sierra
Leone and it has sent military observers to participate in the
United Nations peacekeeping operation there. China is also
ready to provide the African countries that are plagued by
land mines with training and assistance in the area of
landmine clearance, technology and equipment.

The world is now moving more rapidly towards
multipolarity. Under these new circumstances, China will,
as always, strengthen its friendly relations and cooperation
with the African countries and make further contributions
to the promotion of peace, stability and development in
Africa.

To solve the many problems confronting Africa is not
only a challenge to Africa and the whole international
community, but also provides us with an opportunity. It is
our hope that the international community will join African
countries and people in an unremitting effort to promote
peace, stability and development in Africa.

