Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I should like to thank the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their respective presentations on the implementation of
their completion strategies, in line with resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). I should like also to
congratulate His Excellency Ambassador Jose Filipe
Moraes Cabral on the skill with which he is steering
the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the completion strategy and
commends the strong determination of the Tribunals'
Presidents, Prosecutors, judges and staff to ensure the
swift completion of their work. We are convinced that
all of these efforts will enable a smooth transition to
the Residual Mechanism adopted by the Security
Council in its resolution 1966 (2010).

Our debate is taking place at a time when
important developments in terms of combating
impunity have just taken place. The successive arrests,
on 26 May and 20 July 2011, of Ratko Mladie and
Goran Hadzie represent an important milestone for
international criminal justice and for the victims. Those
arrests are evidence of Serbia's determination to
mercilessly combat impunity in the country. Gabon
welcomes the determination and cooperation that the
Serbian Government has shown. We must now take
advantage of the resulting favourable environment in
order to further promote cooperation among States,
which is essential to facilitate first-instance trials and
appeals on the one hand and transfers to national
jurisdictions on the other.

While we welcome the cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the arrest of
Bernard Munyagishari last May, we encourage the
countries neighbouring the Great Lakes region and
those of southern Africa to step up their cooperation
with the Rwanda Tribunal in order to facilitate the
arrest of the nine fugitives and implement the
completion strategy.

Without effective judicial and penal institutions
such as the International Criminal Tribunals, the
combat against impunity and the strengthening of
international criminal justice would be fruitless
endeavours. The standards-setting work of the Security
Council in this area is universal in scope and should be
strongly highlighted.

However, and most importantly, there is also a
need to intensify our vigilance and demonstrate
increased political will so as to bolster the work of the
Tribunals. That is the kind of sustained effort they
require in order to complete their work by the trial
deadlines.

My delegation welcomes the measures taken by
the Security Council to support the efforts made by the
Tribunals despite the challenges encountered in
carrying out their work. Indeed, ongoing support on the
part of the Council for the work of the Tribunals
remains crucial to ensuring their smooth functioning.

On the basis of the provisions of resolutions 1931
(2010), 1932 (2010), 1993 (2011), 1995 (2011) and
2013 (2011), my delegation encourages the Council to
continue to strive to enhance the effectiveness of the
Tribunals. From that standpoint, the Tribunals must be
provided with sufficient resources so as to enable them
to resolve problems related to understaffing.
Furthermore, appropriate measures should be taken to
enable the Tribunals to retain qualified staff, whose
expertise is key to the optimal functioning of the
Tribunals, until the transfer of responsibilities to the
Residual Mechanism. The provisions of General
Assembly resolution 65/253 are relevant in this respect
and should be supported.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
crucial role played by the Tribunals in the development
of international law. The institutional and judicial
legacy they represent must be preserved. My country
supports the efforts made by the Tribunals and all the
stakeholders involved in the achievement of that lofty
goal. Raising awareness of the scope of the work of the
Tribunals is a part of that objective and warrants our
full support.

The international community must also devote
particular attention to the victims of the crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda
and compensate them for the harm and abuses that they
suffered. In this respect, the creation of a special fund,
like that of the International Criminal Court, warrants
our support.

