Mr. Shava (Zimbabwe): I would like to express
my appreciation to Jordan for convening this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at this critical time for the
Palestinian people. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful briefing and
Jordan's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs for presiding over our debate this
morning.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We wish to reaffirm our long-standing solidarity
and support for the Palestinian people's realization of
their legitimate national aspirations and inalienable
right to self-determination and freedom in their
independent State of Palestine, living side by side with
the State of Israel.

The question of Palestine has been on the agenda
of the United Nations for more than 60 years now. Yet
despite decades of Palestine's good-faith participation
in peace efforts, its plight continues to worsen on all
fronts. It is regrettable that the Security Council has
failed to contribute meaningfully to a peaceful solution
in the Middle East, even as the situation continues
to deteriorate and threaten the stability of the whole
region and of global peace and security generally.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to undermine
all peace efforts, supported by some within the Council
under the guise of the right to self-defence. The Israeli
Prime Minister's unfortunate statement, on the eve of
the Israeli elections, rejecting a two-State solution, and
his pledge to continue building settlements, confirmed
suspicions that he was never serious about negotiations,
casting the viability of a two-State solution into grave
doubt. We call on the Israeli Government to reaffirm its
commitment to a two-State solution and take credible
steps towards a peaceful solution.

Zimbabwe is seriously concerned about Israel's
escalation of settlement construction throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, in breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and several United Nations
resolutions, including some of the Council's. Those and
other systematic violations, including the detention
and displacement of Palestinian civilians, undermine
any prospects for peace. A lasting peace in the Middle
East can only be achieved through a two-State solution.
Any attempt to change demographic realities through
settlements or the use of force will only prolong the
suffering of the Palestinian people.

We continue to witness the suffering and persecution
of the people of Palestine at the hands of the occupying
Power, Israel. Zimbabwe strongly condemns, now
or in the future, the withholding of the much-needed
tax revenue owed to the Palestinian Authority. This
inhumane act has forced and will continue to force
the Palestinian Authority to adopt austerity measures
affecting the livelihood of the Palestinian people.
For these crimes, Israel should be held accountable.
Zimbabwe supports investigations into the alleged
war crimes committed during the last Gaza war, and
those found accountable should be prosecuted as
recommended by the Human Rights Council.

Limited progress has been made in the reconstruction
of thousands of homes, hospitals and schools damaged
or destroyed by the Israeli army in Gaza last August.
The critical situation in Gaza needs to be urgently
addressed so as to alleviate the humanitarian disaster
caused by the Israeli armed forces' indiscriminate
bombardments. We urge the international community
to accelerate support for reconstruction to address the
basic needs ofthe Palestinian people. We also call on the
international community to address Gaza's underlying
problems to ensure that the matter is dealt with in a
holistic manner so as to prevent future wars.
The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest to find a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine. Failure to resolve
this question continues to undermine the credibility of
our international system and the rule of law. Zimbabwe
urges the Security Council to take the lead and revive
the peace process in order to preserve the internationally
supported goal of a two-State solution. There is
unanimity that the status quo cannot be sustained.
The Security Council should act in accordance with
its Charter responsibilities and end Israeli occupation
and impunity, which has brought untold suffering to the
Palestinian people and sown so much instability in the
Middle East.

We wish to express our support for a resolution that
sets parameters for a final-status agreement on ending
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and this
decades-long injustice. A resolution delineating a time
frame for the independence of Palestine, in line with
the United Nations proposal on the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders, would restore hope to
the Palestinian people that their national aspirations
will soon be realized.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Zimbabwe's
unflinching solidarity and support for the Palestinian
people in their quest for a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in accordance with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

