Mr. Valle (Brazil): For the fourth time this year the
Security Council is meeting to adopt a draft resolution on
the situation in Sierra Leone. Immediately after President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah was restored to his constitutional
mandate, the Council adopted, on 16 March, resolution
1156 (1998), which lifted the embargo on petroleum
products established by resolution 1132 (1997).

Unfortunately, however, the reinstatement of the
legitimate President was not followed by peace. Criminal
resistance by members of the former junta and their allies
in the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has continued to
impose suffering on the Sierra Leonean people.

On 17 April the Council adopted resolution 1162
(1998), which sent to the area a group of 10 military
liaison officers to strengthen the office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and to cooperate with the
Government and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). And on 5 June, resolution 1171 (1998)
decided that the arms embargo would apply only to the
rebel forces. Notwithstanding all this, resistance continues
in certain areas, and human suffering has not abated in
the regions where the combat is taking place. The RUF
continues to kill, maim and destroy, causing a flow of
refugees to Liberia and Guinea.

 

At the same time we note that the Secretary-General
has informed the Council that in some aspects the situation
has improved considerably. We should now adopt a draft
resolution that will establish the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) with a comprehensive
mandate that we hope will assist in an effective way the
task of promoting reconciliation, assist ECOWAS to end
the fighting and help the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan agreed
among the Government of Sierra Leone, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and other
donors.

Very important are the human-rights and police
components of UNOMSIL. The observance of humanitarian
law is a precondition for durable peace. To uphold human
rights is a requisite for a functioning democracy. The
destruction caused by the junta and its allies will need to be
addressed. It is our hope that the special United Nations
conference on Sierra Leone will help to provide the much
needed increase in assistance to that country.

The humanitarian situation and the plight of children
that have been pressed into armed bands require continued
attention. I wish to commend Ambassador Olara Otunnu,
Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello and Mr. Francis
Okelo for their important role in the efforts to cope with
this grave situation.

