Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for
his illuminating report and for the statement he made this
morning, as well as for the recommendations he has made
to improve the implementation of the humanitarian
programme in Iraq.
I would like also to thank Mr. Sevan, the Executive
Director of the programme, and his team, which is
responsible for overseeing the programme's implementation
in the field.

This is an important meeting that the Security Council
is holding today to consider the humanitarian situation in
Iraq, a country that for some 10 years now has been subject
to a comprehensive sanctions regime. In 1995 the Security
Council established by resolution 986 (1995) a wide-
ranging humanitarian programme aimed at meeting the
basic needs of the Iraqi people. Three and a half years have
elapsed since the programme got under way, and it seems
to us that now more than ever the Council needs to devote
particular attention to the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

Some general consideration has been given to the
worsening humanitarian situation in Iraq, indicated,
according to various sources, by an overall drop in the full
range of socio-economic indicators. The most alarming
aspect of this drop is the unprecedented rise in the infant
mortality rate, as has been reported by the United Nations
Children's Fund. The resulting suffering has been borne by
all strata of the Iraqi population.

We have at our disposal many reports that the
Secretary-General has submitted to the Security Council
regarding the implementation of the oil-for-food
programme. In particular we have the consolidated report,
submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with the
requests contained in resolutions 1281 (1999) and 1284
(1999). The Council, in requesting studies of such diverse
aspects of the humanitarian situation, certainly wished and
was concerned to learn more about what was really
happening in this regard.

The eagerly awaited report of the Secretary-General
provides us with a wealth of information about the serious
deterioration of the socio-economic situation in the
country. The report highlights the fact that the oil-for-
food programme has provided considerable assistance to
all the sectors in order to meet the urgent humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people, but at the same time it
acknowledges that, despite some improvements, the
results of the programme still fall short of expectations.
This is particularly true in certain key sectors of the
economy, which is regrettable.

The Secretary-General describes in great detail the
obstacles to an effective implementation of the oil-for-
food programme. He gives us a distressing assessment of
the oil sector, which, as we all are aware, is of
fundamental importance to Iraq's economy, since oil
alone generates all the income necessary for importing
basic humanitarian staples.

Thanks to the report of the Secretary-General, we
have a comprehensive idea of the status of the oil sector.
It is clearly suffering for want of the substantial capital
investment urgently needed to rehabilitate the sector and
help it attain the necessary production capacity so as to
comply with the decision taken by the Council in
resolution 1284 (1999), which provides for an increase in
the ceiling on oil exports from Iraq. Resolution 1284
(1999) will not be fully effective unless the oil sector can
step up production, and unless it is able to obtain in time
the spare parts and equipment necessary for maintenance
and upgrading.

The Secretary-General blames the lack of spare parts
for the limitations of the oil-production infrastructure. He
stresses that the lack of spare parts has damaged both the
oil wells and the environment. As a corollary, the
Secretary-General reiterates his previous recommendation
that the allocation for the acquisition of spare parts be
increased to $600 million for both phase VI and phase
VII of the programme, and he notes that the necessary
funds are now available because of the increase in oil
prices. This is why we welcome the agreement that has
emerged in the Council with a view to adopting a draft
resolution providing for such an increase.

Nonetheless, the issue of financial resources is not
the only difficulty the programme is facing. Another

 

major obstacle is described in the Secretary-General's
report: the holds placed on export contracts for
humanitarian goods. As the Secretary-General notes, the
number of contracts placed on hold has become
"unacceptably high" in view of the impact of these holds on
the achievement of the objectives of the humanitarian
programme. The oil sector is one of those most affected by
these holds, and it thus suffers from the combined effects
of the lack of financial resources and of the holds.

Furthermore, striking details have been provided to us
regarding entire sectors such as electricity, water,
agriculture, transportation and other related sectors on
which all aspects of daily life depend. These sectors are all
being hampered to varying degrees because of a lack of
parts, which cannot be imported because the contracts for
them are placed on hold - and some of them have been on
hold for several months. We are aware of the reasons
given, inter alia, fears about possible dual use; but
sufficient explanations are not provided - and the
Multidisciplinary Observation Unit deployed in the field is
capable of providing necessary assurances in this regard.
After 10 years of sanctions and the implementation
over a four-year period of a humanitarian programme
unprecedented in the history of the United Nations, we
believe that it would be useful and relevant to immediately
undertake a thorough analysis of the situation in all of its
aspects, including compliance with the provisions of
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
cumulative impact of these provisions.

We need to find a middle way between achieving the
desired objective and minimizing the collateral effects of
the sanctions. To address the concerns of the Secretary-
General - concerns we share - the Council could adopt
an approach that would focus on certain priority areas.
These priority areas could be: conducting regular
assessments of the impact of sanctions by acquiring first-
hand knowledge about each sector affected; significantly
improving the implementation of the oil-for-food
programme, in particular by introducing greater adaptability
and flexibility to the contract-approval process; speeding up
the implementation of the provisions of resolution 1284
(1999) relating to the humanitarian aspect; and finding an
appropriate solution to remedy the build-up of holds.

In addition to dealing with these immediate
necessities, there is a need to adopt a gradual approach so
that we can strike a balance between implementing Security
Council resolutions and trying, as far as possible, to ensure
that those same resolutions do not cause collateral damage.
This will require an objective approach whose ultimate
goal is to confer effectiveness and credibility on any
sanctions regime.

It is true that, over the past decade, the practice of
the Organization with regard to sanctions has revealed the
need to avoid, as much as possible, aggravating
humanitarian situations, which are the responsibility of the
United Nations system as a whole as well as of civil
society.

The humanitarian concept is a unique and universal
one; it is a basic component of peace and stability
everywhere. This concept should not suffer from a
selective approach. We are talking today about the Iraqi
people, but that does not in any way mean that we should
allow other situations in the region to be overshadowed,
such as that relating to Kuwaiti missing persons. The
resolution of the problem of the Kuwaiti missing persons
would doubtless contribute to building confidence among
the peoples of the region and would help us make steady
progress in adopting a global approach to the overall
situation.

The opportunity that you, Mr. President, have
provided to the Council to discuss this very important
issue has proved very useful. The frank exchange of
views that is emerging, together with the comments of the
Secretary-General, will certainly enable the Council once
again to prove that it is responsive to international
realities and that it duly takes them into account when
necessary.

In this context, we believe that the humanitarian
aspect is just one part of the Iraqi issue as a whole - an
issue that must continue to be part of a forward-looking
vision for the region that will enable Iraq to resume its
rightful place in the region and within the international
community, while also enabling all the peoples of the
region to find the peace and harmony that are prerequisite
for stability throughout the region.

