Mr. Hasegawa: It is indeed a great honour to
address the Council for the first time in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

The successive United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Timor-Leste are now widely recognized
to be a major success story of the international
community. In my view, it is largely due to the
determination of the people and leaders of Timor-Leste
to build peace and stability anchored in the principles
of democratic governance.

In introducing the report of the Secretary-General
today, I would highlight, first, recent political and
security developments and, secondly, the status of the
programme implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Lastly, I would outline specific
preparations we are making to achieve an orderly
completion of UNMISET in six months and a smooth
transition to a sustainable arrangement.

Since the beginning of the consolidation period,
Timor-Leste has remained peaceful and stable, except
when officers of the national police (PNTL) made use
of excessive force in arresting peaceful demonstrators,
mostly consisting of former independent fighters, on
20 July and raised widespread concern in the public. It
is significant to note at the same time that, realizing the
urgency and seriousness of the veterans issue, the
Timorese leadership immediately took initiatives to
address the grievances of former resistance members.
President Gusmao organized on 21 August a national
dialogue to bring together veterans and Government
leaders. As I attended the national dialogue, both the
Timorese leaders and ex-combatants asked me at the
end to convey to the members of the Security Council
that they were indeed trying to resolve their differences
of views and expectations in a peaceful manner. It is
encouraging that Prime Minister Alkatiri subsequently
appealed to the diplomatic corps in Dili on 26 October
for its support for a programme that would recognize
and honour the contributions made by the veterans and
ex-combatants. International assistance will constitute
a critical element for the successful resolution of that
issue and thereby reduce the risk of future internal
instability.

Following a successful voter registration, which
was reported in the previous report, preparations for
the first Suco local elections progressed further during
the reporting period. The National Electoral
Commission is deliberating procedures to allow for the
commencement of polling. Political parties have
started organizing themselves to field candidates in the
village elections, although many candidates are
expected to run as independents. In promoting the
elections, the President and the Prime Minister are
carrying out civic education programmes energetically
through their visits to districts. As I accompanied the
President recently to one of his district meetings, I
observed hundreds of villagers expressing their
conviction that it is indeed their right to vote for
candidates freely and devoid of any fear of
intimidation.

During the past three months, however, there
have been some setbacks, such as the National
Parliament's failing to select the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice, despite two rounds of voting. The
Parliament has also not completed its deliberations on
the reports submitted by the Commissions for Former
Combatants Affairs and for Veterans Affairs.
UNMISET is hopeful that Parliament will also act
efficiently when it receives a number of bills for
adoption, including the bill on assembly and
demonstrations.

It has also become increasingly critical for the
Government to secure transparency and accountability
in its own financial operations, particularly in relation
to the emerging petroleum sector. In that respect, it is
essential to establish by legislation the key institution
of fiscal accountability - the high administrative, tax
and audit court - as envisioned in article 129 of the
Constitution.

On the diplomatic front, Timor-Leste continued
to strengthen cordial relations with the countries of the
region. Resident ambassadors, not only those of
Malaysia and Thailand, but also those of Indonesia and
the Philippines, have now presented their credentials.
Timor-Leste has now also been admitted to the
Regional Forum of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN), and will be hosting a
trilateral meeting with Australia and Indonesia in
December of this year. The friendly relations with
Indonesia have been enhanced by the visit of Prime
Minister Alkatiri to Jakarta in October for the
swearing-in ceremony of the new Indonesian President,
Mr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. The participation of
Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta at the Indonesian
Independence Day celebrations in West Timor earlier
in August is another sign of growing relations between
the two countries.

Despite the overall amicable relationship,
however, border demarcation talks have not resulted in
a final agreement, as was expected earlier. It is hoped
that the spirit of good relations will find concrete
expression in the resolution of important pending
bilateral issues, including the operationalization of the
transit facility linking Oecussi with the rest of Timor-
Leste.

The 58 most critical civilian advisers are not only
actively training and mentoring their East Timorese
counterparts, they are also formulating exit strategies
with their counterparts so as to ensure a smooth
transition at the end of UNMISET'S mandate. That will
involve bilateral or multilateral partners, such as the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the World Bank, which will take over functions beyond
May of next year. While it will require several more
weeks before the exact needs and specific modalities of
meeting the requirements are known, it is clear that
some form of continued international assistance will be
indispensable in the finance and justice sectors.

The prosecutors, defence lawyers and trial judges
of the serious crimes process are making strenuous
efforts to complete investigations by November, as
well as trials by May 2005, as stipulated in Security
Council resolution 1543 (2004). The serious crimes
process will not be able to respond fully to the desire
for justice for all of the victims of the violence in 1999
with the limited time and resources available. There are
several ideas and proposals in that regard to address
the issue. The Secretary-General will examine those
ideas and proposals, with a view to identifying the
most appropriate arrangement to resolve the issue.
Meanwhile, I propose to deploy additional data experts
and specialists who can assist in the processing and
archiving of all the evidentiary and testimonial
materials obtained during investigations and trials.

Let me now identify some pertinent
developments with regard to the second mandate, that
is, strengthening law enforcement capacity in Timor-
Leste. UNMISET civilian police advisers continue to
provide training and mentoring to the national police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL), in close coordination with other
bilateral and multilateral development partners. The
second phase of training for the Police Reserve Unit
was successfully completed in late August. As I
reported previously, UNMISET elaborated a skills
development plan and began to implement it on 20
September. It is now providing training to the Rapid
Intervention Unit, in response to a written request
received from the Prime Minister following the
incident of 20 July.

As a result of the concerted support of partners,
PNTL officers are gradually improving their skills and
gaining experience in many areas of policing.
However, a number of key challenges remain, such as
the lack of professional expertise. Some PNTL officers
continue to show little respect for human rights. In
view of the many shortcomings that the PNTL is still
facing, I am convinced of the need for the retention of
the current 157 civilian police advisers for six more
months, as recommended by the Secretary-General in
his report.

The Secretary-General has emphasized the
importance of close cooperation between bilateral and
multilateral partners in providing assistance for the
development of the PNTL. In that regard, I am pleased
to inform the Council that several joint initiatives are
now under way, including a series of train-the-trainers
courses, the training of senior and middle management
members of the PNTL and the provision of assistance
in specialized areas such as counter-insurgency and
forensics.

The capacity of the East Timorese defence force
(F-FDTL) continues to grow, with assistance provided
by UNMISET and bilateral partners through the skills
and knowledge transfer programme and other
programmes. But it is evident that the F-FDTL remains
hampered by a lack of experienced personnel,
appropriate training regimes, equipment and limited
logistics capacity.

It is also clear that the East Timorese border
security agencies have not yet gained sufficient
experience and capacity to manage border affairs by
themselves. In view of the lack of a border agreement
and the insufficient capacity of the national security
agencies, I consider it necessary to retain the 477
military personnel for the next six months. That
includes the 42 military liaison officers who continue
to play a pivotal role in monitoring security-related
developments along the border and in facilitating
contacts between the East Timorese and Indonesian
border security agencies.

In accordance with Security Council resolution
1543 (2004), an integrated assessment mission headed
by Director Lisa Buttenheim of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, visited Timor-Leste in early
October to assess the situation on the ground. Eight
members of the mission sought the views of all
stakeholders. They also travelled to the border districts.
I reiterate the recommendation of the Secretary-
General, made on the basis of the observations of the
assessment mission, that the situation on the ground at
the moment does not justify any modification of
UNMISET's tasks or any reduction in its size.

At the same time, I fully recognize that
UNMISET needs to focus increasingly on
implementing its transition strategy in the next six
months. UNMISET is redoubling its efforts to
encourage increased Timorese involvement and
ownership of the three programme operations.
Following the Council's last discussion, in August, I
constituted eight working groups to address the
concerns and challenges highlighted by Member States.
Those working groups bring together all parties,
including the Government of Timor-Leste, United
Nations agencies, the Bretton Woods institutions,
bilateral partners and civil society organizations. They
have already started identifying specific measures
required for a smooth transition from peacekeeping
operations to more traditional nation-building and
sustainable development assistance.

The eight working groups have more than 150
participants, including ambassadors and other
diplomatic representatives based in Dili and Timor-
Leste leaders, including President Gusmao, who has
agreed to chair the working group on security issues.
The final reports from each of the eight working
groups will be ready by 15 January, and their
recommendations will be reflected in the next report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council, to be
submitted for consideration in February. The
recommendations of the working group will also be
presented to the donor conference that the Prime
Minister has agreed to advance to late March or early
April, instead of June as originally planned. This will
enable both the Government of Timor-Leste and the
development partners to discuss how the
responsibilities carried out by UNMISET can be taken
over by the people of Timor-Leste and helpful
development partners when UNMISET's mandate is
completed in May.

Before I conclude my statement, I wish to take
this opportunity to express my appreciation for the
valuable work carried out by my deputy, Mr. Atul
Khare, and all the staff in the civilian police military
components of UNMISET, for their dedicated efforts in
discharging the mandate of UNMISET in this
consolidation phase.

I also wish to reiterate my view that national
ownership and the determination to rebuild a caring
society with full recognition of human rights and the
dignity of all people are indeed the principal
determining factor of success in peace- and nation-
building in any post-conflict country. The tolerance of
the people of Timor-Leste and the balanced leadership
exercised by the President, the Prime Minister, the
President of the National Parliament and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs demonstrate that post-conflict
countries can indeed learn to govern and develop
themselves if they are anchored to democratic
principles and if the international community can
provide appropriate assistance in a timely manner,
respecting the sovereign rights of the people to choose
their own destiny. It is clear from my encounters with
the leaders of Timor-Leste that they still appreciate and
respect the constructive role played by the United
Nations, particularly by the late Sergio Vieira de
Mello, in the peace- and nation-building efforts of their
country.

For my part, I am grateful to the Secretary-
General, the Security Council and the leaders of Timor-
Leste for the opportunity extended to me to serve as a
partner in this historic enterprise, and I am most
pleased to see the Ambassador Jose Luis Guterres in
this Chamber. I look forward to hearing any views and
suggestions he and the other speakers may have to
bring about the successful completion of the
UNMISET mandate in six months.

