The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Speaking last in a discussion is an advantage
because one can listen to everyone who has spoken.
My impression is that, with regard to Colombia, there
is unity in the Council. There is not only unity with
regard to the full support to the peace implementation
process, but there is also unanimity with regard to the
concerns that we have.

I would like to start with a quote from Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu,
who said at some point that Colombia remains a "source
of inspiration" for all those working on the settlement
of other conflicts. That remains true, and we would
like to commend the Government of Colombia for what
it has been doing under very difficult circumstances,
with 1.3 or 1.4 million refugees from Venezuela.

Germany will continue to support Colombia in
building an inclusive society. We will do that bilaterally,
multilaterally and with the multi-partner trust fund, as
well as by providing funds to the Peacebuilding Fund.

I can be brief in my comments because we
support the report of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his recommendations relating
to the consolidation of the peace process, concerning
which we add our voice to those around the table.
Just before I took the floor, the representative of the
Dominican Republic said how important it was that
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace be implemented, that
the statutory law be adopted and that there be legal
certainty and no retroactivity in applying the laws.

With regard to the security situation, I also join
my voice with those who have said how important it
is that State institutions be present throughout the
whole country so that there is safety and security for
all representatives of civil society, social workers,
community leaders, indigenous leaders and human
rights defenders. In addition, with regard to the
reintegration of the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo, I would like to add my voice to those who have
said how important that is.

I would like to make one special point. Following
on from what the Indonesian Ambassador and others
have said, the peace agreement is exemplary with
regard to its gender provisions. I would like to reiterate
what Ms. Salamanca said, the effect that investing in
women yields peace dividends. I would also like to add
to it. Mr. Singer Weisinger just said that investing in
young people also means investing in peace.

With regard to the gender provisions, there are
still a number of challenges, such as the integration of
former female combatants, barriers to the participation
of women in the political process and security risks for
women human rights advocates. Women social leaders
also face many security challenges. Another very
important point, which Ms. Salamanca addressed is
that of sexual violence in conflict and accountability.
Reparations are therefore very important.

As I said, we have made a great deal of progress. I
have one question for Ms. Salamanca. I wonder if she
would have concrete measures i perhaps, low-hanging
fruit - that the Government could do to help women.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

