Ms. Tan (Singapore): We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). We also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
clear briefing on the Mission.

It is clear that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Jacques Klein, and his team in
UNMIBH are doing an excellent job in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They should be congratulated.

There is still one more year to go before
UNMIBH is expected to complete its mandate. In
short, UNMIBH's core mandate is to contribute to the
establishment of the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by assisting in building a professional
police force. This is a major undertaking. But what
Mr. Klein and UNMIBH have done so far is very
encouraging, to say the least. They have certainly made
much progress towards the completion of the core
mandate, as can be seen from their achievements so far
in improving the professionalism of the police forces
and in inter-entity and regional police cooperation,
including combating terrorism, organized crime and
illegal migration. We hope that UNMIBH's efforts to
increase minority representation in the police forces
will achieve better results.

But more than doing their operational work well,
Mr. Klein and UNMIBH have also shown their far-
sightedness to make sure that the job is done right. Two
significant examples demonstrate this.

First, Mr. Klein and UNMIBH are closely abiding
by the results-based approach they initiated two years
ago to fulfil the Mission's mandate by the end of next
year. They continue to rigorously implement the
detailed mandate implementation plan they had worked
out for the period 2000-2002, to match their
achievements with the goals, benchmarks and
performance indicators set and to make adjustments
accordingly. This is commendable. Singapore has been
pushing for the Security Council to take a results-based
approach since we joined the Council. The Council can
learn a lot from what Mr. Klein and UNMIBH are
doing.

Secondly, as early as the adoption of the mandate
implementation plan, Mr. Klein and UNMIBH had
established a clear exit strategy for the Mission. They
not only identified when UNMIBH could exit from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also determined the need
for a follow-on presence to preserve what has been
achieved with regards to law enforcement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This has been followed through
conscientiously. With one more year to go before
UNMIBH closes, the Secretary-General has called for
an early decision on a much smaller follow-on police
mission to provide continued international monitoring
and assistance. We note that the Secretary-General has
reiterated the desirability of regional actors assuming
responsibility for such a mission. We urge all the actors
involved to respond to the Secretary-General's call.
This will be another vivid demonstration of the
implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council on "no exit without strategy"
(S/2001/905).

However, we should remind ourselves that
UNMIBH's work is not done in a vacuum. UNMIBH
may be able to make a clear exit from Bosnia and
Herzegovina after fulfilling its mandate, but
sustainable peace and development can be achieved for
the nation only if the right political, social, economic
and other conditions are put in place. We note that this
is the role of the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement, SFOR, the
United Nations and other actors. In fact, to do its job,
UNMIBH is dependent on the High Representative to
create the necessary conditions. One vivid example is
found in the Secretary-General's report (8/2001/1132),
in paragraph 15:

"The Independent Judicial Commission,
operating within the framework of the Office of
the High Representative, continues to focus on
overhauling the judiciary (judges and prosecutors). Progress has been slow, however,
and even where police officers and institutions
fully comply with their obligations and
responsibilities, judicial misconduct has
compromised prosecutions of perpetrators of
ethnic violence, police misconduct and trafficking
in human beings. Police officers are often
discouraged from pursuing arrests and
prosecutions, public confidence in the judicial
system is low and widespread corruption
continues."

There must be other similar examples. Clearly,
the full spectrum of essential conditions has to be
established for Bosnia and Herzegovina to attain
sustainable peace and development. Contrast the
presence of a nationwide policing framework with
State-level services and the absence of a single national
army in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the point
becomes clear. It is difficult to see how a nation can
exist with two independent armies while the police
exist in a single national framework. I believe no other
country has done this.

Before I conclude, allow me to raise a procedural
issue. The Security Council took a step forward in
holding a public meeting with both High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Klein this
September. Our view is that this practice should
continue for future public meetings on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, whenever the opportunity presents itself.
In this way, the Council would be able to see the full
picture of what is happening in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and what is being done by all the key
actors to make progress on the Bosnia and Herzegovina
issue, including in coordination with one another. To
benefit fully in this regard, perhaps the High
Representative and the Head of UNMIBH could submit
their reports at about the same time. Of course, the
frequency of these reports could be properly timed so
as to balance the need for regular meetings on Bosnia
and Herzegovina and not overburden the two
authorities.

