Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): My delegation fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the observer of
the European Union.

Slovakia condemns in strongest terms the
recruitment and use of children by parties to armed
conflict. Military exploitation of children is not only
completely wrong and unjustifiablem, it is also illegal.
Children simply have no role in warfare. We call for
the universal ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and encourage those
States that have not yet signed or ratified the Protocol
to do so without delay.

I would like to express our appreciation for Sweden's
leadership in negotiating an important resolution on
children and armed conflict, adopted today, which my
country has readily co-sponsored. Resolution 2427
(2018) builds upon commitments from last year and
stresses that the protection of children should be part
of a comprehensive strategy to resolve conflict and
sustain peace. We are optimistic that there is increasing
awareness about the fact that the protection of children
must be better connected to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace efforts. Ultimately, our goal must
be to prevent armed conflicts from happening in the
first place.

Despite progress in protecting children in armed
conflict, the general situation remains grave and
unacceptable. According to the 2018 annual report of
the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
(S/2018/465), there was a 27 per cent increase in the
number of grave violations of children's rights verified
by the United Nations last year as compared to 2016.
We are deeply concerned in particular about reported
cases of the denial of humanitarian access as a weapon
of war and about the increase in the number of attacks
on schools and hospitals.

We appreciate the tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, who has a key
role to play in strengthening the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. The effective
implementation of her mandate requires our support
and cooperation. Furthermore, I should like to reiterate
the crucial importance of child protection advisers in
mainstreaming child protection and in monitoring,
reporting and prevention efforts in peace operations.
Child protection must remain at the heart of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding and receive
adequate support. Where necessary, the number
of child protection advisers should be increased in
field operations.

As mentioned, last year more than 10,000 children
were released as a result of the implementation of action
plans signed with armed forces. The recent open Arria
Formula meeting in May highlighted the importance
of action plans in the Council's framework for ending
and preventing grave violations against children. The
meeting also highlighted key challenges and priorities
for action plans in the coming years that should be
taken into consideration, both at Headquarters and in
the field.

Lastly, I wish to stress that failing to incorporate
the security sector in the solution to the recruitment and
use of children can lead to renewed conflict and the use
of child soldiery. Resolution 2151 (2014) encourages
nations emerging from conflict to take appropriate
measures to protect children and ensure that security
sector actors are equipped to do so.

