Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
China commends the active efforts of the relevant
United Nations agencies to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in some areas of Syria.

The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year and has
caused terrible suffering for the people of Syria. The
humanitarian situation in parts of the country has
recently deteriorated. China calls on all parties in Syria
to put its country's future and destiny, as well as its
people's safety, security and well-being first, cease
hostilities and violence without delay, resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation and ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria as soon as possible.

United Nations humanitarian convoys have now
gained access to eastern Ghouta in order to deliver aid
supplies to the people there. China welcomes Russia's
establishment of temporary truces in eastern Ghouta,
opening up a humanitarian corridor for Syrian civilians.
As a result of the efforts of the parties concerned, some
ceasefire agreements have been reached and a large
number of civilians evacuated through the corridor.
In the circumstances, it is important to continue to
promote the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018)
so as to alleviate the humanitarian situation in areas
such as eastern Ghouta.

China welcomes the meeting between Foreign
Ministers held by Russia, Turkey and Iran in Astana,
and commends Kazakhstan for hosting the meeting.
We hope that the upcoming meeting of the Heads of
State of the three countries and the next round of the
Astana dialogue will contribute positively to restoring
the ceasefire momentum in Syria and supporting the
Geneva talks.

The international community should continue
to support the role of the United Nations as the main
mediator, andback Special Envoy de Mistura's diplomatic
efforts to relaunch the Syrian political process.

Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be respected, and all Syrian
parties must be encouraged to reach a political solution
to the Syrian issue, based on the principle of the
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned peace process, and in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), with a view
to fundamentally easing the humanitarian situation in
Syria and continuing to advance the counter-terrorism
agenda, as mandated by the Council's resolutions. The
Council should remain united on the Syrian issue and
speak with one voice. China stands ready to work with
the international community and to contribute actively
and constructively to a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.

