Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
Government and people, I wish to convey condolences to
the Government and people of Japan for the enormous
losses they have suffered as a result of the recent
earthquake in that country.

It is appropriate that the Security Council should
devote a special session to an open debate on the
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace: position paper of
the Secretary-General on the occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations", and my delegation is
grateful to the Secretary-General for this important
document. Nigeria fully supports the views expressed by
Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). However, as a country that is a major troop
contributor to both regional and United Nations
peace-keeping operations, we would like to make the
following additional comments.

The end of the cold war has not, unfortunately,
brought about the safer and more peaceful world which
was generally hoped for. In his "An Agenda for Peace",
released about two and a half years ago, the Secretary-
General drew Member States' attention to certain hard
decisions which had to be taken to meet the challenges of
the post-cold-war era in the areas of preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping. Quite rightly,
the Secretary-General, on his own initiative, also touched

 

on the related concepts of post-conflict peace-building and
peace enforcement.

The document now before us takes stock of the
performance of the United Nations in the complex and
challenging fields of conflict management and conflict
resolution against the background of extant difficulties, and
it suggests options for overcoming some of the
contradictions immanent in those instruments available to
the international community for the maintenance of
international peace and security. One cannot but sympathize
with the Organization's managers, who, within the short
span of two years, have had to cope with a phenomenal
increase in the number and volume of crises, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General's Supplement. Furthermore, these
crises have, in a broader sense, been predominantly
intra-State rather that inter-State, sometimes with no clear-
cut battle lines and almost always with devastating
consequences for non-combatants - in particular, women
and children. Clearly, this underlines the dire need for
rethinking many aspects of how to cope with such crises
and conflicts. It calls for new tools, new concepts and new
responses, as well as a greater political commitment and
increased resources from Member States of our
Organization.

With respect to preventive diplomacy and
peace-making, there can be no denying the continued
relevance of early warning mechanisms and other
preventive means for nipping in the bud or defusing
situations of tension before they develop into full-blown
conflicts. My Government believes that in order to achieve
the desired results of early preventive measures the
Secretariat should cast its net far and wide in recruiting
personnel with the requisite experience and knowledge of
local situations to undertake conflict-prevention missions on
behalf of the Secretary-General. Nigeria is ready to make
available to the Secretary-General individuals with the
necessary skills, background and relevant experience.

My delegation welcomes the flexible manner in which
the United Nations has responded so far to the evolving
process and challenges of peace-keeping. The lessons
learned as a result of this flexible approach need to be
further developed. Meanwhile, we can all be justifiably
proud of the high degree of professionalism, skill and
dedication of our "Blue Helmets" involved in the complex
and challenging tasks in the field and on the ground. We
salute the entire Secretariat, especially the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, for the creativity and dynamism with
which they have adapted to the changed and changing
circumstances of peace-keeping and conflict management.

However, certain aspects of peace-keeping deserve
serious reconsideration. Here I would like to pose a few
questions. For example, how do we ensure that mandate
periods given to peace-keeping operations are realistically
determined, taking into account the complexity of the
particular situation, while refraining from using them as
instruments to coerce parties in conflict in order to
achieve short-term rather than long-term objectives in
finding durable solutions to the conflicts in the various
areas of the world? Secondly, how can United Nations
operations be sustained in the face of unexpected but
unavoidable setbacks which tend to erode and undermine
the credibility and authority of the United Nations by
making the United Nations look as if it wanted to cut and
run in conflict situations? I believe it is inappropriate for
a peace-making Organization such as ours to cut and run
whenever unforeseen difficulties arise in peace-keeping
operations. Thirdly, how does the United Nations
standardize the procedures and criteria for establishing
and terminating peace-keeping operations in order to
avoid the perception - or is it the reality? - of double
standards?

Nigeria is acutely aware of the difficulties posed to
peace-keeping operations by the shortage of troops and
equipment. It is important, therefore, that continuing
efforts be made by the Secretary-General in respect of
stand-by arrangements and that Member States provide
the necessary support to translate the proposal into reality
- in particular, the support of those who are in a
position to provide such badly needed logistic, equipment
and training facilities to the proposed force.

The objective, in our opinion, is how to reduce the
time-lag between the time the Security Council decides to
authorize a peace-keeping operation and the actual full
deployment of such an operation on the ground. We
would prefer this approach to the idea of a rapid reaction
force proposed by the Secretary-General, because we
strongly believe that such a rapid reaction force presents
many problems.

My delegation ascribes due importance to the
Secretary-General's prescription on post-conflict peace-
building - an issue which in our view remains pivotal to
the establishment of a durable and comprehensive peace
in societies that have just undergone crises in which the
United Nations has been involved. The scope of
assistance which the United Nations could provide

 

includes the retraining of militia organizations, institutional
reforms and the execution of development projects. In this
respect, my Government shares the Secretary-General's
justifiable concern at the reluctance which Member States
have often shown with regard to rendering assistance which
is necessary in order to secure the peace that has been
gained through peace-keeping operations. There are several
examples from our continent, Africa, to illustrate this
unfortunate trend. We cannot but hope that Member States
will become more forthcoming in supporting peace-building
activities, even when such exercises involve additional
costs, cognizant of the fact that these efforts may be the
best way of assuring that the major efforts already invested
in helping to end conflicts are not undermined in the
post-conflict period.

The Secretary-General puts his finger right on the
contradictions that arise from the employment of sanctions
in efforts to maintain or restore international peace and
security. Therefore, several questions again need to be
addressed. First, how do we, for example, ensure that it is
properly targeted to affect the relevant segment of a
country's population - that is, usually, the leadership or
the senior members of a Government? Secondly, how do
we make adequate provisions to protect innocent civilians?
Finally, how do we compensate the neighbouring States that
often hear the brunt of enforcement, at great expense to
their own economies and to their own domestic stability?

My delegation does not underestimate the fact that in
certain circumstances, short of the use of military force,
sanctions remain one of the most potent instruments
available to the international community for achieving
compliance from parties unamenable to peaceful
negotiations. Indeed, experience has shown that, given the
political commitment of all Members to enforce the
measures, sanctions could indeed within a short time frame
have the desired effects. However, we must not forget that
prolonged imposition of sanctions could have the opposite
effect of producing greater intransigence and defiance from
the people and Government, who may suddenly find
common ground by pleading that sanctions are an
international conspiracy by the international community to
unduly punish them.

An unhealthy development in the area of sanctions is
the unilateral imposition of measures by some countries on
other States in an attempt to influence the domestic politics
of the targeted country. Such unilateral actions give
sanctions a very negative connotation and may very well
undermine their moral force.

Enforcement action - another issue raised by the
Secretary-General - could be part of peacemaking and
peace-keeping. It is the View of my delegation that there
may not be a dividing line between peacemaking and
peace enforcement. We are of course aware that in the
present circumstances the United Nations lacks the
necessary political backing and resource support from
Member States to undertake directly enforcement as
envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter.

The past few examples of the collective use of
enforcement action have been undertaken by a group of
Member States with the blessing of the United Nations.
My delegation believes that this may not always be the
ideal situation, and present difficulties being faced by the
Organization should not be an excuse to contract out to a
group of powerful States what would normally be a
United Nations responsibility. With the necessary political
will and commitment to the ideals of collective security
enshrined in the Charter, it is the view of my delegation
that multinational forces for peace enforcement could be
placed at the disposal of the United Nations and might
well operate under the command of the Secretary-General
and his staff. This is one of the hard decisions that needs
to be taken by Member States.

Effective coordination between the United Nations
and other players in conflict situations has been rightly
identified by the Secretary-General as crucial to the
successful and effective management and resolution of
conflicts. It remains critically important that all other
agencies, especially Governments, which authorize and
finance United Nations activities, continue to lend their
full support to the Secretary-General in the discharge of
his onerous duties. Especially crucial is the role of
regional organizations and the inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations, whose functions must be
seen as complementary to the work of the United Nations
itself. We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
authority and supremacy of the United Nations are vital
in these relationships if interregional or institutional
rivalries are not to mar the prospects of achieving
collective goals and objectives. No less important for the
regional organizations, especially for those of developing
countries, is adequate assistance from the United Nations
through logistic and financial support to enable such
regional organizations to execute their mandate in the
maintenance of regional peace and security, a mandate
which, after all, they exercise for and on behalf of the
United Nations. The relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the area of
peace-keeping is, in the view of my delegation, one of the

 

most underdeveloped aspects of the Agenda for Peace,
which has been under consideration by the international
community since 1991.

The conclusions reached by the Secretary-General in
his position paper are imaginative and far-reaching, and on
the whole very constructive. They underscore in our view
a basic need for the United Nations to be responsive to the
demands of a changing international political landscape
whose form and content are yet to be fully assessed and
fully determined so that the continuing legitimacy of the
United Nations can be assured.

In this regard, the Secretary-General' s "An Agenda for
Peace", the "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace" and "An
Agenda for Development", should, taken together, form a
composite whole from which the United Nations can
realistically meet the aspirations of the international
community in the collective search for peace, in the
collective search for development and the collective pursuit
of the well-being of all of our peoples.

