The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make a
statement in my national capacity.

I am honoured to preside over today's meeting of
the Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize Jordan's commitment, in
particular through its membership in and presidency
of the Council this month, to continue working with
other members to achieve the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations with respect to the
maintenance and preservation of international peace
and security, as well as international harmony and
stability. Supported by the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah II and relying on the policies of Jordan,
which reflect the voice of logic, wisdom and balance
in an ever-changing hotbed of tension, we intend to
use our position productively in pursuit of those noble
goals.

The Kingdom of Jordan is presiding over the
Council at a delicate stage, when multiple, shifting
challenges demand an instantaneous response in the
face of constant change. We would therefore like to
reiterate that failure to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict through a two-State solution, whereby a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine would be
established on Palestinian soil along the borders of
4 June 1967, with Al-Quds-al-Sharif as its capital,
would intensify the dangers to our region. There are
legitimate international reference points to support that
View.

The Kingdom of Jordan is close to Palestine and its
citizens, and its situation impacts us directly. Jordan is
not a mere observer or mediator in the peace process
but has a real and tangible interest in achieving peace
through serious and committed negotiations based on
a timetable conducive both to bringing about the two-
State solution and to tackling all substantive issues,
including the status of Jerusalem, refugees, security,
borders and water, inter alia. All those issues affect the
interests of Jordan in accordance with the principles of
international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative,
and must be resolved in a manner that fully satisfies
vital Jordanian interests.
Regarding occupied East Jerusalem, as well as
Muslim and Christian holy sites, in line with his Majesty
and Jordan's oversight role in East Jerusalem, we will
continue to make every effort to preserve and protect
them, in particular Al-Haram al- Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. Furthermore, we will not compromise on any
Israeli infractions on this matter and will take the
appropriate legal and diplomatic measures to counter
them. In accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, Jordan will continue to preserve the Arab
character of East Jerusalem and its position as a city
under Israeli occupation.

Concerning Palestinian refugees, we host the
greatest number of Palestinians living in the diaspora,
the majority of whom are Jordanian citizens, and
support their inalienable status as refugees. Protecting
their legitimate rights, as dictated by international law,
is a core responsibility. As a host country, we have rights
and duties imposed on us by the massive burdens that
we have borne since the Palestinians became refugees.
I would like to express here my deep appreciation to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) for its ongoing
efforts in support of Palestinian refugees in our region.
Additionally, I the great burden of our expenditures in
supporting the Palestinian refugees, which exceed the
UNRWA budget.

We continue to emphasize the need for an immediate
and lasting solution of UNRWA's budget problems
and deficit. This is the only way to allow UNRWA to
continue its work and programmes until a final solution
to the question of the Palestinians refugees is reached.
It is no secrect that any reduction in the Agency's
services will be tantamount to making an indirect call
on hosts countries to make up for these services, and
these States can not bear this burden.

As to the Gaza Strip, Jordan calls on the
international community to lift the suffocating Israeli
blockade on Gaza, put an end to the deteriorating
humanitarian tragedy and make a serious effort to
achieve reconstruction. This is our collective duty in
the face of the suffering imposed on the beleagered
children of the Strip.

We call for concerted efforts to resume direct
negotiations in order to achieve the two-State solution
and find a comprehensive settlement. These negotiations
must be earnest, characterized by good intentions
and time-bound. They should be complemented by
commitment to avoiding any unilateral action that
would prejudge the outcome, including settlement
activities, which are illegitimate in the eyes of the
entire world.

We will pursue our efforts a member of the Security
Council and President this month - in addition to our
membership in the Arab ministerial committee entrusted
to consult with international parties - to lauch serious
negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian parties
and to conclude an international agreement within
parameters that all parties can agree upon, including
the possible adoption of a unanimous Security
Council resolution that identifies a time-table for the
negotiations to end the occupation and achieve the two-
State solution, we are conducting requisite negotiations
on this score through the aforementioned ministerial
committee by maintaing contacts with all interested
parties and States.

The tragedy being endured by Syria has entered
its fifth year and is deteriorating day by day. Killings,
assassinations and destruction persist in that country.
This tragedy feeds radicalism, criminality and
terrorism, which are outlawed by all international
conventions and religions. Consequently, we have to
press ahead in finding a political solution in Syria,
which, as we have stressed since the beginning of the
crisis, is the only way to meet the aspirations of the
Syrian people and achieve political transformation into
a new reality in which all Syrian parties will take part.
Such a solution would be based on the outcomes of the
first Geneva negotiations, restore stability to Syria and
uproot terrorism in that country, which is now reaching
beyond its borders. It should also preserve Syria's
territorial integrity and political sovereignty and allow
for the voluntary return of Syrian refugees, particularly
those in neighboring States. On this matter, we will
elaborate in extenso at the briefing on 24 April.

I wish to express our appreciation of the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to find a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. Jordan is hosting more
than 1.5 million Syrian citizens, with whom we share
our limited resources. This task has overburdened
Jordan's economy and exceeds its capacities. In that
regard, I thank all those brothers who have assisted us,
particularly Kuwait, for its significant efforts in hosting
three pledging conferences.

We support political legitimacy in sisterly Yemen,
which is embodied in President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, and reiterate our full endorsement
of the resolutions adopted at the most recent Arab
summit, held last month in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt,
which emphasize support for legitimacy in Yemen
and assistance in accordance with the joint Arab
defence initiative and Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and reject any attempt to undermine
the legitimacy, territorial integrity and political
independence of Yemen. We reiterate our call for full
commitment to the implementation of resolution 2016
(2015), an immediate end to the violence and unilateral
actions, rejection of any violent overthrow of power, the
normalization of the situation in Yemen and a return to
the political track and dialogue, in accordance with the
Gulf Initiative.

The Kingdom of Jordan emphasizes the need to help
sisterly Libya to consolidate its security, sovereignty
and stability, as well as to support the elected Parliament
and the Government, as they are considered the basis
of legitimacy, and we encourage national dialogue
among the Libyan national parties that reject violence
and radicalism. The adoption of resolution 2214 (2015),
submitted by Jordan, is part and parcel of that effort.
We welcome the dialogue between the Libyan brothers,
hosted by Morocco, and we support Mr. Bernadino
Leon's efforts. We hope that they will succeed.

In recent years, the danger of terrorism has been
on the rise in our region and the world. Criminal and
terrorist gangs under different names and forms, such
as Daesh, Al-Shabaab in the Horn of Africa, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida, have hijacked tolerant Islam and
distorted its image. Our religion is innocent of such
violence. All religions have a peaceful message. Those
gangs perpetrate their horrendous crimes in the name
of our great religion of Islam, but they are unrelated to
it. Islam provides a model for cherishing human dignity
and life and the rights of man, for respecting dialogue
and for accepting the other. Therefore allow to me
reiterate the words of His Majesty King Abdullah II in
his statement before the European Parliament:

"All my life, every day, I have heard and
used the greeting, Assalamu aleikum, a wish for
the other to be blessed with peace. That is what it
means to be a Muslim. More than a thousand years
before the Geneva Conventions, Muslim soldiers
were ordered not to kill a child, a woman or an old
person, not to destroy a tree, not to harm a priest,
not to destroy a church. These are the same values
of Islam that we were taught in school as children:
not to destroy or desecrate a place where God is
worshipped, not a mosque, not a church, not a
synagogue. This is what it means to be a Muslim.
These are the values that I teach my children and
that they hand on to theirs."

Therefore, I would like to say once again that the
ideological war will be long, involving many fields and
different levels. It is a war launched by an enlightened
ideology against a retarded ideology that calls for
killing and assassination. This requires a collective
effort and cooperation among all States that agree with
these lofty goals with a view to protecting themselves
from the dangers of terrorism and radicalism. Here, I
would like to emphasize the need for immediate and
collective work, as I have mentioned, as well as for
developing a comprehensive strategy that includes
military and political aspects, the renewal of religious
speech, the rectification of erroneous concepts and
ideas adopted by people, as well as the launching of
cultural campaigns that address people's minds and use
sound logic.

The modern-day Khawarij, with their terrorist
gangs and their radicalism, are expanding because of
underdevelopment and the inequitable distribution of
wealth, a political vacuum and the presence of sectarian
and religious strife among the different strata of society
and within States. That makes it necessary not to
allow any such imbalances in our countries. We must
pave the way for the return of harmony and stability
to those sisterly Arab States whose social fabric has
been harmed. We are descending into violence and
radicalism.

In that connection, we would like to affirm our
support for the current Iraqi Government and Prime
Minster Mr. Haider Al Abadi in their combat against
terrorism and in their quest to eliminate criminal gangs
from Iraqi territory. We also support their efforts to
achieve national reconciliation. We are equidistant
to all components of Iraqi society. We state that the
participation of all of the components of Iraqi society
in a substantive process, not the marginalization of any
of those elements, is necessary for the success of those
efforts. Iraq is a sisterly, neighbouring State to Jordan.
Its security is our security.

In light of the changes taking place in the region
we are following the framework agreement agreed to
between the P5+l on the Iranian nuclear file. We have
always emphasized the need for a peaceful solution,
while asserting the right of people to make peaceful
use of nuclear energy. We hope that the final contour
of the agreement will consolidate peace and security in
our region and the world, and will lead to solving many
other issues.
(spoke in English)

I will switch to English for a couple of minutes as I
address the question of the need to arrive at a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In
anticipation of the formation of the new Israeli Cabinet
and given the situation in the region, I would like to
mention to the Ambassador of Israel that the region has
never been short of excuses not to do things. I think that
what we need to examine today is the set of decisions
needed to create peace, not to look for excuses not to
do that. The Arab Peace Initiative, as I am sure the
Ambassador will appreciate, contains all the elements
needed to ensure that peace is sustainable, but for that
peace to take shape and be implemented, will power
and good intentions are needed.

With all due respect for the television shows that
people watch, whether it is House of Cards or Pride and
Prejudice, at the end of the day the reality on the ground
requires that we all put our differences aside and that
we launch a substantive time-bound, peace-negotiating
process that will ensure the end that we all seek,
namely, the two-State solution. I would advise the
Ambassador to revisit the Arab Peace Initiative and
look at the elements that we still are committed to in
the Arab world. Like I said, that will not only ensure
peace between Israel and the Palestinians, but between
Israel and the entire Arab world.

Given all the dynamics within and beyond the
region, especially the threat of terror and extremism,
the Palestinian question remains the essence and the
root cause of much of the instability that we see in our
part of the world. It is through resolving the Palestinian/
Israeli conflict and achieving peace and security for all
the peoples and States of the region, especially Israel,
that we will be able to collectively deal with the dangers
and threats that we all face as a region. Israel must
become part of the region, not just be in the region.
Through peace, I think that end will be achieved.

(spoke in Arabic)

In conclusion, I would stress that Jordan will
continue to act resolutely to strengthen relations of
cooperation and friendship between the peoples of the
world. We will continue with our message ofpromoting
international peace and security and confronting
despair and hatred under one human umbrella. History,
geography and a common future link us all. Together,

we will be able to build the basis of mutual respect for
the benefit of all future generations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.

