Mr. Kolby (Norway): The Government of
Norway welcomes this open debate on the important
topic of examining the link between the exploitation of
natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the continuation of the tragic conflict in the
Great Lakes region. We welcome the participation here
today of the Ministers of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi as a sign of
their commitment to the issue and to a peaceful
solution to the conflict.

We thank the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for its
report. The report provides extensive information on
the complexity of the conflict and significant food for
thought for our further deliberations. Before
commenting on the Panel's report, I would, however,
like to make some general remarks.

Norway notes with concern the terrible toll the
conflict is having on the people, economy and
environment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we remain strongly concerned about the lack of
governance and continued violence, particularly in its
eastern regions. The Government of Norway strongly
condemns the recent murders of International
Committee of the Red Cross personnel in Orientale
Province and underlines the need to hold the guilty
accountable for this hideous crime. Norway calls on the
parties to ensure the safety of all international
personnel working to assist the region in its quest for
peace, security and development.

Furthermore, Norway continues to believe that
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the path to a
peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region. We certainly hope that the countries and the
various rebel groups involved in the conflict do not
forget this fundamental premise. We continue to urge
the parties to explore thoroughly all political avenues
that might be available for finding a peaceful solution.
In our view the parties to the conflict have taken
significant steps since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1341 (2001) in February of this year. The
parties have begun the disengagement process, and the
deployment of observers and liaison officers of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is
proceeding. However, other key aspects of the peace
process, notably demobilization, disarmament,
rehabilitation and reintegration of the negative forces
operating in the region and a constructive inter-
Congolese dialogue leading to effective governance of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, remain
indispensable. We look forward to further signs of
political will and common pursuit among the parties to
achieve real progress in these regards.

The efforts to re-establish peaceful relations in
the Great Lakes region must take due account of
economic agendas in conflict. The Panel report
indicates that considerable illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is taking place. We find this deplorable and
appeal to all parties to cease without delay all
exploitation activities that fuel the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this regard, we
would like to make some remarks regarding
cooperation with the Panel of Experts. In both
reports-the interim report of 16 January and the
report of 12 April - the Panel complains about the
lack of cooperation from certain countries, individuals
and private companies. We regret that the Panel has
faced "a problem of imbalance in the acquisition of
data" (5/2001/35 7, para. 11) and that "This constraint
can be felt in the report." (ibid.) We would like to urge
all parties to cooperate fully and to provide the Panel
of Experts with relevant data as soon as possible. We
will always need to ask ourselves what may have been
omitted in a report like this. Information has come to
our attention indicating that some private companies
involved in this exploitation business are not
mentioned in the report. We would like to ask the Panel
of Experts to look into this matter.

Several members of the Security Council have
asked the Chairperson of the Panel of Experts to
provide the Council with a more assertive presentation
of the findings, separating hard facts from more loosely
based information. It is very difficult for the members
of the Council to distinguish between information and
accusations that are based on primary data that can link
the accused parties to illegal exploitation with some
certainty, and the parts of the report that are based on
information obtained in interviews. If possible, the next
presentation should contain corroborative evidence
against those involved.

We agree with the assumption behind the mandate
of the Panel of Experts that the parties to the conflict
are motivated by the desire to control and profit from
the natural resources. Moreover, we take note of the
indications that the parties finance their armies and
military operations by exploiting these resources. This
is reflected in the initial conclusions and
recommendations of the Panel. My delegation supports
an extension of the mandate of the Panel of Experts by
three months in order for the Panel to complete its
work. Further confirmation by the Panel - beyond
reasonable doubt - that countries in the region and
other actors continue to be involved in exploitation
activities fuelling the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be perceived as a very
serious matter by this Council.

In conclusion, we urge the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement to maintain the momentum that
has been created over recent months and look forward
to the further dialogue on the next steps to take place
after the Security Council's mission to the area. We
believe that the full commitment by all involved parties
to peaceful negotiations will remain indispensable in
the search for a lasting solution to the conflict.

