Mr. Calovski (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Allow me first to express my great satisfaction
at seeing my old friend, the representative of the
Netherlands, a country with which the Republic of
Macedonia enjoys excellent relations, presiding over this
session of the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. You will, of course, have the
full support of my delegation, Sir, in your endeavour to see
this debate end successfully and with important results.

The views of my delegation coincide with those
expressed by the representative of Finland, who spoke on
behalf of the European Union.

The decision of the Security Council to convene an
open meeting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including the subject of international
humanitarian law, should be seen as an important positive
development and an important change by the Security
Council and by the Organization as a whole, on the
implementation of international humanitarian law. This
includes the Geneva Conventions of 1949 - whose
fiftieth anniversary was recently observed by many
organizations, including by the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, and the International Institute
of Humanitarian Law of San Remo - and the concept of
human rights in armed conflict, as adopted in 1968 by the
International Conference on Human Rights in its
Proclamation of Teheran.

That decision means that the Security Council will
start to be involved in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as an implementation mechanism of the
international community to enforce international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, which
until now, as stressed by previous speakers, have often
been ignored, unsatisfactorily implemented, seriously
violated and abused; their violators have not really been
brought to justice. It is also of paramount importance that
the permanent members of the Security Council have
agreed with this course of action, which means - and
this is very important - that they will be guided by
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the United Nations Charter.

In the twenty-first century, there will be no
important distinction between international and internal
armed conflicts. The present distinction will simply
disappear, and it would be wise for the international
community, primarily the Security Council, to be prepared
for this coming situation. The Secretary-General's
decision to request the observance of international
humanitarian law by United Nations peacekeepers is a
good start in this respect. What happened and what is
happening in Kosovo and Metohija, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, in East Timor and, before that, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in Rwanda, in Sierra Leone and so on, are
good illustrations of the new reality, and, in that regard,
of the new obligations of the Security Council.

One of the questions to be asked at present is why
the United Nations has not so far been involved in the
implementation of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 on
international humanitarian law. Why was that important
task of the maintenance of international peace and
security left to individual States parties to the

 

Conventions, to the ICRC and the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and other non-
governmental organizations? In our view, the answer is
known: it was because the implementation of international
humanitarian law requires a correct observance of the
principles of the sovereignty of States and of non-
interference in the internal affairs of other States. Our View,
which I think is shared by many delegations, is that the
situation has changed since the end of the cold war. The
violation of human rights in armed conflicts, the rights of
refugees and other human rights can no longer be the
subject of selective concern. The violation of human rights
is everybody's concern. The same should hold for the duty
to observe all human rights - of course, in particular when
we are faced with mass violations, such as those in armed
conflict.

It is therefore the duty of United Nations Member
States and of the main organ of the United Nations, the
Security Council, which is responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, to act fast and
effectively. We were pleased to see the Council in action
on East Timor recently.

The Security Council should request without delay or
hesitation that the Secretary-General prepare the necessary
reports in close cooperation with the ICRC, the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies and the Offices of the United Nations High
Commissioners for Human Rights and for Refugees for
deliberation and action by the Council. The Council should
ask for reports and documentation. In that endeavour, the
prime concern of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council should be the enforcement of the observance of
human rights, and the well-being and dignity of civilians in
danger, not so much, as I said earlier, a preoccupation with
the observance of the principles of the sovereignty of States
and of non-interference in internal affairs - which, of
course, should not be ignored.

Another question to be dealt with is what the Security
Council should do to prevent the spread of the non-
observance of international humanitarian law. The best
thing would be for the Security Council to take immediate
action to freeze or to stop a conflict and undertake
measures aimed at finding solutions. The initiative for this
could come from the Secretary-General, from competent
regional organizations or from Member States. The Security
Council should be resolute, inventive and innovative and
should act under Article 24, paragraph 2, of the Charter. I
would like to stress that the permanent members of the
Council should avoid acting under Article 27, paragraph 3,
of the Charter. Under Article 24, paragraph 1, the
Security Council is requested to act on behalf of Member
States. That means that the members of the Security
Council should not act on their own behalf. If they are
not in a position to act on behalf of Member States, it
should be possible for the Secretary-General to request
the urgent convening of the General Assembly. That
would be a rational and democratic thing to do and would
strengthen the role of our Organization altogether and
prevent its marginalization. It is impossible to understand
or accept that the Security Council cannot act fast and
resolutely in the implementation and enforcement of
international humanitarian law.

As the Security Council has begun to deal with the
implementation of international humanitarian law, it is
important to see what should be done with existing
international humanitarian law and with refugee law, both
of which are regulated by numerous instruments that were
adopted long ago, in 1994 and 1951, during different
times and for different purposes, but which are
nevertheless in force at present. In this regard, we are
faced with several problems: the relationship among the
three bodies of human rights law; the laws themselves;
and their implementation. In our view, the Security
Council at present is not really well prepared to handle
this situation and it should start preparing.

The competent body for dealing with international
humanitarian law is the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC); the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for refugee law; and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for human rights.
The fact is that these bodies of laws are so highly
regulated that one needs to be a real expert in order to
know them. And that simple situation is a source of
serious difficulties in the implementation of these laws in
the field. At present, as we all know, there is a huge gap
between the laws contained in the instruments and their
implementation in the field. You have a situation in which
militaries are engaged in armed conflict, but in which the
victims are civilians.

This problem should be addressed. In our view, we
have two alternatives. The first one is to strengthen
existing international humanitarian and refugee law by
adopting new protocols or by adopting amendments to the
Geneva Conventions. The second alternative is to start a
process of "deregulation" and adopt new instruments -
new Geneva Conventions - on international
humanitarian law and on refugees. The second alternative,

 

of course, is more difficult but, in my view, more
promising.

We believe that the time has come to discuss and
agree on a mechanism for enforcement of the
implementation of human and refugee rights in armed
conflicts. This will probably be discussed at length at the
forthcoming International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent that will be held in November in Geneva, as
we were informed by the Observer of Switzerland. In the
future we will have the International Criminal Court, which
will be part of the implementation mechanism. But that will
not be enough. The important role of the ICRC and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies should continue. The action of competent regional
organizations such as the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the OSCE and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) will continue to be important. But in
our view, the time has come to decide that the Security
Council should act as a central mechanism for the
enforcement - and I emphasize enforcement - of
international humanitarian law.

The concern of the international community for the
victims of violations of the Geneva Conventions should not
be interpreted as support for those who seek to achieve
political goals by the use of force. The Council should take
into account that the development of international law has
left the period of coexistence that began 10 years ago after
the end of the cold war and has entered a period of
cooperation. The forces of globalization will influence the
Security Council to act against the violation of human
rights, in particular against violations in armed conflicts.
Accountability must prevail and justice must be done.

Speaking generally, it is of particular importance to
promote all efforts to deal not only with the consequences
but also with the sources of armed conflicts, which, as
members know, are not only political, but also social and
economic.

The Security Council should abide strictly by the
principles of the inviolability of international borders and of
the integrity of each Member State. But, as I have stressed,
as in the next century there will - I hope - in fact be no
international conflicts and most of conflicts will be internal,
the only way the Security Council will be able to help
civilian victims will be to act to enforce international
humanitarian law. The Charter of our Organization demands
from the Security Council not only that it help to maintain
international peace and security, but also that it contribute
to the respect of human dignity.

Let me express my great appreciation for the
contribution made by the Secretary-General in his report
contained in document S/1999/957 of 8 September 1999.

In conclusion, I would like to say something as a
footnote to my statement. In my view, it may perhaps be
advisable for the Security Council to organize its open
meetings differently, not as they are organized at present.
In my view, the Security Council should first listen to
what States non-members of the Security Council would
like to say on the item on the agenda. After that,
members of the Security Council could make their
statements. In this way, they would be able first to hear
the positions of the broader membership, which is so
important at present when we are investing so much
energy and time in democratizing our Organization and in
making the work of the Security Council more transparent
and, of course, more relevant. The absence of so many of
the Permanent Representatives of States members of the
Security Council prompted me to add this footnote, and
I hope it will be understood properly.

