Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. We
appreciate the participation of His Excellency the
President of Croatia in this important discussion. His

presence, as well as renewed interest in this debate,
signifies the importance of this subject in today's
context.

The threat to international peace and security
caused by terrorism has serious consequences for
humanity. It debases the traditional ethos on which
States and societies are founded. Most importantly, it
denies people their basic rights and fundamental
freedoms.

Terrorism has assumed international dimensions
through a mix of destructive transnational networks.
Those networks hum with activities like fundraising,
trafficking in people, drugs and illicit arms, including
weapons with possible mass-destruction capabilities.
They propagate hate literature and other forms of
transnational subversion. As a former United Nations
Secretary General once put it, the growing nexus
between these activities, including through the
dynamics of globalization, could constitute a
supranational subversive threat to international peace
and security.

The debate is also timely and topical. The world
has barely recovered from the shock of recent terrorist
attacks on innocent civilians in Mumbai, the
commercial hub of our neighbour and friend, India. As
a country that has suffered much from such terrorism,
Sri Lanka has conveyed to the Government and people
of India our sympathy and solidarity.

More terror attacks on more places in many of
our countries continue on a daily basis. The orgy of
attacks has led to the death and injury of numerous
innocent civilians. This is in addition to enormous
losses to infrastructure and economies. These types of
attacks by terrorists, whether they are from within the
region or outside - or even from within our own
countries, including mine, where one of the most
ruthless terrorist groups in the world, the so-called
Tigers, remains a threat - demonstrate the growing
transnational dimension of this scourge.

Terrorists are emboldened by such so-called
tactical successes as these and, as the Secretary-
General said this morning, they get carried away by the
publicity won for whichever cause they espouse. They
then become intransigent at the negotiating table and
brazenly walk out of peace talks when Governments
offer negotiable compromises as democratic solutions
at negotiations. Then they go international -
ideologically, diplomatically and financially. This is
exactly the situation engendered by today's so-called
Tiger terrorism in Sri Lanka and abroad, after almost
25 years of efforts by successive elected Governments
to negotiate political solutions. This situation requires
a robust deterrent response to the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) brand of terrorism and political
solutions to its root causes. That is Sri Lanka's
approach to the issue under discussion.

Democracies today have become especially
vulnerable to terrorism and its international
manifestations. The basic guarantees of fundamental
rights and freedoms, as well as the political space
available to different actors in a democracy are
increasingly exploited and constrained by terrorists.

The Security Council has addressed the threat of
terrorism in its different resolutions, particularly
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). The Council
remains preoccupied with Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
associated groups, against which specific targeted
measures have been taken through listing, naming and
shaming. Resolution 1373 (2001), on the other hand,
provides a common framework for international
cooperation in taking specific and comprehensive
measures against terrorism irrespective of the type of
perpetrator of such atrocious acts. The Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Executive Directorate, as well as other multilateral
mechanisms and several international legal instruments
relevant to combating terrorism, can be synergized
through the Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Such
collective action would provide an appropriate
architecture for harnessing global efforts to combat and
eliminate this clear and present threat to peace and
security.

It is high time that we galvanized all these
mechanisms and measures into concrete actions against
individuals and entities engaged in terrorism, without
seeking to discriminate between terrorist groups on the
basis of their real or assumed cause or grievance. As
we have learned painfully over the years in different
places, from Mumbai to Karachi and from Colombo to
New York, no cause or concern justifies terrorism. The
common goal of such brutal violence is annihilation
and destruction - the antithesis of what the United
Nations and international community stand for.

Concrete actions should be taken on several
fronts. They should be multidimensional,
interconnected and coordinated. Such actions should

range from technical surveillance of potential acts of
terrorism at the planning stages, focused on the entities
or their front organizations, to the prevention and
interdiction of illicit trafficking of people, arms,
ammunition and other offensive material. This should
be done at the supply end as well, not relying solely on
action at the receiving end, which is the case at present
in most situations. While a comprehensive legal regime
and reasonable implementation mechanisms against
terrorist fundraising and financing do exist, there is not
yet a robust and functional tracking and interdiction
system in place against the acquisition and
transportation by air or sea of offensive assets
deployable by terrorist groups that are banned
worldwide. The interdiction and non-proliferation
systems that exist for weapons of mass destruction are
either unable or unwilling to be harnessed for what is
clearly an equally dangerous threat to international
peace and security: the free movement of terrorist
hardware across frontiers, on the high seas and now by
air.

Some terrorist groups, like the Tigers in Sri
Lanka, have audaciously acquired aviation capability,
indicating their intention to become a regional hub for
weapons trafficking. There should be more determined
mutual assistance and international cooperation to
ensure that terrorist groups do not acquire such
transnational capabilities, whether through diaspora
assistance or geopolitical manipulations.

In 2006, the Security Council adopted an
important resolution with a view to making its
coverage of terrorism more inclusive. Resolution 1566
(2004) requires urgent attention and action by the
Council and other Members of the United Nations to
build upon its specific focus on individuals and groups
other than those covered by resolution 1267 (1999).
The resolution calls for the identification of specific
measures against such groups, which, in our view, also
include internationally banned groups such as the
LTTE. It is hoped that the Working Group established
under resolution 1566 (2004) will address the critical
issues with the attention they deserve.
Along with other Members of the United Nations,
Sri Lanka finds it timely to urge the Council to devote
more effort to balancing its current counter-terrorism
focus in order to provide a more comprehensive
approach to the security dimension of the terrorism
challenge. Only such an approach, which does not
discriminate among terrorist groups, will enable
Member States and the international community to take
decisive measures against the perpetrators of terrorism
in a coherent and coordinated manner.

Conceived in cold blood and executed
uncompromisingly, the ruthless attacks in India, which
we have condemned unreservedly, are a pointer to how
the agents of terror, both external and home-grown, are
fine-tuning their strategies and tactics. This
coordination reveals a dangerous trend of cooperation
among such networks at all levels - national,
subregional, regional and international - and thereby
confronts us with the expanding prospect of the
globalization of terrorism.

Collective, coherent and resolute action through
international cooperation is therefore imperative. This
is necessary so that terror groups like the LTTE do not
seek and abuse the cover of ceasefires to acquire and
operate illegal merchant fleets under flags of
convenience, as they do now, in order to transport
weapons and build commercial networks with other
terror groups such as Al-Qaida, as the London
International Institute for Strategic Studies has reported
for several years now.

Such international cooperation could have
prevented the LTTE, for example, from abusing a long-
standing ceasefire to illegally acquire an aviation
capability that can threaten stability and security
abroad while undermining democratic conflict-
resolution processes at home. The policy and legal
regimes of Council resolutions such as 1373 (2001)
should be given more functional teeth. There is no time
more demanding than today to prove that we are equal
to that task. We therefore welcome your efforts, Sir,
and the draft presidential statement of the Council in
that regard.

