Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Sir, for the
chance to participate in this debate. In view of the
time, I shall abbreviate my circulated statement.

Australia believes that the Paris Conference
delivered good outcomes that will contribute to a more
comprehensive approach and complement the
political/military plan agreed to by International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) partners at the NATO
summit in Bucharest in April. In endorsing the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, the
Conference sent a strong message of the international
community's continued commitment to Afghanistan's
long-term development and to providing the resources
to implement the Strategy's key priorities. Importantly,
in our view, the Conference clearly underlined the
importance of Afghan leadership and, ultimately,
ownership of efforts to address the key challenges
facing Afghanistan - security, lack of institutional
capacity, corruption and narcotics. It also critically
reaffirmed a central role for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
United Nations more broadly, in the coordination and
implementation of reconstruction and development
assistance activity in Afghanistan.

Australia strongly supports UNAMA and the
recent decisions of the Council to reconfirm and extend
the Mission's mandate. We believe that continued
progress in Afghanistan depends vitally on
strengthened and expanded United Nations
engagement.

We welcome the announcement by the Secretary-
General of his intention to expand the reach of
UNAMA through the establishment of new provincial
offices, including in Uruzgan, where Australian
personnel are deployed. In our view, that approach
sends a clear signal of the United Nation's commitment
to providing more direct humanitarian and
development assistance through programmes and
outreach at the community level, where help is most
needed.

Australia also welcomes and supports the
priorities identified for UNAMA in the Secretary-
General's report. We recognize that Afghanistan's
challenges are of an enormous scale and that civilian
efforts are best focused on those sectors that can
underpin and help to drive Afghanistan's longer-term
economic and social development and, through that,
help to combat the insurgency.

We believe that strengthening Afghanistan's
democratic processes, particularly by ensuring credible
elections, should be a key priority for the international
mission and the Afghan Government. We also strongly
support United Nations focus on building Afghan
institutional capacity to provide basic services, such as
water, roads and power; training to improve public
administration and local governance; and initiatives to
reduce Afghan economic dependence on narcotics.
Those are priority areas where the United Nations,
working with other international donors, can and
should make a difference.

At the same time, we need to be realistic, given
that, without basic security, meaningful development
activity and sustained progress on the ground will not
be possible. ISAF partners and the Afghan Government
have an important responsibility to help establish the
conditions to support the delivery of United Nations
and civilian programmes.

Australia is firmly committed to doing its part.
We are making a major contribution to international
military efforts in Afghanistan through the deployment
of around 1,000 Australian Defence Force personnel,
largely to Uruzgan Province. At the Paris Conference,
our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Smith, announced
that Australia would provide $250 million over three
years to support the implementation of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, bringing Australia's
total commitment in aid and reconstruction in
Afghanistan to $600 million since 2001. We will
increase our support for the Afghan National Police
and counter-narcotics initiatives through a substantial
increase to the number of Australian Federal Police
officers deployed to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, the challenges facing Afghanistan
are enormous, but we are making progress. It is clear
that our collective efforts require significant resources
and better integration - a fact reflected in both the
Bucharest and the Paris outcomes.

We firmly believe that the United Nations has a
crucial role to play in marshalling and coordinating
civilian resources, and we look forward to working
with the Special Representative and his UNAMA team
to help bring peace and stability to Afghanistan.

