Ms. Bensouda: I am briefing the Security Council
as the second Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to address the situation of Darfur, in the
Sudan, which the Council referred to my Office through
resolution 1593 (2005). This is my Office's sixteenth
briefing to the Security Council on the subject of
Darfur.

The situation in Darfur continues to be of serious
concern to me and my Office. In my report, I have
indicated specific incidents of concern, which seem
to represent an ongoing pattern of crimes committed
pursuant to the Government-avowed goal of stopping
the rebellion in Darfur. I must reiterate that these
alleged ongoing crimes, similar to those already
considered by the judges of the International Criminal
Court on five separate applications, may constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
My Office will consider whether further investigations
and additional applications for arrest warrants are
necessary to address ongoing crimes, including those
undertaken with the aim of thwarting the delivery
of humanitarian aid, attacks on peacekeepers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, as well as bombardments and other direct
attacks on civilian populations. The words of the
Government of the Sudan's representatives, promising
further peace initiatives, are undermined by actions on
the ground that show an ongoing commitment to crimes
against civilians as a solution to the Government's
problems in Darfur.

The Council should be even more concerned about
the situation in Darfur, given that crimes continue to
be committed, including by those already indicted by
the Court. The Council referred the situation in Darfur
because of its firm belief that the justice process is
an essential component of any strategy aimed at truly
stopping ongoing crimes and achieving peace in Darfur.
We have always believed the referral to be a joint
endeavour of the Council and the Court to contribute
to lasting peace in Darfur through investigation and
prosecution ofthose who bear the greatest responsibility
for the most serious crimes. Indeed, in this and
other contexts, the Council has reaffirmed the vital
importance of promoting justice and the rule of law,
including respect for human rights, as an indispensable
element of lasting peace. My Office and the Court as
a whole have done their part in executing the mandate
given by this Council in accordance with the Rome
Statute. The question that remains to be answered is:
How many more civilians must be killed, injured and
displaced for the Council to be spurred into doing its
part?

There are no words to properly express the
frustration of Darfur's victims, which we share,
about the lack of any meaningful progress towards
arresting those indicted by the Court. The failure of the
Government of the Sudan to implement the five arrest
warrants seems symbolic of its ongoing commitment
to a military solution in Darfur, which has translated
into a strategy aimed at attacking civilian populations
over the past 10 years, with tragic results. The victims
of Darfur crimes can hardly wait for the day that
fragmentation and indecision will be replaced by the
decisive, concrete and tangible actions they expect
from the Council.

Investigating the Darfur situation was an enormous
challenge for the Office and a huge sacrifice for the
witnesses and victims, whose lives remain at risk as a
result of their interaction with the Court. The question
they ask is: Were their sacrifices in vain?

In its resolution 2063 (2012), the Council expressed
concerns about ongoing impunity and the lack of
any progress on national proceedings to date, after
nearly eight years of reported efforts on the part of
the Government of the Sudan authorities. It should be
clear to the Council that the Government of the Sudan
is neither prepared to hand over the suspects nor to
prosecute them for their crimes.

Despite the challenges we faced, including
non-cooperation by the Government of the Sudan,
the Office conducted independent and impartial
investigations and submitted its evidence to the judges.
Contrary to the often-repeated allegations of bias and
politicization of the Office's investigative activities,
the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber independently
evaluated the evidence to determine whether there
were reasonable grounds to believe that particular
individuals bore individual criminal responsibility for
these crimes.

Having considered all the evidence, the judges
concluded that Government of the Sudan forces
committed war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide in Darfur, following a strategy adopted at the
highest echelons ofthe State apparatus. The findings on
genocide, moreover, were entered following a ruling by
the five-member bench of the Appeals Chamber. The
Pre-Trial Chamber identified the individuals who must
face justice and issued arrest warrants for a militia/
Janjaweed leader, Ali Kushayb, who reported to the
then Minister of State for the Interior, Ahmed Harun,
who in turn reported to the then Minister of the Interior
Abdel Raheem Muhammad Hussein, who reported to
President Al-Bashir. Their responsibility is not a mere
consequence of their official roles. In all of these cases,
there are witnesses who describe in detail their active
participation in the strategy to commit crimes as well
as in the execution of that strategy.

The Judges of the ICC have formally communicated
six times to the Council without receiving any response.
That includes a 25 May 2010 decision of the Pre-Trial
Chamber, informing the Council about the lack of
cooperation by the Republic of the Sudan, in particular
in the Harun and Kushayb cases; two 27 August 2010
decisions of the Pre-Trial Chamber informing the
Council and the Rome Statute Assembly of States
Parties about President Al-Bashir's visit to Chad and of
his presence in the territory of the Republic of Kenya;
the 12 May 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
informing the Council and the Rome Statute Assembly
of States Parties about his visit to Djibouti; the
12 December 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
pursuant to article 87(7) of the Rome Statute on the
failure of the Republic of Malawi to comply with the
cooperation requests issued by the Court with respect to
the arrest and surrender of President Al-Bashir; and the
13 December 2011 decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber
pursuant to article 87(7) of the Rome Statute on the
failure of the Republic of Chad to comply with the
cooperation requests issued by the Court with respect
to the arrest and surrender of President Al-Bashir.

My Office and I personally remain committed to
working with regional organizations endeavouring
to contribute to a comprehensive solution, including
the League of Arab States and the African Union.
The recommendations of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel for Sudan will be one
among other points for discussion that I intend to
raise in my interactions with former President Mbeki
and the African Union Commission Chairperson,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. The recommendations
of the African Union High-Level Panel on justice, if
implemented, would go a long way towards addressing
the Challenge of the deliberate imposition and tolerance
of impunity not only in Darfur, but in the Sudan as a
whole. My Office undertakes this interaction with the
African Union on its justice recommendations pursuant
to its policy of positive complementarity.

Investigating the Darfur situation remains an
enormous challenge for the Office. Despite these
challenges, we managed to conduct full investigations
that have led to five arrest warrants - two against the
same individual - and three summonses to appear.
Good progress has been made towards the start of
the trial for two of the three individuals accused of
war crimes in the rebel attack on the African Union
peacekeeping base at Haskanita, in Northern Darfur.
I expect that trial to begin in 2013, although the
defence has asked for its postponement until 2014.
The investigation and preparation for the trial have
involved unique challenges, including the translation
of all materials for the defence into Zaghawa, a tribal
language with no written form. That work demonstrates
the commitment of the Office and the Court to a fair
trial.

I look forward to the opportunity to present to
the judges the substantial and voluminous evidence
gathered in the other four cases, including following
the arrest and surrender of four individuals sought by
the Court. That is an essential step towards delivering
justice for Darfur's victims. I believe it will also
shed light on the obstacles facing other international
processes, such as those endeavouring to bring relief to
victims through the delivery of humanitarian aid or the
conduct of a peace process that aims to be principled
and substantive. The justice process is an essential
component of any strategy aimed at truly stopping
ongoing crimes, by publicly exposing to the highest
independent judicial standards the reasons why and
how those crimes have been committed, who has been
responsible for them, and how they must be stopped.

I have been encouraged of late by my participation
in discussions with Rome Statute States parties and
others aimed at galvanizing action to ensure greater
cooperation in the Darfur and other Council-referred
situations, including through the implementation of
outstanding arrest warrants. I am committed to working
with both States parties and Non-States parties, inside
and outside of the Security Council, to push those
processes forward.

