I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. We cautiously welcome the conclusion of the Syrian Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva at the beginning of this month. That process remains an important pillar in reaching a political agreement to end the war in Syria. We look forward to the next session of the Committee, to be held in January, which will finally concentrate on the constitution itself. We hope that in future that process will also pave the way for discussions on other confidence-building measures between the Government in Damascus and its legitimate opposition. We remind the Syrian Government and its allies that the European Union will not support Syria's reconstruction or lift sanctions until a genuine political process is firmly in place. I would also like to stress that the current economic crisis in Syria is mostly a result of widespread corruption, warlordism and a lack of good governance. At least 400,000 people have lost their lives during the conflict, while millions of others have been deprived of their homes and livelihoods. Unfortunately, the Security Council has not been able to take the necessary actions to end this tragedy. Instead, we continue to witness human rights violations, chemical attacks, air raids, torture and broken promises on the part of the Syrian regime. Here in New York, Russia makes sure that nothing meaningful passes through the Council to stop those atrocities. We regret the double vetoes of Russia and China against the cross-border mechanism this summer (see S/PV.8697), which went directly against the wishes of other Council members and the interests of the Syrian people. Thirteen members were in favour and two against - we heard those words more than once last year. The promises of replacing cross-border deliveries with cross-line aid have fallen short in their substance. Cross-line aid is dysfunctional, irregular and unreliable. That is a fact that cannot be overlooked. However, since Moscow does not believe in tears, humanitarians have been pushed to their limits, working tirelessly. Eight hundred trucks with vital aid are expected to enter Idlib from Turkey this month as winter preparations are conducted across the country. I thank the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for its continued efforts to bring relief to millions on the ground. Finally, I want to extend my sincere gratitude to the Syria humanitarian co-penholders, Germany and Belgium, for reminding the Council of the humanitarian principles it must uphold. I ask them not to forget that 11 of us followed them through the most critical moments and only two looked the other way. I am sure that they will keep working on Syria, even after leaving the Council as elected members. Once again, I thank them and their teams for their dedication and professionalism.
