Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Today marks 70 years since the United States
Army used a nuclear weapon against Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Seventy years ago, humankind discovered
the scope and the horror of that destructive weapon.
Since that time, Governments have taken pains to
come to terms with it, adopting the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968. My
country became a signatory to the Treaty that very
year. That was followed by the discovery of a new type
of weapon - biological weapons. Governments once
again worked hard, adopting the Biological Weapons
Convention in 1975 to ban such weapons. My country
has adhered to that Convention. Then came chemical
weapons, and Governments exerted themselves for a
third time to adopt the Chemical Weapons Convention
in 1993. My country adhered to it recently. The Syrian
Government has not used any such weapons - nuclear,
biological or chemical.

When we served as amember of the Security Council
in 2003, my country's commitment was evidenced by
our submission to the Council and to Member States
of a draft resolution to make the Middle East a zone
free of all types of weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Unfortunately, our draft resolution was objected to by
a Council member, an influential country, with the aim
of protecting Israeli nuclear weapons.

In my statement today, my aim is to paint a
complete picture of the situation, not a partial one.
We have many times drawn the Council's attention
to, and warned it of, the danger of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria by terrorist groups, some of which
are affiliated with Al-Qaida. We have expressed our
grave fear that certain regimes that support terrorism
and terrorists may provide chemical weapons to armed
terrorist groups, and then pretend that it was the Syrian
Government that had used such weapons. In that regard,
I recall the Syrian Government's initiative in asking
the Secretariat to conduct an inquiry into the attack on
Khan Al-Asal village near Aleppo. Unfortunately, that
inquiry has yet to be conducted, in spite of the Syrian
Government's agreement to send Mr. Sellstrom to carry
out an investigation on the specific incident that took
place two years ago. After two years, still no inquiry
has been carried out on the events in Khan Al-Asal. The
perpetrators of that horrific crime remain unknown and
have so far escaped any form of accountability. I also
recall that dozens of official letters sent by the Syrian
Government to the Security Council, its committees
and to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) included tangible proof of the use of
chemicals. On 5 August, we provided a file containing
all 13 official letters, which can be found in the United
Nations archives and with delegations.

Syria has upheld its commitments flowing from its
adherence to the Chemical Weapons Convention as well
as to those under resolution 2118 (2013). From the very
beginning up to today, Syria has consistently cooperated
and positively, transparently and flexibly meet its
commitments, in spite of the terrible challenges posed
by an extremely complex, difficult and even provocative
security situation - the result of the bellicose positions
taken by certain regional and international parties.
Without Syria's constructive cooperation with the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission, its work would not have
been successful. Ms. Sigrid Kaag has herself attested to
that. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
repeatedly reiterated to the Secuirty Council and to the
OPCW Executive Council its condemnation of the use
of chemical weapons and weapons of mass destruction
by anyone anywhere. In that regard, I reiterate once
again that the Syrian Government and the Syrian army
have never used chemical weapons, and never will.

Contrariwise, Syria's army and its civilians have
been targeted with toxic chemicals and chemical
weapons, including chlorine gas, by armed terrorist
groups, such as Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front, in many
parts of Syria, as part of their criminal and terrorist
acts in our country and the region.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterates that neutrality, transparency, credibility
and integrity, while refraining from politicization, as
well as cooperation and coordination with the Syrian
Government, must be the guiding principles for the
Joint Investigative Mechanism established pursuant to
resolution 2235 (2015), which the Council just adopted.
We say that based on our experience with previous
missions, which flouted all those principles in their
practices, and in particular because they based their
work on false, fabricated statements made by parties well
known to all. Those missions have carried out partial
and biased investigations - outside Syria - without
a modicum of coordination with the Syrian authorities.

For example, various Council members have
spoken of helicopters. That is a very important point
that is a typical example of the fabrication included
in various documents of witnesses purporting to
have heard helicopters - in Turkey, not over Syrian
territory. That makes such statements questionable, for
reasons known to all. In addition, two years ago in the
Council we showed a film, taken in Turkish territory,
in which rabbits were used as test subjects for chemical
weapons. According to one of the people in the film,
the terrorists claimed to have carried out those tests in
order to enable them to use chemical weapons in Syria.
Unfortunately, that is precisely What happened.

The facts show that the Syrian Government
has upheld all of its commitments under all of the
resolutions adopted by the Council - be it with regard
to chemical weapons, the humanitarian situation or
combating terrorism. At the same time, however, certain
States - in the region and beyond, and including
some mentioned by name in various reports, including
reports of Council committees - are inflaming the
situation and attracting foreign terrorist fighters to
Syria from more than 100 countries. Those parties have
not implemented any of the Council's resolutions.

We in Syria we are suffering from those parties'
violations, in an unprecedented context of political
blackmail that is prolonging the people's suffering
and exacerbating the crisis. In the context of the
adoption of today's resolution, we reiterate our appeal
to the Security Council to call on all Member States
to fully implement the provisions of all the Council's
resolutions, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2015). We ask the Council and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism it hasjust created to cooperate
and coordinate its actions with the Syrian Government
in order to ensure accountability and transparency.

The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
