Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me too
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Mr. Lezhnev for their insightful and
comprehensive briefings and recommendations.

I would like to start by commending the important
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in the Central African region.
UNOCA plays a crucial role in stabilizing the region
and is essential to preventing any further escalation. We
would also like to expressly welcome the good offices
role that the Special Representative can play.

We also would like to express our concern about
the precarious situation in the region, which continues
to be beset by challenges, such as the effects of climate
change on security and stability. I think it is worth
noting, in this context, how many times the Special
Representative referred to this nexus in his briefing and
in how many different circumstances he considered this
nexus to be relevant. We agree with his assessment.

Of course, there are also other challenges, such

as cross-border terrorism, particularly by the Lord's
Resistance Army and Boko Haram, conflicts between
farmers and herders, and small arms proliferation.
Those threats destabilize the region, exacerbate
the humanitarian crisis and undermine chances for
political dialogue.

We would like to underline that many of the issues
at hand do not stop at national borders and have to be
tackled jointly, which is why one of UNOCA's key
tasks should be to promote regional integration through
organizations such as the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS). We would
like to encourage UNOCA's close cooperation and
coordination with other actors in the region, including
other United Nations bodies, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel or country offices,
as well as more specialized bodies, including United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies, like the Office of
Counter-Terrorism or the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

It is also important for UNOCA to work on
addressing the effects of climate change in order to
ensure stability and security in the region. At the same
time, we believe that it should strengthen its focus on
the women and peace and security agenda and support
more inclusive political processes. The engagement
of civil society is also critical. In addition, strategic
cooperation with regional groups, especially ECCAS,
should be strengthened. Together with UNOCA and the
African Union, ECCAS can play an important role in
preventive diplomacy.

We would like to express particular concern about
the deteriorating situation in Cameroon and its negative
impact on the entire Central African region. We
very much regret that the situation has not improved
following the grand national dialogue and that violence,
unfortunately, continues on both sides. We deplore
the incident on 1 December of secessionists targeting
a passenger aircraft with gunfire, which constitutes
unacceptable violence against civilians. We urge
the Government of Cameroon to swiftly publish and
implement the recommendations of the grand national
dialogue. Special status for Anglophone regions, for
example, is a promising approach, but needs to be
further substantiated.

We also add that we very much appreciate
Switzerland's mediation efforts and would also welcome
regional and wider African engagement. Before
concluding, I would like to reiterate that we strongly
believe that we should keep an eye on the situation
in Cameroon and consider further how UNOCA can
contribute to resolving the conflict.

