Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Madam President, it
is a great honour for us to see you presiding over this
meeting. It is also a great honour to see the Secretary-
General in this meeting, and we thank him for the
efforts that he has undertaken to support East Timor. It
is a great honour too to see Special Envoy Ian Martin
again, and Special Representative Tamrat Samuel. We
have known them for many years and we know of their
dedication to the country and the role they have played
in the birth of Timor-Leste as a nation.

I have with me a statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation and Minister for
Defence, Mr. Jose Ramos Horta. I will read out only
parts of that statement but, due to today's special
circumstances, I beg for your patience.

"Madame President, I offer my sincere
apologies to you and to the members of the
Security Council for my absence, but demands
for my presence in Timor-Leste at this time are
extensive.

"As the Council meets, I am visiting rural
areas of the country, covering east and west,
continuing to take the State to the people. I am
also able to listen to their needs and to
communicate them back to our President and our
Government. In addition, I have addressed our
national Parliament, upon the invitation of its
President.

"I thank the Congolese presidency and the
other members of the Council for the press
statement of 24 May 2006 (Press release 
6
SC/8728), which gave international legitimacy to
the deployment of the multinational forces of
Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Portugal.

"On behalf of all Timorese, I offer profuse
thanks to the Joint Task Force, all the components
of which were able to respond promptly and
efficiently to quickly quell the violence.
However, the forces were not able to prevent the
extensive looting and burning and the
displacement of tens of thousands of Timorese, as
law and order broke down in some quarters, with
the earlier disintegration of the National Police
Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) in Dili.

"I also offer profuse thanks to Portugal,
which, from a great distance, showed no
hesitation in deploying its elite police force, the
Republican National Guard (GNR). The Timorese
people's experience with the GNR under the
United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor was a positive one, and the GNR's
presence has been demanded by every sector of
the Timorese society. It is our wish that, in a new
United Nations mission, the GNR play a vital role
in maintaining law and order. We are equally
grateful that Malaysia has made available a
similar rapid-reaction police force.

"The humanitarian situation has been
managed very well by our Minister for Labour
and Community Reinsertion, His Excellency
Mr. Arsenio Bano, who chairs the Inter-Agency
Humanitarian Assistance Group, which includes
other Government ministries and agencies, the
United Nations Country Team, the International
Organization for Migration, international non-
governmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the heads of specific sector
working groups. In a very short time, they, along
with Minister Bano, were able to mobilize and
provide services to the large number of internally
displaced persons. I thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for its
coordination assistance and for the launch
yesterday in Dili, New York and Geneva of the
flash appeal. A special reference should be made
to the impressive efforts of our Church, which
has provided shelter and care to tens of thousands
of people.

S/l'V.5457

 

"East Timorese and foreign doctors and
nurses, including Cubans and Chinese, have
performed and continue to perform their
admirable duties. We are grateful to all of them.

"We note with deep appreciation the
bilateral assistance provided by our friends,
including our closest neighbour, Indonesia,
which, in its own time of suffering caused by
natural disasters, reached out to Timor-Leste with
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian aid.

"The international forces on the ground are
continuing their efforts to collect weapons from
individuals. Through voluntary surrender or
enforced confiscation, close to 1,000 assorted
weapons have been collected.

"Pursuant to a decision of the Supreme
Council of Defence and Security, on Friday, 9
June, our own defence force, the Timorese Armed
Forces (F-FDTL), participated and assisted in the
commencement of a weapons inventory
inspection operation, undertaken with an
international observation team comprising
military personnel from Australia, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Portugal, the United States and the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).
The preliminary reports that I have received
indicate that it is a success.

"The second part of the operation concerns
the PNTL and will take place this week. Members
of the PNTL have begun to surrender their
weapons and have voluntarily agreed to be
cantoned in Dili and to hand over their weapons
to the Australian Defence Force. By this
weekend, the new Minister of Interior will submit
to His Excellency President Xanana Gusmao a
complete list of all weapons in the PNTL official
inventory. That list will be checked against
existing weapons in use by PNTL officers or in
the armoury.

"This level of cooperation would not have
been possible without my President. His moral
standing and influence among all sectors of
Timorese society are high. He was pivotal in
preventing irregular armed forces - reservists -
from leaving Baucau for Dili in the last week of
May to join in the violent disturbances. My
President's leadership has been fundamental to

the stabilization process.

"The graveness of our current crisis causes
me great sadness. However, I take this
opportunity to assure members that the situation
is redeemable. The good work done by the United
Nations and the international community,
together with the Timorese leadership and the
Timorese people, has taken root in the form of
State institutions that have had the capacity to
continue operations, even at the height of the
current crisis.

"Ministries and associated agencies have
continued to function, contrary to some media
reports that depict us as a failing State. Those
ministries and agencies include, but are not
limited to, the following: the presidency; Health,
Labour and Community Reinsertion; State
Administration; Agriculture; Education; Justice,
which is working alongside the Combined Joint
Task Force in the area of detention, investigation
and prosecution; Telecommunications, including
Electricidade de Timor-Leste and Timor Telecom,
which kept the electricity, telephone and Internet
services working throughout; Radio Television
Timor-Leste, the national television and radio
broadcaster; customs; the Port Authority, which is
doubling as a military headquarters; air services;
and my own Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
Defence.
"Timor-Leste's inaugural petroleum
exploration bid round was completed on 22 May
2006, when the Prime Minister announced the
winners of the bid with the publication of the
Evaluation Commission's final report.

"Many shops and restaurants are open -
many stayed open - and some taxis and
microlets continue to operate. The fact that the
private sector continues to function alongside the
public sector is indicative of our gains so far.

"The Government has kept the 2006-2007
budget process on track. I wish to provide
members with some specific detail, as it
demonstrates the Government's competence in
this regard and its responsiveness to the people's
needs, particularly in the area of rural
development. The Council of Ministers meets
tomorrow to consider a revised State budget for
2006-2007, which is expected to exceed $315

million and to be in line with the State's

S/l'V.5457

 

sustainable income levels. That is in addition to
the $140 million in donor assistance for
development. A total of $110 million will be
allocated to capital and development, with $50
million for public works. "Lastly, all public
sector workers will receive a cost-of-living
adjustment to cover cost increases in fuel and
food.

"I should make a distinction for members
with regard to the areas of Timor-Leste affected
by the crisis. Those areas are limited primarily to
the capital, Dili; the other 12 districts have
continued to function, with all services operating,
including the PNTL police service, whose basic
infrastructure has remained intact in the districts.
There is, of course, no guarantee that an outbreak
of violence will not occur in the regions while the
country is in a politically precarious state.

"The border area that Timor-Leste shares
with Indonesia has remained calm. I have visited
the border on three occasions in the past month,
the last visit being of three days' duration. I was
accompanied by His Excellency Mr. Ahmed
Sofwan, the Indonesian ambassador to Timor-
Leste. I thank the Indonesian authorities for
assisting us in keeping our common border area
safe and stable.
8

"I came back inspired by the
professionalism of the PNTL Border Patrol Unit
and of the military forces operating on the
Indonesian side. I was, however, concerned about
the poor living conditions of our police, which
are an incomprehensible example of neglect by
our own Government.

"I wish to inform members of our initiatives
vis-a-vis political dialogue, as political peace is
as necessary to democratic health as physical
security. I have been in contact on more than one
occasion with every key person and group
involved in the conflict. My President has begun
to meet each individual and group directly
involved in the conflict, as the first step in
establishing an all-inclusive political dialogue,
which all have agreed to. The all-inclusive
dialogue will commence within the next two
weeks, with the arrangements in place by the
week's end. It will be co-chaired by my President

and our two Bishops, the Bishop of Dili and the
Bishop of Baucau.

"President Xanana has provided leadership
in securing the agreement of all the key
individuals and groups that an all-inclusive
dialogue was the approach needed to resolve
political problems and, furthermore, that all
political problems needed to be resolved within
our constitutional framework. That recognition
demonstrates a commitment to the democratic
culture that has begun to take root in Timor-
Leste.

"Parallel to the all-inclusive dialogue will
be the special inquiry commission that Timor-
Leste has requested, as outlined in my letter to
the Secretary-General of 8 June 2006. The
President, the Prime Minister, the Government,
the F-FDTL, the PNTL, religious leaders and
civil society all welcome an impartial and
independent inquiry, as an important step in
reaching a settlement and upholding the rule of
law. It is our fervent desire that the special
inquiry commission commence immediately. In
the interim, the Australian side, through its
Federal Police service in collaboration with the
Prosecutor General's Office, is undertaking
preliminary work to secure some crime scenes
and preserve evidence.

"Members will be aware that I have taken
on the sensitive portfolio of Defence. My
motivation in accepting - and I cannot but say
that, as a Nobel Peace Laureate, I am a most
reluctant Defence Minister - is to lift the
standing of the F-FDTL and to help heal the
wounds between the F-FDTL and the PNTL and
between both forces and the community.

"While peace has been restored overall, the
security and law and order situation remain
precarious. It is acknowledged by all that our
institutions of State and our democratic culture
are fragile. It is, however, our considered View
that sustained international support by way of a
United Nations police force under United Nations
command, with the PNTL working under its
auspices - as outlined in the letter to the
Secretary-General of 11 June 2006 on the matter,
signed by my President, the President of the

S/l'V.5457

 

Parliament and my Prime Minister - needs to be
provided without delay.

"Before I turn to the needs of a new United
Nations mission, I wish to reiterate that we
Timorese are deeply indebted to the deploying
countries but also that, as the emergency situation
is nearing an end, it is important that our
attention turn to the issue of the transition to a
peacekeeping force under the United Nations
umbrella, as was the case with the International
Force for East Timor in 1999.

"We believe that it is essential to have an
international presence under the United Nations
flag so as to reduce political and diplomatic
tensions. Hence, it is our considered view that the
current force in Timor-Leste should in due course
be replaced by a United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping force.

"It is also our considered view that the
current force and its successor - as, indeed,
other components of a new United Nations
mission - should also comprise a greater number
of countries in the region, including, we hope,
our friends in Fiji, Singapore, Thailand, the
Philippines, the Republic of Korea and other
countries that stand ready to contribute to such a
force. We were very proud that a country member
of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) - namely, Malaysia - came to us at
our time of need and was able to respond quickly
and professionally. We are very grateful to
Malaysia and other ASEAN countries that have
indicated a willingness to respond.
"I want to issue a caveat regarding a new
United Nations mission: the reality is that we
have not been able to undertake a comprehensive
needs assessment for such a mission. It is our
intention to enter into detailed discussions with
the United Nations on this matter in the
immediate future. I can, however, offer some
preliminary comments regarding our request for
an international police force and a special inquiry
commission.

"First, the time frame must be long enough
to enable our State institutions to move beyond
the fragile stage, consistent with our being an
infant State. As members know, it is a Herculean
task to build a nation almost from scratch, and

while we have succeeded, it is an infant nation
that we now have. Collectively, we did a
remarkable job of nation-building, initially under
the stewardship of the late Sergio Vieira de
Mello.

"The main focus of the United Nations
mission will be the maintenance of a secure
environment that involves, inter alia, a
multinational military presence, a United Nations
police force, presidential and parliamentary
elections organized, administered and conducted
by the United Nations and key civilian advisory
positions, with some embedded in Government
administration alongside capacity-building
positions, so that our State institutions can be
strengthened, along with civil society.

"I wish to place on public record my sincere
thanks to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sukehiro Hasegawa, for his
good work during the current crisis.
Mr. Hasegawa has also served the people of
Timor-Leste in an exemplary and selfless manner
and has a special place in our hearts, as indeed do
our friends from Japan, Mr. Hasegawa's home
country, who have made a great contribution to
our country.

"I also want to also convey our profound
thanks to the United Nations police for their
wonderful efforts in attempting to broker a
peaceful resolution to a very critical situation on
25 May. We deeply empathize with them; but
they acted profes sionally, selflessly and in the
best traditions of the civil servants of the United
Nations. We salute them.

"The decision is now in your hands, Madam
President and members of the Council. We
require your sustained engagement. We, the
people of Timor-Leste, await your consideration."

