Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia and the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

Let me begin by thanking the French presidency
of the Council and the United Kingdom delegation for
undertaking this important and very timely initiative,
which should launch a process of deliberations on a
topic that is essential not only for the Security Council,
with its special responsibility for peacekeeping, but
also for the entire United Nations system and all
Member States.

I would like to extend special thanks to Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and to
Special Representative Annabi for their informative
and comprehensive briefings.

The European Union (EU) fully supports the
United Nations in the field of peacekeeping. Indeed,
the last decade has been one of increased challenges in
that regard. The demand for peacekeepers has been
growing steadily since the 19905, and this trend is
likely to continue. Moreover, the peacekeeping
operations have become more complex and challenging
in terms of planning, mandating and management.

At present, peacekeepers are needed in highly
volatile environments such as the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti. The
enormous requirements for deployable, well-trained
and adequately equipped personnel constantly remind
us that United Nations peacekeeping resources are not
unlimited. In parallel, the United Nations peacekeeping
budget has increased five times over the last ten years
and is currently bigger than the regular budget. Despite
all these difficulties, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have brought security to many destabilized
regions.

The European Union has a long-established
partnership with the United Nations in the field of
crisis management. Our long-standing cooperation -
which was formalized in the first joint United Nations-
European Union declaration, signed on 24 September
2003 - has developed substantially over the years.
Today the EU and the United Nations work side by
side in Africa, the Middle East, Asia and the Western
Balkans.

While being active in conflict prevention and
resolution in different parts of the world, the European
Union has also successfully conducted peacekeeping
operations mandated by the United Nations and
consistent with its Charter. The level of support that the
European Union has been providing is perhaps best
illustrated by the current EUFOR military operation in
Chad and in the Central African Republic, or by the
first EU maritime operation, launched off the Somali
coast in December 2008 to protect the supply of
humanitarian aid to the Somali people.

The European Union member States also actively
participate in United Nations peacekeeping missions
and contribute over 40 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. Furthermore, some 20 operations
under the European Security and Defence Policy have
been carried out so far, many under a Security Council
mandate. I wish to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their continuing commitment.

The European Union is seriously concerned at the
increasing number of fatalities among United Nations
peacekeepers and would like to stress again that attacks
against United Nations personnel are absolutely
unacceptable. The safety and security of United
Nations personnel must be given the highest priority,
and the European Union supports all possible
protective measures. At the same time, peacekeeping
troops need to demonstrate impeccable behaviour. The
European Union is gravely concerned about recent
reports of sexual abuse and exploitation by United
Nations peacekeepers. The EU fully supports the zero-
tolerance policy.

The sixtieth anniversary of United Nations
peacekeeping operations provides a unique opportunity
to take stock of what has been achieved. The task of
such peacekeeping operations has evolved, as has the
context in which they operate. These developments
require new approaches when formulating their
respective mandates. The objectives of each and every
operation need to be clear and realistic. The mandates
should be developed in close consultation with the
Secretariat and must be matched with adequate
resources. In that regard, we all have a common
responsibility as United Nations Member States. Clear
benchmarks and exit strategies should be developed
prior to the deployment of peacekeepers so that the
international community can monitor progress and fill
the gaps as needed.

In other words, the main elements of the
mandates should be elaborated in a systematic, well-
coordinated and realistic manner in order to ensure that
they are achievable. Such an approach will also
contribute to enhancing the credibility of the United
Nations.

Recently, peacekeeping missions have
increasingly become multidimensional and integrated.
At least eight of the current operations have an explicit
mandate to protect civilians. The European Union
strongly believes that protection of civilians should be
an integral part of the mandate of peacekeeping
operations and that the United Nations should
strengthen its capacity to deliver in this area.

The European Union supports a comprehensive
and multifaceted approach to peacekeeping. In its
conflict-management capacities the United Nations
should focus on the root causes of conflict and put
special emphasis on supporting credible political peace
processes and immediate post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts, notably in the areas of police, the rule of law,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
security sector reform. The European Union welcomes
the increased attention that those issues have recently
received in the Secretariat and the Security Council
and among Member States.

The monitoring capacities and the evaluation of
operations need to be strengthened. The European
Union underlines the importance of recruiting qualified
personnel in a timely manner and supports the creation
of a roster of civilian experts who could be deployed
whenever and wherever necessary.

Past experience has shown that a smooth
transition between peacekeeping and peacebuilding is
vital. In that context, the European Union underlines
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
advising the Security Council on relevant issues.

United Nations peacekeeping capacities should
be deployed only when there is no other viable option,
and only for the shortest time necessary. Peacekeeping
is costly, and rebuilding peaceful and sustainable
societies after armed conflicts requires a lot of
resources. Therefore every effort the international
community undertakes in order to prevent conflicts is
worthwhile.

The European Union continues to look for more
ways to support peace and security endeavours. One of
the important tools is the EU Instrument for Stability,
with a seven-year budget of more than two billion
euros. In addition, the joint Africa-EU strategy adopted
in 2007 has an important security component. Another
way that the EU is supporting Africa-led peace
operations is the African Peace Facility, aimed at
enhancing the institutional capacities of the African
Union and African subregional organizations in
relation to peacekeeping and prevention of armed
conflicts. The European Union aims at an effective
partnership in order to improve planning, deployment
and management of African peacekeeping operations in
a framework of predictable funding mechanisms and
clear guidelines.

Allow me to conclude by underlining once again
that United Nations peacekeeping faces many
challenges. Nearly a decade after the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), it is time to revisit the panel's
recommendations, review their implementation and
take a strategic look into the future. Much can be done
to improve our practice, in particular on the three
series of issues identified in the Franco-British non-
paper. We therefore welcome this timely debate in the
Security Council and are ready to carry forward this
discussion in other forums, including the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We very
much look forward to the outcome of the process
launched today.

