Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We commend
the Egyptian presidency of the Council for initiating
and convening today's open debate. As a Member
Observer of the African Union (AU), Kazakhstan is
deeply committed to strengthening the African Peace
and Security Architecture and welcomes cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of peace and security. My delegation will do
everythinginitspowerto supportAfricainimplementing
the recommendations of the three related 2015 United
Nations reviews - of peacekeeping operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security.

Kazakhstan believes that in Africa we have to
expand the concept of peace and stability from security
that is State-centred to security that is people-oriented,
and from military security to non-military, in order
to encompass a broad concept of human security that
includes food, water and energy for all. Such a concept
calls for greater cooperation with a wide range of
organizations and regional groups in order to achieve
the objectives of State-building, establishing the rule
of law and good governance, protecting civilians,
disarming combatants and reforming the security and
justice sectors. They should be based on inclusive
political processes, all of which shape our mandates
and how we implement them.

Implementing resolution 2282 (2016) on the review
of the peacebuilding architecture in Africa will require
greater internal coherence among the United Nations
and its agencies and country teams on the ground and
with regional and subregional structures, as well as
international financial institutions and regional banks.
It implies closer collaboration between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council,
their special representatives and the special political
missions and peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations. We must take into account the need for a
regular flow of funding to AU missions. Peacebuilding
must involve conflict prevention and resolution from
the very start rather than beginning in the post-conflict
phase. The emphasis should be on building peace rather
than enforcing security.

In support ofAfrica, Kazakhstan has signed a third-
party cost-sharing agreement with the United Nations
Development Programme with a View to implementing a
partnership for sustainable development between Africa
and Kazakhstan, aimed at benefiting 45 countries in
the region by sharing institutional experiences and best
practices. We consider it essential to address security
issues and maintain lasting peace by developing a more
comprehensive continental strategy that is put together
by all stakeholders, including civil society. If we are to
achieve the aspirations for Africa's Agenda 2063, we
have to think in terms of stronger military, diplomatic
and development partnerships that can capitalize on
every kind of cooperation - North-South, South-
South and triangular - so as to support the efforts of
the United Nations, the Security Council and the AU
through their various resolutions on peace and security.

No peace can be complete without the dimension
of women and peace and security, and Kazakhstan
will spare no effort to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000) and, most importantly, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) in the region. In that regard, food, water and
energy security are essential to peace and stability and,
together with nuclear security, form the four pillars
supporting Kazakhstan's bid for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council. At the Fourth Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington, DC, President Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan drew the attention of world leaders to his
very significant document "Manifesto. The World. The
Twenty-first Century". He has proposed formulating
a 2045 global strategic initiative plan, whose primary
goal would be to eliminate the root causes of wars and
conflicts by the time of the centenary of the United
Nations, in 2045. During his address to the General
Assembly in September (see A/70/PV.13), he also called
for investing 1 per cent of Member States' defence
budgets in the special United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.
Addressing Africa's issues requires taking bold
and daring measures under the auspices of the United
Nations and the AU, together with the European Union.
We therefore call on all delegations to support these
forward-looking approaches, together with the other
existing processes of the Sendai Framework, the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, the 2030 Agenda and the Paris
Climate Change Agreement. We must invest more in
sustainable development, and we will join the States
of Africa and the international community in making
Africa conflict-free.

