It is an honour to brief the Security Council on cooperation between the European Union (EU) and the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security. I congratulate Estonia on its presidency of the Council. The outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a test of our humanity, but also of the multilateral system itself. This crisis demonstrates that global challenges require collective action. COVID-19 and climate change are not problems that any one country alone can solve. The rules-based international order, with the United Nations at its core, must therefore be upheld and strengthened. There is no other option. The pandemic is shaking the very foundation of our societies and exposing the vulnerabilities of the most fragile countries. It risks unravelling progress in recent years towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and pushing millions back into poverty. In addition, the pandemic can exacerbate existing conflicts and generate new geopolitical tensions. That is why the European Union was one of the earliest and strongest supporters of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We regret that only a few countries - two out of 43, according to the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project report - have seen a reduction in violence. We also support the appeal by High Commissioner for Human Rights Michele Bachelet to ensure that sanctions do not hinder humanitarian aid, as is currently the case for the EU. At a time of global crisis, we need a Council that can make critical decisions, not one that is paralysed by vetoes and political infighting. The EU is doing what it takes to combat the coronavirus crisis. We know our battle at home can succeed only if we defeat the virus around the world. That is why the EU, its member States and European financial institutions pooled resources to fund a €23 billion Team Europe package to support partner countries and the most vulnerable. We fully agree with Secretary-General Guterres that socioeconomic recovery packages must aim to build back better by investing in sustainable and resilient societies. In these troubled times, emergency measures are necessary, but they must be proportionate, temporary and in compliance with the rule of law and international obligations. Respect for human rights remains essential, especially for the most vulnerable. Even as others back away, the EU remains a staunch supporter of a strong United Nations as the beating heart of the multilateral system. Secretary-General Guterres is right to say that multilateralism is under threat precisely when we need it most. We therefore support his efforts to advance the United Nations reform process and to use the Organization's seventy-fifth anniversary to work for a rejuvenated United Nations. At a time of growing scepticism, we must demonstrate the Organization's added value and relevance. This is why the EU and its member States support United Nations reform and are the largest financial contributors to the United Nations system. We pay our dues in full and on time. In the area of peace and security, the EU is also a generous, reliable partner. All 17 EU crisis management missions and operations cooperate closely with members of the United Nations family. Indeed, 11 of those EU missions and operations are located in the same area as a United Nations mission. In some cases we even share barracks and camps. We know that women play a crucial role in securing peace and security, and we need to promote their role and contribution. That was the central reason for the adoption, 20 years ago, of groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000). We have made progress since, but much work remains to achieve gender equality and women's empowerment. Let us therefore pursue this agenda with determination. Africa is our sister continent and a major strategic priority for the EU. From the Sahel to the Horn of Africa, from the Central African Republic to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the European Union is actively backing political processes, providing financial support and contributing to peacebuilding, stabilization and development. In that regard, we have but one motto: African solutions to African problems. We work very closely with the African Union (AU), including Mr. Smail Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security. Nevertheless, we cannot do all the work for our partners. Instead, we are supporting their efforts. Today I would like to focus on the Sahel. It is a test case, with all the elements of the modern foreign policy agenda at play. Security, extremism and terrorism, governance, sustainable development, migration and climate change are all driving the conflict dynamics and explain why we need an integrated approach. Since 2014, the EU and its member States have provided massive financial support - a total of €8,5 billion - to the Sahel region. The EU recently broadened the scope of its work and has three missions deployed to help develop the capacities of the military and security forces of the region. But the hard truth is that the situation in the Sahel keeps deteriorating at an alarming pace. A total of 4,000 lives were lost to terrorist attacks this year alone, there are 800,000 displaced persons in Burkina Faso - seven times more than in February 2019 - and around 50 million people are at risk of food insecurity due to terrorism and COVID-19. We must therefore be ready to do more and better, which is what we - together with the Group of Five for the Sahel and the AU - are doing. The same is true with regard to the Horn of Africa, where EU cooperation with the AU and the United Nations is also crucial. Our analysis of the situation is the same. Our commitment to work jointly is strong. Together with our partners, we must stay the course. Libya is a major crisis right on the European Union's doorstep. We have seen the absurd situation of fighters wearing masks to protect themselves against COVID-19 while exchanging fire. The EU is working hard to create conditions for a ceasefire; it is not easy and there are many agendas at play. There is no alternative to an inclusive political solution. But in order to find a political solution, we need to stop the flows of weapons into Libya and create a space for real dialogue. With that objective in mind, we have launched the new European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. Its core task is to implement the United Nations arms embargo through naval, aerial and satellite assets. Operation IRINI builds on the achievements of Operation Sophia, which so far has been the only operation actively implementing the United Nations arms embargo and reporting back to the Organization. Although it began its sea activities only a few weeks ago, Operation IRINI has already proven its added value by sharing valuable information with the Panel of Experts on Libya established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) and by serving as a deterrent for oil smuggling. It is critical that the Council renew the resolution authorizing inspections on the high seas. We know that the broader Middle East has a major impact on European and global security. We need to adopt an approach that addresses individual conflicts and crises, including Yemen and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where unilateral action could threaten the stability of the entire region and where the EU remains ready to work with both parties and its partners on a solution based on internationally recognized parameters. We must also recognize the interconnected nature of the region's conflict dynamics. To that end, we must continue long-term efforts to achieve a genuine regional, cooperative security framework. In Syria, the situation in Idlib remains fragile. The ceasefire must continue to hold and must extend all across Syria, in line with Special Envoy Pedersen's appeal. It is imperative that the Council renew the authorization of cross-border humanitarian operations and deliveries into north-west Syria. I appeal to the Council to not play political games with the lives of the Syrian people. Have they not suffered enough? The fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region, to be held on 29 and 30 June, will be an opportunity to show our continued support to the Syrian people. The humanitarian needs are enormous. We must therefore maintain the same pledge level as that of previous years. The conference will also aim to consolidate international backing for a political solution to the crisis that is in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015). Let me reiterate the enduring importance of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran. It remains essential to ensure the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. This is why I regret yesterday's decision by the United States to not prolong the waivers for the JCPOA-related nuclear projects. Finally, I will touch upon Europe itself, including the Western Balkans. Our overall goal is to see the whole region advance on the path of reform, reconciliation and integration into the EU. I recently appointed Miroslav Lajeak as EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue, which remains one of my top priorities. Staying on the topic of Europe, I would like to mention Ukraine, where Russia's illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula and the unfulfilled Minsk commitments have resulted in a major disruption in EU-Russia relations. Respect for the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries remains a key elements of the EU's relationship with its Eastern partners. The principles enshrined in Helsinki cannot be forgotten if we are to achieve a cooperative, more secure and cohesive European continent. I now turn to Venezuela, nestled in a continent close to my heart. There, the political crisis, compounded by measures related to COVID-19, has turned into a catastrophic economic and humanitarian emergency, affecting the stability of the whole region. Earlier this week, we mobilized €2.5 billion, with €595 million in grants at a pledging event hosted by the EU and Spain to step up emergency assistance, including to the displaced population in the region. Finally, turning to very recent developments, I must express deep concern about steps taken by China with regard to national security legislation in Hong Kong. Such actions are not in keeping with international commitments or the basic laws of Hong Kong. There are many other specific situations I could mention. But allow me instead to close with some broader, more strategic reflections. The COVID-19 crisis has laid bare the fragility of a hyperglobalized and interdependent world. We must learn the broader lessons and truly understand the link between human and planetary health, and how existing inequalities are making us more vulnerable. If we want to build back better, we must recommit to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The EU is doing its part, and we count on others to also meet their obligations. We also know that climate change is affecting global security by acting as a threat multiplier. That is why we fully support Germany's efforts to put the climate and security nexus on the Council's agenda. My main message today is that the EU remains deeply attached to the rules- based international order, to multilateralism and to the United Nations. We support the United Nations, not only through words - although they do matter - but through concrete actions and contributions across the three pillars of the United Nations, especially peace and security. We believe in multilateralism, which is precisely why we want the Security Council to be able to act. All States should uphold the founding values of the United Nations, starting with those bearing the special responsibilities of Council membership. Multilateralism must deliver results for the people who need it most. Otherwise, it loses legitimacy while unilateralism and power politics gain the upper hand. The world needs a revitalized multilateral system. But that will happen only if we all invest in it, as the EU is doing. We count on those who sit on the Council to do their part.
