Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on my visit to Haiti
and the Dominican Republic last week and on the
humanitarian situation in Haiti.

The aim of my trip, following an initial visit with
the Secretary-General four days after the earthquake,
was to review on the ground the challenges the
humanitarian community faces in the months ahead. In
the Dominican Republic, a vital logistics hub and
2

staging area for the relief operation, I thanked the
Government for its exemplary cooperation and its
contribution to the relief effort in Haiti. I visited a
public hospital, in which severely injured Haitians,
including children, have been receiving life-saving
medical treatment. I also visited the border area
between the Dominican Republic and Haiti to see in
particular the fragile and flood-prone road corridor
through which large quantities of relief supplies enter
Haiti. This road must be repaired and strengthened
urgently, before the rainy season causes major damage
and blocks it.

In Haiti I visited Leogane, the epicentre of the
earthquake, where its devastating effects were
particularly clear, before going on to Port-au-Prince to
look at progress there, as well as to meet the
Government and the many actors, humanitarian and
military, engaged in the relief operation.

Let me repeat first of all that the national and
local authorities, civil society and the people of Haiti
themselves have coped with extraordinary resilience
and patience in the midst of devastation on a scale
which has rarely been seen, particularly in a capital
city. Life of all kinds was visibly returning to the
streets. Meanwhile, a large and complex humanitarian
response is in place, despite the destruction of
government, United Nations and non-governmental
organization (NGO) offices, the loss of many key
personnel and the initial absence of so many basic
services.

It was heartening to see the determination shown
by United Nations, NGO and Red Cross/Red Crescent
national and international staff in the field. They have
worked tirelessly since just hours after the earthquake
struck, in often dreadful working and living conditions
themselves, to launch the relief operation in support of
the Haitian people. Let me also pay tribute to the
peacekeepers of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and United Nations
police, as well as to the other military forces, who are
all playing a vital role, using their indispensable assets
and helping to distribute aid safely and to maintain
public order.

The humanitarian situation is now gradually
improving on a daily basis. The worst of the medical
emergency is behind us. More than 3 million people
have received food rations and continue to do so on an
increasingly targeted basis. Clean water is available for
10-24612
the vast majority of those in need. Essential
infrastructure - such as the port, airport, electricity
and telecommunications facilities and most roads,
which during the first days and weeks were bottlenecks
for relief and aid workers trying to get into the
country- is increasingly operational. Every day,
larger quantities of relief supplies are reaching Haiti
and being distributed.

Nevertheless, it is clear that not everyone in need
has yet been reached and that we have much more to
do on the ground, particularly in terms of emergency
shelter, other non-food items and sanitation. The
estimated 1.2 million Haitians in need of emergency
shelter support desperately need a waterproof cover
over their heads, and we are still only 30 per cent there.
We are straining every nerve to speed up the delivery
of shelter materials, mainly plastic sheeting, but also
tents, before the rains begin in earnest. This shelter and
sanitation surge is the top priority.

While life may be returning in some ways, the
devastating effect of the earthquake is still abundantly
evident in the capital and elsewhere. Around 3 million
people - one in every three Haitians - were badly
affected by the earthquake. The majority of those are in
the capital, Port-au-Prince, but also in other
surrounding towns and cities, including Jacmel, and the
epicentre, Leogane, where 80 per cent of buildings
were destroyed. It was encouraging to see in Leogane
that, despite the initial difficulties involved in reaching
the city, a good deal was happening in terms of relief
assistance. Over 70 organizations are on the ground in
Leogane, including an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Cooperation
with the large and effective Canadian military presence
was clearly good. Food and shelter distribution had
made good progress.

However, it was also clear that some of the
informal sites, where those unable to return to their
homes were living, were not sustainable. They were
overcrowded, liable to flood and at serious risk of fire
from cooking in the makeshift shelters. The
identification of alternative sites is a challenge, but
land should be easier to find in Leogane than in the
more congested and geographically challenging context
of Port-au-Prince itself.

In Port-au-Prince, I Visited an informal camp in
the grounds of the Petionville Club, where tens of
thousands of people have taken refuge. It was both
10-24612

encouraging and worrying. It was encouraging because
the camp seemed well organized and relatively clean,
with good availability of food and shelter material, a
rudimentary school already established and a calm
atmosphere overall. There was excellent cooperation
between the NGOs and the United States forces on the
spot. But it was worrying, again, because of the very
obvious unsuitability and unsustainability of the site
once the rainy season begins. The steep slopes and
floodable area at the bottom of the site mean that a lot
of people must be moved out soon. But there is
nowhere for them to go until alternative, more
acceptable sites are made available. I give this detail
because there are many similar sites with high risk of
flooding that also need to be decongested. So,
provision of suitable land is a high priority, and we are
working with the Government on this.

In a meeting with President Preval and
Government ministers, I thanked him for the
Government's continued leadership and engagement
with the United Nations and partners. He was
understandably anxious to see faster progress, on
shelter in particular. I assured him that we were doing
our utmost to meet the emergency shelter and
sanitation requirements before the rainy season, as well
as making an early start on the huge task of rubble
removal: rapid clearance of some urban sites would
free up areas to which the people on currently
congested sites could move. To do this, we need to
mobilize urgently more heavy equipment, including
assets which the military and the private sector can
provide, to supplement the efforts of the 75,000
Haitians who have already been engaged in United
Nations cash-for-work programmes. We also need to
start a systematic effort to assess earthquake-affected
structures, to decide which need demolition, which can
be repaired and which can be used.

The cluster approach that the international
humanitarian community has developed since the
Asian tsunami five years ago is proving its worth in
improving coordination and the effectiveness of the
response. Local cluster leadership is being reinforced,
faced with a catastrophe of this magnitude and the
900-plus organizations on the ground whose efforts
need to be coordinated. A Deputy Humanitarian
Coordinator has also now been deployed to Port-au-
Prince, not least to strengthen and expand partnerships
with key stakeholders, including bilateral donors,
military forces and private actors.
3

The situation in Port-Au-Prince, the capital, and
surrounding towns has been the main focus of relief
efforts so far, but there are huge needs elsewhere too,
which require a nationwide response. Nearly half a
million people have left earthquake-affected areas and
dispersed around the country. Many have gone to areas
that were already highly vulnerable before the
earthquake. Host families and communities have been
very generous, but are poorly placed to feed and look
after their guests for long. Help is badly needed for all
concerned and is now a priority for the relief operation.

While we continue to refine our assessment of the
humanitarian needs, the longer-term post-disaster
needs assessment process is now under way in parallel
to look at reconstruction and redevelopment
requirements. We need to make sure that our relief
efforts pave the way as effectively as possible for this
phase to enable Haiti to be built back better, which is
the overriding aim of us all.

On the resource mobilization front, I thank all
Member States and private donors again for
contributing generously to the relief operation and
fully funding the initial six-month Haiti flash appeal.
However, sustained and additional support will be
necessary for the long haul before us. The Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy for Haiti, President
Clinton, launched yesterday the revised humanitarian
appeal, taking into account not only relief needs but
also early recovery help to be delivered within a
12-month time frame, including in key areas such as
health, education and agriculture. The revised appeal,
for a total of $1.4 billion, includes the amounts raised
in response to the initial six-month appeal. Unmet
needs therefore amount to $768 million, which is the
amount we are asking for now to fund projects from
54 non-governmental organizations, 21 United Nations
agencies and the International Organization for
Migration. They include plans for the upcoming rainy
and hurricane seasons, not least transitional shelter
requirements, as well as vital disaster-risk reduction
measures.

In sum, the humanitarian situation in Haiti is
undoubtedly improving day by day, but we are under
no illusion about the scale of the challenges still ahead
for the next weeks and months. The international
humanitarian community will continue to support the
Haitian Government in addressing the most urgent
needs and gaps as the longer-term recovery and
reconstruction processes gather pace in parallel.
There are no instant solutions. It will take time to
cover all these needs and care to maintain help to the
most vulnerable without creating dangerous aid
dependency. But we must not waver in helping several
million people not only to survive this catastrophe, but
also to rebuild better, more prosperous lives and
livelihoods for the future.

