Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/590). I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia, Ambassador
Duale.

In spite of the ongoing multinational naval
operations off the coast of Somalia and around the Gulf
of Aden, which are aimed at increasing maritime
security and securing the delivery of international
assistance, the acts of piracy in the region remain a
source of concern for the international community. It is
crucial to effectively and robustly address this
problem. We praise the efforts of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, which is definitely an
important international cooperation mechanism in all
aspects of combating piracy. Turkey joined the Group
as a founding member, and we have been actively
contributing to its work. We are pleased to see the
increased interaction between the Group and the
United Nations.

Turkey is of the opinion that that it is crucial for
the Contact Group to continue to play a leading role in
setting up a solid legal framework and practical
arrangements in order to clarify pending legal issues
concerning the arrest, detention, prosecution, trial and
extradition of suspected pirates and to strengthen
related cooperation. Working Group 2 of the Contact
Group has already gone a long way in this regard.

The increase in the number of pirate attacks in
2009 despite all efforts of the international community
indicates that satisfactory deterrence has not been fully
achieved. One of the main factors behind this is
undoubtedly the lack of capacity to detain and punish
perpetrators who are apprehended. If we want to
sustain the success of the ongoing operations, we
should continue to explore legal options for the
effective prosecution of suspected pirates. Hence,
Turkey believes that it would be useful if a mechanism
were to be put in place in one of the countries in the
region, under the supervision of the United Nations, to
effectively prosecute persons suspected of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. That
would no doubt require the support of the international
community for the enhancement of capacity in the
States of the region. We believe that the newly
established trust fund can be utilized in this regard.

Given the vastness of the area, Turkey believes
that it is vital to improve and develop operational and
intelligence support to counter-piracy operations. That
said, we welcome the establishment of the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction (SHADE) group. It will
no doubt help contribute to interoperability among the
naval forces. Sharing of information should not be
limited to the maritime area, but also be extended to
relevant airspace and mainland with the active
contribution of the regional countries and
organizations. We welcome the contributions of
INTERPOL in this regard.

Allow me to briefly say a few words about what
Turkey has done in the fight against acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. Thus far, Turkey has taken part,
with four frigates, in the efforts aimed at repressing
such acts under the Standing Maritime Group 2 of
NATO and Combined Task Force 151 (CTF-151).
Indeed, CTF-151 was commanded by Turkish naval
forces from May through August 2009. Today a
Turkish frigate with air assets is operating in the
region, pursuant to the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. To date, the Turkish
naval elements in the region have apprehended some
30 piracy suspects in various operations.

The Turkish maritime authorities are actively
seized of the issue of strengthening situational
awareness for commercial ships and other capabilities.
For that purpose, the document on best management
practices to deter piracy has been widely circulated to
the industry. A national maritime armed robbery
information system has also been initiated.

We should continue to concentrate and cooperate
on the elimination of the root causes of piracy that are
embedded in Somalia. We share the view that measures
taken to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia can yield results only if they are
coupled with the efforts to strengthen the capacity of
both the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia
and the African Union Mission in Somalia.

