Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome the unanimous renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for another year. As penholder, as it does every year,
France assumed its responsibility and tried to keep the
unity of the Security Council on renewing UNIFIL's
mandate. It being necessary to preserve its mandate,
we all agreed in the Council to maintain the mission's
capacity to ensure that it can carry out its tasks as best
as possible. I would like to thank all the members of
the Council and the parties for their cooperation and
constructive attitude during the negotiations, which
were difficult.

UNIFIL is a regional public good. It is carrying out
its mandate by monitoring the cessation of hostilities
along the Blue Line, where the situation remains
volatile but overall calm and stable after more than 10
years. That is in and of itself a major accomplishment,
specially when we see that elsewhere in the region the
security situation has deteriorated. Carrying out its
work in a difficult area of operations, UNIFIL plays an
indispensable role of being between the two sides even
though the forces present have quite superior capacities.
As with all operations and arrangements, UNIFIL can
of course can do better and can do more. But no one
within the Council can imagine for one second that
environment without UNIFIL.

We went as far as we could to take into account
the concerns of some Member States, even though the
preference of almost the entire Council was for a strictly
technical renewal, As a troop contributor, we are well
aware of the situation in the south of Lebanon and do
not want to imperil the delicate balance. However, that
in no way excludes the possibility of working in other
contexts on the serious concerns expressed by some of
our partners.

Given the difficult regional context, UNIFIL has a
strategic stabilizing influence that is in the interests of
all. In that regard, I would like to commend the troop
contributors, especially Italy, which enable UNIFIL to
carry out its mandate. It is also essential that the parties
respect all of their obligations.

I should like to conclude by commending the
Egyptian presidency of the Council for the month of
August, which has led our work with efficiency and
wisdom. I wish them a happy Eid.

