Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated country Cyprus, as well as the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) country member of the
European Economic Area Norway, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union welcomes the significant steps
which have been made towards stabilization in the Central

 

African Republic following the breakdown of security and
civil order in 1996. The signing of the Bangui Agreements
represented a major breakthrough in this process, and we
pay tribute to the key role of regional leaders; the
International Mediation Committee, under President Bongo
of Gabon; and the International Monitoring Committee in
this regard.

The European Union also congratulates the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) on the vital contribution it
has made to the improvement in the security situation in the
Central African Republic over the past year. The rapid and
effective deployment of this mission in 1997 is an
important example of a regional response to regional
problems and demonstrates the professionalism and
capabilities of African peacekeepers. Thus the operation
conducted by MISAB was approved and authorized by the
Security Council during the course of last year. In this
context, we commend the contributions of those African
countries that have provided troops to MISAB and the
substantial commitment of one member State of the
European Union, France, in support. We welcome the
continued commitment of these countries to participate in
and support, together with others, the new United Nations
operation, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA), which will shortly take
over from MISAB. We applaud this new expression of
United Nations readiness to act in the peacekeeping field.

The European Union recognizes that while important
progress has been made in implementing the provisions of
the Bangui Agreements and towards reform in the social,
economic, electoral and security spheres, there remain many
important tasks ahead. In this context we note with
satisfaction President Patasse's commitments to further
reform measures in these areas and to the successful
holding of a National Reconciliation Conference in Bangui
in March. We look forward to continued progress leading
to the holding of free and fair elections later this year.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
establishment of MINURCA to replace MISAB from
mid-April. We recognize that its security, training,
disarmament and electoral assistance responsibilities will
play a key role in the period leading up to elections. We
also welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representative in the Central African
Republic, and fully support the coordination and
cooperation roles assigned to him, in particular his
responsibilities for encouraging assistance from the
international community to the Central African Republic.

In this respect, the European Union will continue to
provide development assistance, especially under the
European Development Fund. This will include substantial
support for the rehabilitation of the transport sector and
assistance to the health sector.
The European Union shares the concerns which have
been expressed over the fragility of the situation in the
Central African Republic. There are many challenges
ahead facing its Government and people which will need
to be met in order to consolidate the progress made over
the past year. The European Union believes the United
Nations, through MINURCA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, can make a
significant contribution to meeting those challenges and
help build lasting peace, democracy and development in
the Central African Republic.

