Ms. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking the briefers for their
insightful presentations.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.

Let me commend Indonesia for making
peacekeeping, and especially the improvement of
safety and security and performance, a priority during
its presidency. This momentous debate allows us to
exchange views on such important topics as training
and capacity-building.

I say nothing new when I state that adequate training
improves the performance of peacekeepers and that, in
combination with good equipment, it enhances safety
and security and decreases the risk of fatalities. Both
predeployment training and in-mission training of high
quality are essential for the effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates.

However, there is a world to be won if we manage
to go from saying to doing.

In addressing the challenges that training and
capacity-building still face, I wish to focus on three
elements: first, the Action for Peacekeeping framework;
secondly, from commitments to action; and, thirdly,
good practices.

First, the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative enjoys wide support
among Member States. We are also very encouraged by
the steps that the Secretariat is taking to advance the
Action for Peacekeeping agenda and guide these efforts.
The Declaration of Shared Commitments lays out what
needs to be done, and we know that implementation is
the hardest part of the improvement of United Nations
peacekeeping. We, the Member States, as well as the
Secretariat, must stay committed to and focused on the
implementation of the Declaration, our blueprint for all
further action.

Secondly, today, more than a year after the launch of
Action for Peacekeeping, we must stand together, focus
on the tasks we have set ourselves and persevere to get
the job done. If we want to strengthen our peacekeeping
missions and improve the safety and security of our
personnel, coordination is key.

There are many initiatives, and there is a need for
coherence and consistency. We therefore greatly value
the coordinating role of the Secretariat in aligning
all Action for Peacekeeping efforts and actions. We
encourage the Secretariat to play a proactive role
in identifying training needs and matching them
with the pledging countries. We therefore welcome
the development and operationalization of the light
coordination mechanism to deconflict training and
capacity-building programmes, which the Kingdom of
the Netherlands financially supports.

This brings me to my last point. One of the
Action for Peacekeeping focus areas for the Kingdom
of the Netherlands is training and performance. We
provide numerous trainings, often together with other
Member States, on a wide range of subjects, including
peacekeeping military intelligence, protection
of civilians, United Nations police and gender in
operations, and we support the United Nations mobile
training teams.

Many initiatives have already been taken to
improve training and capacity-building. Along the way,
many lessons have been learned and improvements
made. Let us use those good practices as examples to
further enhance our actions and improve training and
capacity-building.

In conclusion, training and building the capacity
of our Blue Helmets will improve their performance
and enhance their safety and security, thereby reducing
the risk of casualties. Let us build further on the good
initiatives that are already under way.

