Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
briefing on the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission (UNAMA) in Afghanistan and all his efforts to
make the Security Council's visit to Afghanistan a
success. I would also like to thank Ambassador Apakan
for his briefing on the recent Security Council mission
to Afghanistan to learn more on the ground about the
role and support of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
and for all his preparatory work for and excellent
management of the visit.

I would like to cover the following points. We
reiterate our support for UNAMA and its activities in
support of the Afghan Government, especially in
regard to electoral support, national reconciliation,
regional cooperation and human rights. We call for a
strengthening of coordination between UNAMA and
the other international forces in Afghanistan.

We stress the leading role of the Afghan
Government in security, politics and the economy, and
national unity, as well as the role of the United Nations
in helping and supporting the Afghan people to take
gradual control of their own destiny and of the
sovereignty and independence of Afghanistan. We have
concerns about the lack of improvement in the security
situation and the increase in attacks on civilian targets
and international forces.

We condemn the terrorist operations that have
taken place in Afghanistan and emphasize the links that
exist between security and development, as well as the
need to address the root causes of conflict there
through the political process. Military and security
forces alone cannot achieve a settlement. Illicit drug
cultivation and trade must also be combated, since they
are linked to the financing of terrorist activities.

We welcome the Afghan Government's
determination to further national reconciliation and
reintegration, as well as its organization of the
Consultative Peace Jirga from 2 to 4 June, in which
hundreds of delegates participated, representing many
categories of Afghan society. A draft outcome
document entitled "Peace and reintegration
programme" was released, but we still stress the need
to pursue efforts towards reconciliation after that
meeting and to work closely on organizing more
inclusive and representative efforts covering all Afghan
political forces. This naturally calls for a new vision
and an innovative approach, as Mr. De Mistura stressed
in his briefing.

We support the efforts of the Afghan Government
and its institutions regarding preparations for the
elections scheduled for 18 September. We hope that
these will be more transparent and fair than the last
round of presidential elections. We are reassured by the
information in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/318) on the active work of the Independent
Electoral Commission and on the Commission's fully
independent nature. However, we believe it essential to
introduce improvements and additional amendments to
the electoral law that are inclusive and long-term, and
to make the most of the assistance provided by the
United Nations in this area.

Finally, we note the importance of uniting
international and regional efforts to help Afghanistan
achieve stability and prosperity. There are close links
between the situation in Afghanistan and the wider
region, of course, and peace in Afghanistan will help
promote the interests of all neighbouring States. In this
context, we support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to promote
regional cooperation, and we hope that the upcoming
Kabul Conference on 20 July will be fully successful,
putting Afghanistan firmly on the path towards peace
and security.

In conclusion, through Ambassador Tanin, I wish
to thank the Afghan Government for its hospitality and
all of the facilities they put at the disposal of the
Security Council's visit.

