Mr. Holmes: May I thank all the delegations who
spoke this morning for the support they expressed for
the efforts we are making. I was struck by the large
measure of agreement around the table on the
seriousness of the humanitarian issues I have
discussed, on the need to continue to carefully monitor
those situations and on the need for political action in
all cases to try to remove the causes of those problems,
because - as someone remarked here today, and I
fully agree - humanitarian help can only be a sticking
plaster, not a solution for these problems.
Many speakers, including you yourself,
Mr. President, have talked about the need for and the
importance of peacekeeping operations in two of the
situations we have been discussing, that is, the earliest
possible deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
Darfur and the strengthening of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I fully agree that those
forces need early deployment and strengthening in
order to create better environments for civilians and for
humanitarian workers to operate.

I note that there are still in some areas - and I
saw this again when I was in Darfur in some internally
displaced persons (IDPs) camps, for example - some
exaggerated expectations of the likelihood of
UNAMID transforming the situation overnight. I think
we need to keep those expectations in check to avoid
too much disappointment afterwards, because it is clear
that it will take some time for UNAMID to reach its
full capacity. In any case, as I said, some of the
expectations in some of the camps are simply not
aligned with reality.

You make some powerful points, Sir, about the
need to avoid any suggestion of a double standard
existing between Somalia and Darfur. I do not want to
go into this in too much detail. That is obviously more
the business of my colleagues in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and in the Department of
Political Affairs.

Of course, I agree that when we talk about a
peace to keep, we should not be thinking about a
perfectly peaceful situation, because we certainly do
not need a peacekeeping force at that point. I think the
point I know I have tried to make is that some kind of
political framework is needed, some kind of situation
in which to try to support a political process; otherwise
the situation can become very difficult indeed, and it is
possible for contingents to become part of the problem
rather than part of the solution.

Having said that, I think we all entirely accept the
need for the kind of contingency planning that has been
talked about and for a possible United Nations
successor force to AMISOM.

Many delegations commented on the problems of
security that underlie so many of the humanitarian
problems in the areas I have been talking about. Again,
I fully agree with that. I did not make the point in my
initial intervention, but what would be extremely
valuable - in particular, I think, in Darfur, but also in
Somalia - would be some kind of cessation of
hostilities that could be agreed to by all sides and that
would give a respite at the very least, if not a more
lasting relief, from the fighting and the violence, which
is what causes the humanitarian problems or makes
them so much worse.

I take the opportunity to say that I still think a
humanitarian ceasefire in Darfur is necessary. There
have been suggestions by the Government of the Sudan
that they are prepared to contemplate that, as long as
others reciprocate. That would obviously be extremely
useful and would help to avert some of the problems I
have discussed.

Similarly in Somalia - however difficult it may
seem in present circumstances - a cessation of
hostilities, if it could be agreed, would be extremely
valuable, not least because of the situation in
Mogadishu itself.

One or two other points came up during the
discussion. I think the delegation of the United
Kingdom mentioned the desirability of a further
meeting of the High-level Committee that was
designed to follow the implementation of the Joint
Communique on Facilitation of Humanitarian
Assistance in Darfur, and I entirely agree. The reason
there has not been a recent meeting - I think the last
meeting was in September - is because there has not
been a Minister for Humanitarian Affairs in the Sudan
as a result of the difficulties between the north and the
south over the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement.

But I accept that we need to move to a meeting as
soon as possible. Meanwhile, the procedures under that
High-level Committee have not ceased and have
continued to operate. But I entirely agree that a
meeting of the High-level Committee would be
desirable soon.

One or two delegations commented correctly on
the impact of weather on some of these humanitarian
situations and that is certainly the case. I would draw
the attention of the Council to some early indications I
heard while I was in Darfur that the harvest in Darfur
this year, at least in the south and the north, will likely
be poor. That is going to put an extra strain on our
humanitarian operations. So we will be planning to
step up our food relief efforts, not only to those in
camps, but also to the wider population who may face
a longer hunger gap than normal.

Several delegations mentioned the question of
piracy off Somalia. Allow me to take the opportunity to
welcome the steps that have been taken to try to reduce
and eliminate it, not least the protection given by
French naval vessels to the recent World Food
Programme ship that arrived in Merca a few days ago.
Some delegations also referred to the incident that that
gave rise to, when there seemed to be a ban on
humanitarian operations in that particular region. That
was happily resolved. But this is an illustration of the
problems we face in Somalia with the authorities, and I
very much hope that the new Government and its new
Prime Minister will take a very different attitude in the
future and will facilitate humanitarian aid much more.

Meanwhile, the dangers faced by humanitarian
workers are illustrated again by the fact that a World
Food Programme driver was killed - I think earlier
today in Afghanistan - which again is an illustration
of the problems we face.

Many people referred, as I did myself, to the very
serious situation in Mogadishu, the apparently
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks going on
there and reciprocal fighting, which is having a terrible
effect on the civilians. I agree that that is a terrible
problem. We need to repeat that those who are
operating in Mogadishu from all sides must be
regarded as accountable for their actions. I think that is
a very important principle to stress.

Several delegations referred also to the very
worrying situation in eastern Chad, which obviously
has a linkage with what is going on in Darfur. I agree
that that is profoundly preoccupying. Humanitarian
operations are having great difficulty in continuing
while fighting between the Government and rebels is
going on. Movement is heavily restricted, and if that
situation is not resolved quickly it will start to have a
22

very serious impact on the ground in terms of the help
we can give to the 230,000 refugees in camps in
eastern Chad and the 180,000 internally displaced
persons who are also there. This is something we need
to follow very carefully. I hope the fighting will stop
soon, and I echo the calls that others have made for a
final end to mutual support of rebels across that border.

Mr. President, you referred to the importance of
the protection of civilians in the particular context of
Somalia. I entirely agree that if we compare the kind of
issues that we were raising in the report of the
Secretary-General in November and the situation in
Somalia, that is clear illustration of how far we have to
go in some of these areas.

Finally, I thank delegations for their interest and
support. Once again, the support of this Council is
absolutely vital for what we are trying to achieve. Let
me reassure all concerned that we will continue to do
all that we can to face up to these humanitarian
problems and to step up our relief efforts in all three of
those places, because they are profoundly worrying and
they do have implications. They are a reflection of the
peace and security problems in that area and probably
also have implications for the peace and security
problems in this highly explosive area in the Horn of
Africa, if we do not resolve those problems quickly.

