Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, I should like
to thank the representatives of the Secretariat's
Department of Political Affairs and Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their briefings and to
welcome the presence among us of the Permanent
Representative of Georgia.

Let me begin by expressing our regret at the
decision by the Russian Federation to formally
recognize the independence of the two Georgian
regions, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. As it has on
numerous occasions in discussions on this subject in
the past, Croatia reiterates its support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia with its internationally recognized borders. In
our opinion, the unfortunate decision to recognize
those two Georgian regions is not in accordance with
the Charter of United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
or the prior resolutions of the Security Council,
confirming the aforementioned principles, to which the
Russian Federation rendered its support.

We are also concerned by the fact that that
decision can effectively negate all the progress
achieved thus far towards a possible resolution of the
situation in Georgia. Bearing in mind the new
circumstances, it is self-evident that further progress in
that regard will be extremely hard to achieve.
Notwithstanding, we need to continue to unite our
efforts to achieve a reasonable and peaceful political
solution to the crisis. We believe that the best option
would be to turn to negotiations, as provided for in the
six-principle agreement drawn up by the Russian and
the French Presidents. The politics of presenting a fait
accompli is not acceptable, as it does not leave room
for a negotiated settlement.

My Government strongly supports the efforts of
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, aimed at resolving the
current crisis. Croatia reiterates its support for the six-
principle agreement. According to that agreement, all
military action must cease and the military forces must
return to the positions they held prior to the outbreak
of hostilities. Although the Russian Federation pulled
out the majority of its forces from Georgia last Friday,
it is still maintaining a presence both within the two
regions and in the buffer zones imposed around their
boundaries.

Finally, Croatia is extremely concerned by the
humanitarian situation on the ground and the large
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs). My Government, acting together with the
relevant international organizations and interested
Governments, will continue to provide help to all those
in need. We believe that all the refugees and IDPs
should be given the right to return to their homes and
continue their lives in a secure and safe environment.

