Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank France and the United Kingdom
for convening this important meeting on strategic force
generation and for inviting Canada to brief the Council
on the upcoming Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Meeting in the beautiful city of Vancouver.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank my colleague from
Bangladesh and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for their very useful
presentations today.

Canada is convinced that, when properly mandated,
resourced and supported, peacekeeping remains one
of the most flexible and effective tools available to
the international community in responding to crises.
But the nature of conflict is evolving, the operational
tempo of peacekeeping is increasing and the scale and
complexity ofpeacekeeping operations are growing. We
have no choice but to anticipate, adapt and respond to
the challenges. That requires reforming our collective
institutions, enhancing operational effectiveness and
making a sustained and collective effort to address
capability gaps.

However, addressing capability gaps requires more
than just supplying boots on the ground. It is about
providing troops with the right training, capabilities
and equipment, and doing so in a timely fashion.
Strategic force generation is fundamental to that effort.
And it is an area where we - Member States and the
Secretariat - need to work together, differently and
more effectively.

(spoke in French)

Since 2014, a high-level series of conferences have
helped to bridge the gap between the operational needs
of United Nations peacekeeping and the tremendous
capabilities that Member States have to offer. From
New York to London to Paris, we have not only seen
an unprecedented number of pledges to United Nations
peacekeeping, but also steps by Member States and the
United Nations to introduce qualitative considerations
into the discussion on force generation. Those annual
events are now a key part of the institution of United
Nations peacekeeping, complementing the work of this
organ as well as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. United Nations peacekeeping has a renewed
sense of purpose thanks to the reforms proposed by the
Secretary-General.

With those considerations in mind, Canada
volunteered to host the 2017 United Nations
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Meeting. We are
not alone in that endeavour. We are honoured to be
working in lockstep with 10 co-hosts - Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, Indonesia, Japan, the Netherlands, Pakistan,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom, Uruguay and the United
States. The Ministerial Meeting will take place from
14 to 15 November in Vancouver. Participation is open
to Member States announcing new pledges to United
Nations peacekeeping. Much preparation has already
gone into organizing and planning the Ministerial
Meeting, including three substantive meetings, held
in Tokyo, Kigali and Dhaka, which involved the
participation of approximately 50 Member States. The
meetings help pave the way for a successful Meeting in
November. We are on track to reach the highest level
of participation seen yet, and we have set equally high
expectations for the outcome of the event.

(spoke in English)

Canada fully agrees with Secretary-General Guterres
that conflict prevention should be one of the key priorities
for the United Nations. Discussions in Vancouver will
accordingly highlight the importance of integrated
approaches to preventing violent conflict. Ministers
will advance those objectives through panel sessions
on the following themes.

First, participants will close capability gaps in
United Nations peacekeeping by announcing new
pledges and taking stock of pledges already in place.
In particular, those include strengthening capabilities
related to gender, police peacekeepers, as well as to
peacekeeping in a francophone environment.

Secondly, we will identify concrete ways to
strengthen partnerships on training and capacity-
building between the United Nations, troops, police and
other actors. We all have a common purpose in making
United Nations peacekeeping operations more effective,
and we have complementary skills and experiences
to offer. It is time that troop- and police-contributing
countries, along with the Secretariat, work closer
together before deployments to ensure that all of our
women and men in the field have the training they need
and are able to operate as one.

Thirdly, we will examine how we can better protect
those at risk by ensuring that our strategies align with
the realities on the ground. That includes looking
into what concrete measures can be taken to better
address sexual exploitation and abuse and prevent the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.

Fourthly, we will encourage greater coherence in
early warning and rapid deployment by identifying
innovative approaches, capacities and technologies to
improve early warning, rapid analysis and planning
capabilities. We will also look at ways to shorten new
mission start-up times and ensure that we have filled
the United Nations rapid-deployment requirements
for 2018.

Given the leadership of Prime Minister Trudeau and
Secretary-General Guterres, no one should be surprised
that the Vancouver Ministerial Meeting will include
the importance of integrating gender perspectives as
its principal cross-cutting theme. In addressing our
persistent failure to leverage the impact that women
can have in prevention efforts and in securing durable
peace, gender perspectives will be mainstreamed
across all discussions. That will include enhancing the
recruitment of female personnel, addressing barriers
to their participation, providing training opportunities
and combating conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as sexual exploitation and abuse. Indeed, gender
perspectives and the participation of women is directly
linked to operational effectiveness and it is vital to
prevention efforts and in securing a durable peace.

Most fundamentally, in the Canadian way, we
recognize that inclusive partnerships are central to
our shared success. The peer-to-peer nature of joint
training, leading to better prepared and interoperable
troops and police; the vital importance of working with
key regional organizations, such as the African Union,
on a more equitable footing; the potential of joint smart
pledges, which can provide the predictability of supply
needed to enhance a mission's chance of success - all
point to how we can do more to come together at a time
when United Nations peacekeeping needs us.

We look forward to welcoming everyone in Vancouver.

