Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): It is with great sadness
that we extend our deepest condolences to the people
of South Africa and our colleagues in the Mission of
South Africa. In this moment of great loss, we stand
together with them.

Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Gerard Araud,
Ambassador of France, and the French delegation on
their assumption of the presidency of the Council for
December, and to wish you, Mr. President, great success.
I also acknowledge Mr. Liu Jieyi, Ambassador of
China, for his successful conduct of the proceedings of
the Council during November. Our special appreciation
goes to Guatemala for the hard work and leadership in
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

Let me begin by welcoming the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and by thanking them
for the reports they submitted. We studied them with
great attention.

At the outset, I would like to point out that
the cooperation of the Republic of Serbia with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has been based on continuity and that it
continues to evolve unimpeded and at a very high level.
That fact was also confirmed in the latest reports of
the ICTY President and the Prosecutor, in which it was
stated that there are no more outstanding fugitives and
that, in general, Serbia has shown continued diligence
in processing the requests for assistance of the Office
of the Prosecutor.

Proceeding from Serbia's determination of
Serbia to make a contribution to regional peace and
reconciliation, as well as from its readiness to continue
to cooperate constructively with the ICTY, I would like
to take this opportunity to inform the Council on the
concrete results that my country has achieved in its
cooperation with the ICTY, confirmed also this time
round in the ICTY President's and the Prosecutor's
reports of December 2013, just as they were confirmed
in previous reporting periods.

There are no outstanding or overdue requests for
assistance. Summonses were served on time, court
orders were executed and witness interviews were
arranged without delay or difficulty. In that way,
my country has shown that it is not only seriously
committed to abiding by its international obligations but
also that, by taking each and every step in good faith,
it is resolved to contribute to achieving international
justice and regional reconciliation. Concrete examples
and results reflect Serbia's cooperation with the ICTY
in the best possible way, and I shall mention a few here.

In July 2011, Serbia completed cooperation with
the ICTY on the transfer of all accused persons.
Serbia responded to more than 3,350 requests for
assistance received from the Office of the Prosecutor
or the defence counsel regarding access to documents,
archives and witnesses. Only those of a more recent
date are still being processed. No request for assistance
from the Office of the Prosecutor or defence counsel
regarding access to archives has been rejected, while
all witnesses for whom waivers were requested were
granted. That enabled them to testify before the ICTY.
According to the data of the Republic of Serbia Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor, 410 individuals indicted
for committing criminal offences under international
humanitarian law have been tried in the courts of the
Republic of Serbia.

Serbia has shown in a demonstrable way that
it is fully committed to the quest for truth about the
crimes committed during the armed conflicts on the
territory of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and to bringing those responsible for the
crimes to justice, irrespective of their nationality or the
nationality of the victims.

My country is of the opinion that the Security
Council, whose resolution provided the basis for
the establishment of the ICTY, has an exceptionally
important role and responsibility in ensuring the
impartiality of the Tribunal, respect for basic
international legal norms and laws and in eliminating
all forms of politicization and voluntarism in its work.

In that context, let me draw the Council's attention
to the case of Vojislav Seselj, whose detention, lasting
almost 11 years without a judicial decision, is a gross
violation of basic human rights and civilizational
values. The length of the detention in this case is in
contravention of the provisions of the United Nations
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European
Convention on Human Rights. The two international
documents provide for a fair and public hearing within a
reasonable time. Although the term "a reasonable time"
may be interpreted elastically and vary from case to
case, an ll-year lapse of time can hardly be considered
a reasonable time. We also believe that the detention of
a person without a first-instance decision is tantamount
to the denial of the presumption of innocence. We are
convinced that the case is less than conducive to the
ICTY's reputation and that concrete measures should
be taken speedily in order to unlock the legal and
procedural deadlock in which the case finds itself.

Bearing in mind that Serbia is firmly committed to
cooperation with the ICTY, and the fact that 20 years
have elapsed since its establishment, I would like to
point out once again that my country attaches great
importance to the initiative that those convicted by The
Hague Tribunal be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. This initiative is motivated by the desire
of Serbia to assume responsibility for its nationals and
other persons convicted by the Tribunal serving their
senstences, as well as by its belief that the purpose
of punishment - which implies, among other things,
the resocialization of convicted persons - can hardly
be achieved if they serve their sentences in far-off
countries, the language of which they do not understand
or speak, and when family visits and contacts are
reduced to a minimum.

Yet today, the States that emerged in the territory of

the former Yugoslavia have no possibility to conclude
agreements with the ICTY on the serving of sentences,
even though President Meron said in his report that,
in addition to 17 existing agreements, additional
agreements should be concluded in order to complete
the ICTY's mandate successfully.

In that context, let me recall that since 2009 Serbia
has requested the signing of such an agreement with the
ICTY. From the outset, we have very actively sought to
promote this initiative. Serbian officials have written
to the United Nations and the ICTY on a number of
occasions. Regrettably, no progress has been made
because the question continues to be determined by the
Secretary-General's recommendation to the Security
Council in May 1993 that "the enforcement of the
sentences should take place outside the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. While that position may have been
justifiable in 1993 at the time of the war in the former
Yugoslavia, it is clear that the situation has changed and
lost its relevance a long time ago.

The results of the years-long cooperation with
the ICTY indicate that my country takes this question
seriously and that it is ready to accept international
supervision of the enforcement of sentences and
to provide clear guarantees that convicted persons
will not be paroled without a decision of the ICTY,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals or some other organ or body of the United
Nations to be made responsible for this matter in the
future.

Let me also recall that, on 20 January 2011,
the Republic of Serbia signed an agreement on
the enforcement of criminal sentences with the
International Criminal Court. Under the agreement,
persons convicted before the Court for war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide may serve their
sentences in Serbia. My country is the first country in
South-East Europe to sign such an agreement - Great
Britain, Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Finland having
done so earlier. Once again, I express my country's
expectation that the Security Council will vest its full
attention on this initiative and enable those convicted
by the Tribunal to serve their sentences in Serbia.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
readiness of Serbia to, and interest in, addressing the
question of the ICTY archives. We advised the Security
Council of our official position on the matter in October
2008. My country is ready to participate actively in all
future discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil its obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals.

In conclusion, let me point out once again that
Serbia is committed to regional peace, stability and
reconciliation. In that commitment, however, the
quest and respect for justice and fairness are of vital
importance. The international judicial system has a key
role to play in the process, and the Tribunal is duty-
bound to make a contribution by ensuring full respect
for international norms, human rights and the right to a
fair hearing and defence. The influence of the Tribunal
and its decisions are fully felt both within regional and
national confines. Attaining justice is just as important
as establishing the difference between fairness and
vengeance all over again, for the two notions send
basically different social and political messages to our
societies.

