I would like to thank Ms. Williams for her briefing today and for her dedication to peace in Libya. I would also like to thank Ambassador Sautter for his first briefing as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, and thank his predecessor, Ambassador Schulz, for his chairmanship. As the recent demonstrations have shown, many Libyans aspire to peace, security, development and an effective response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Belgium therefore welcomes the statements made by Mr. Serraj and Mr. Saleh regarding a ceasefire. We call on all actors, inside and outside Libya, to follow suit and stop the war logic. All mercenaries need to leave. No valid reason exists for not responding positively and immediately to these calls for a ceasefire. A dialogue remains the only sustainable solution to the crisis, and the parameters are well known: the Libyan Political Agreement, the principles agreed in Berlin, the three-track approach of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and resolution 2510 (2020). We welcome the steps taken by the Joint Military Commission in the 5+5 format and urge additional progress in order to sustain a reliable ceasefire. We also welcome the positive developments on the political and economic tracks, with regard to which the start of the audit of the Central Bank of Libya is to be highlighted. Progress on these three tracks will enable the complaints expressed by the demonstrators in recent days to be addressed. In that context, the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General to help guide the political process is indispensable. The arms embargo continues to be flagrantly disregarded. I want to be clear: there is no excuse for not respecting the arms embargo. Violating it means contributing to the spiral of violence, exacerbating tensions among Libyans and severely undermining a lasting way out of the crisis. More important, it means contributing to the loss of life of innocent civilians, Libyans and migrants. I would like to commend the efforts of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI in that regard. All parties need to protect civilians. My country considers that widespread impunity will undermine a durable reconciliation among Libyans. National courts, transitional justice and the International Criminal Court all have a complementary role to play. I welcome the establishment of a fact-finding mission by the Human Rights Council to investigate violations and abuses of international human rights law and international humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. I call on all Libyans parties to cooperate with the mission so that it can start its work in earnest. We remain concerned about the excessive use of force against demonstrators in Tripoli and the arbitrary arrest of a number of civilians. With regard to the UNSMIL mandate, which we will discuss in the coming days, the mission currently has insufficient capacity to systematically monitor, verify and attribute cases of violations against children, which we all know to be widespread. We believe that it needs to be strengthened in order to better ensure systematic monitoring and reporting of violence against children, including through language in the future mandate. We are deeply concerned by the continued blockade of oil production, which has disastrous consequences for the economy of the country and the population as a whole. We call for a full resumption, at full capacity, of oil production throughout the country in the interest of the Libyan people, along with the implementation of economic reforms, with a view to agreeing on a fair and transparent distribution mechanism for oil revenues and to enhancing the governance of Libyan economic and financial institutions. Libya's natural resources belong to all Libyans, and their exploitation is vital to maintain the country's economy, particularly given the need to address the COVID-19 pandemic. I urge that the civilian nature of oil infrastructure be respected and encourage further dialogue on how to better share the revenue it generates. In that regard, I welcome the recent announcements and encourage further progress in order to lift the blockade and scale up production. In conclusion, allow me to once again commend the courage and determination of the entire staff of UNSMIL and the whole country team.
