Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me to welcome you among us this morning,
Mr. President. I would like to thank the delegation of
your country, the United Kingdom, for having organized
this important meeting on Somalia at a crucial point in
the reconstruction of the Somali State. I also welcome
among us Ms. Fowsiyo YusufHaji Adan, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement. Our congratulations also go to
Mr. Nicholas Kay on his appointment, and we would
like thank Mr. Augustine Mahiga for the remarkable
work that he did as Head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.

Morocco welcomes the significant progress that
has been seen in Somalia as it proceeds along the path
of reconciliation and peace. A new dynamic has been
launched for the rebuilding of a unified Somali State
following a civil war that has lasted more than 20 years.
The emergence of the new political situation would not
have been possible without the determination of the
Somali people and the impetus given to the process of
political stabilization by the international community.
However, Somalia continues to face a number of
challenges which require significant support from its
various partners.

The deepening of the political and security
achievements made up until now is of primary
importance to enabling Somalia to move assuredly
towards the next political steps, particularly the
establishment of a federal system, the adoption of a
constitution and the holding of the elections planned for
2016. The second London Conference, on 7 May, helped
to maintain the impetus of the international community
to strengthen the capacity of Somalia, particularly in
the areas of security, justice and the management of
public finances, which are critical aspects to ensuring
the stability and the viability of the Somali State.
The gains made in the area of security and the
freeing of Mogadishu and other parts of the country
were decisively important for the success of the
political process and the end of the transitional period
in Somalia. We would like to express in that regard
our thanks to the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, as well as to the
troop-contributing countries for their efforts and their
sacrifices. However, the security situation in Somalia
remains fragile, and the Al-Shabaab movement is still
a threat to the peace and security of the country. The
loosening of the arms embargo through the resolution
2093 (2013) should strengthen the Somali security
forces in order to make it possible for the Somalis to
take ownership of their own security and to ensure
peace throughout the country.

Somalia needs the help of all partners in order to
make progress towards political stability and social
development and in order to establish a sustainable
economy. We welcome resolution 2102 (2013), on the
creation of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and its deployment, which was adopted a few
days ago. It is important to stress the need for there to
be greater coordination of international assistance in
order to avoid fragmentation and duplication of efforts.

National ownership by the Somalis of the process
of reconstruction of their State should be one of the
guiding principles for any assistance provided to
Somalia, both in terms of political facilitation and
economic development. The six priorities of the
Somali president provide an adequate framework for
strengthening stability in the country on the basis of a
Somali national vision.
We welcome the resumption of economic activity
in the capital, Mogadishu, thanks to the improvement
of the security situation. The promotion of investment
in activities that create jobs and the provision of basic
services to the Somali population are necessary for
ensuring that the gains obtained in matters of peace
are lasting. Despite a steep drop in the number of
new attacks, piracy along the coast of Somalia is
still a worrying concern for international shipping in
the region. Solving the problem of piracy in Somalia
requires a wide-ranging approach that tackles the root
causes, as well as continued international cooperation
based on coherent, coordinated action. To that end, the
international community must continue to show proof
of its solidarity and step up its efforts to conquer the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia.

