Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the briefers - Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and Chairperson
Mogae - for updating us today.

As all Security Council members are aware,
the long-term stability of South Sudan is dependent
upon securing a political agreement. To that end, we
welcome the work of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) on the High-Level
Revitalization Forum, in particular the Agreement on
the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access. I would like to thank, and pay
tribute to IGAD and Ambassador Ismail Wais, who led
efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table. The
Revitalization Forum provides the best opportunity to
secure a political agreement. It must be truly inclusive
in order to deliver an agreement that is accepted and
supported by the people of South Sudan. Women, youth
and the broader South Sudanese civil society must all
be allowed to participate meaningfully.

We made the Council's expectations clear
in the presidential statement issued last month
(S/PRST/2017/25) - an end to hostilities, cost and
consequences for those who obstruct the Revitalization
Forum process, and unimpeded humanitarian access.
Let us now take stock ofthe progress that has been made.

First, hostilities have not ended. The cessation of
hostilities agreement was violated almost immediately
after it was signed, and fighting continues across the
country today. We are particularly concerned about
the fighting in Koch. The significant military build-
up by the Government and by opposition groups in the
Malakal-Tonga corridor are also extremely worrying, as
are potential offensives in Yei and Akobo. We are also
concerned by the movements of First Vice-President
Taban Deng and his 500 troops in Jonglei state, which
are both a violation of the cessation of hostilities and an
inflammatory action in the run-up to peace talks. We
therefore welcome the statement of the Chairperson of
the IGAD Council of Ministers of 29 December, which
strongly condemned the violations and called for those
responsible to be held to account.

That brings me to our second
expectation - consequences for those who obstruct
the negotiations process, which includes violations of
the cessation of hostilities. We call on IGAD to use its
Council of Ministers meeting on 27 January to set out
defined consequences for violators. IGAD can identify
such individuals and, collectively, we can take action
against them. The Security Council must be ready to
support IGAD, using all the measures at its disposal.

We welcome the joint statement by the United
Nations and the African Union on 12 January and fully
support South Sudanese civil society, which is calling
for accountability for violating the ceasefire. We are
concerned by the recent threats against civil society
groups as they comment on the cessation of hostilities,
which, as signatories to the agreement, they have every
right to do.

We also welcome the efforts of the Chair of the
new Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism to increase the timeliness of
reporting. There have been marked improvements in
the short time that he has held that post. We hope that
he will build on those, including reporting on gender-
based violence. An effective cessation of hostilities
monitoring body is crucial if we are to prevent further
violence. The Mechanism has a difficult job to do, and
we call on the Government and opposition groups to
stop impeding and criticizing it. We welcome the recent
JMEC statement on that.

The consequences of the conflict are known all too
well by the peple of South Sudan, who are victims of
the dire and deteriorating humanitarian situation. Two
thirds of the population are in need of humanitarian
assistance in what is a man-made disaster. We condemn
unreservedly sexual violence in South Sudan. In
November, despite the President's decree calling for
unimpeded access, nine aid workers were killed and aid
was obstructed on more than 100 occasions. All parties
to the conflict bear a responsibility for that, but the
Government alone is responsible for the bureaucratic
impediments - such as the $4,000 work permit fees
which continue to hinder the efforts of the relief
agencies to save lives.

The Council visited Addis Ababa last September
for its annual meeting with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. At that meeting, we
talked about supporting the African Union and its
subregional organizations. Today, citing statements of
IGAD, Chairperson Mogae asked us to make clear the
consequences to those who violate, spoil or derail the
peace agreement. Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
urged us to show that there would be real consequences
for violators. We therefore reiterate our call for an arms
embargo. It would apply equally to all parties and would
not single anyone out for blame. It would send a strong
message to those who undermine the Revitalization
Forum, and strengthen those in the region who are
trying to bring the South Sudanese parties to peace. It
is in line with what the region has called for - clear
consequences for violators.

The parties in South Sudan must start putting the
people of South Sudan first. They must fully engage
with the Revitalization Forum and refrain from
violence. They must allow humanitarian access to all
who need it. We, as the Security Council, must also do
our part to make the consequence of inaction, including
by us around the table, clear because - make no
mistake - inaction is a decision, too. It is a decision
to allow people to be attacked and to die. We must
hold those responsible to account now. The people of
South Sudan can wait no longer. Let us not protect the
warmongers and abusers. Let that not be a stain on the
Council's conscience.

