Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the convening of today's meeting
to consider the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/874) on the latest developments in the situation
in Colombia and the activities of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. We warmly welcome
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, whose presence reflects
the importance that the Colombian authorities attach
to the ongoing peace process in their country. We also
thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for
his comprehensive briefing.

My delegation would like to comment on the
following points in the report: the recent progress in the
implementation of the peace process, the difficulties
that have been encountered and the prospects for the
future. With regard to recent progress, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the Colombian authorities' determination to
continue to cooperate with the Mission with a View to
achieving a just and lasting peace. In that regard, we
were pleased to note the letter to the Security Council
from the Colombian authorities, in agreement with the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC),
requesting the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission, which was due to end on
26 September.

We also welcome the various initiatives launched
by President Ivan Duque Marquez since his accession
to the presidency of Colombia with a view to promoting
a new dynamic in the peace process. They include
appointments to commissions established under the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, the signing of the national
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and
human rights defenders, and the strengthening of
social dialogue.

My country commends the commitment of all
Colombian institutions to providing adequate responses
to key issues related to security, the promotion of
human rights in conflict-affected areas, and the truth,
justice and reparation system. In that regard, we
welcome the adjustments and clarifications made by the
Constitutional Court to the relevant provisions of the
peace agreement when assessing their conformity with
the Constitution. We also welcome the holding of the
first hearing of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and
the referendum on the proposals to address terrorism
and corruption and promote transparency, held at
the initiative of several political parties and with the
support of President Duque.

With regard to the difficulties facing the peace
process, my delegation is concerned about the violence
that has persisted throughout the country. We are
sorry to note the insecurity in areas where training
and reintegration centres for former combatants are
located, which is forcing them to leave the centres. A
number of pressing and sensitive issues also require
sustained attention, as they are a source of concern
for the Council. They include delays in implementing
the process for the economic reintegration of ex-
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo, the growing illegal
economies, clashes between illegal armed groups for
the control of territories, and the issues of victims'
rights and the Special Jurisdiction's independence
and financial autonomy. All of these call for urgent
action on the part of the Colombian authorities and the
international community.

In terms of responding to the difficulties with the
peace process, my delegation urges the Colombian
authorities to redouble their efforts to implement the
peace agreement together with the FARC, including
through measures to restore trust. In that regard, it
is imperative to strengthen the State's presence in all
the conflict zones and to accelerate the process of
economic reintegration by providing adequate financial
resources. Furthermore, while welcoming the steps
already taken in the field of security, my delegation
encourages the Government to continue its efforts
to resolve this thorny issue. We also urge the new
Colombian authorities to engage in discussions with
representatives of the National Liberation Army.

My delegation believes that significant progress
has been made. We therefore urge the Security Council
to support the peace and reconciliation efforts of the
Colombian people and their Government. In that regard,
my country reiterates its support to the Verification
Mission and the United Nations country team in
Colombia for their commitment and the work they have
already accomplished. We particularly commend the
efforts in the area of peacebuilding and related issues.
In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire assures the Colombian
authorities of its Willingness to work with them to ensure
the success of the peace and reconciliation process.

