Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The
United States greatly appreciates the broad support for the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) shown in the
Security Council this past Wednesday and around the
world in the past several days. We emphasize that we and
our allies began military action only with the greatest
reluctance, after all peaceful options had been thoroughly
exhausted. By rejecting a peace settlement and escalating
its assault on the people of Kosovo - in violation of
numerous Security Council resolutions - Belgrade chose
the path of war.

Belgrade continues to attack innocent Kosovars. We
have received disturbing reports that Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia forces are using human shields, that non-
combatants are being rounded up in large groups and that
some are being summarily executed. Attempts to verify
these reports have been obstructed by the Belgrade
Government, which has cracked down on independent
journalists in Yugoslavia, harassed and expelled
international media, and clamped down on independent
human rights groups.

Even today Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces
are pressing their offensive against civilians, burning and
looting, and attacking Kosovar Albanian political leaders.
Some 60,000 people have been forced to flee their homes
since the last round of peace talks began in France, and
that number is increasing daily. It stands now at more
than 250,000 displaced persons - one in 10 of Kosovo's
population. This is a humanitarian catastrophe.

Large refugee flows out of Kosovo into
neighbouring countries could have a serious and

 

destabilizing effect. The stability of Albania, of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and of the rest of the region is at stake.

These developments justify sustained military action
to limit Belgrade's ability to threaten and harm innocent
civilians in Kosovo.

I want to be very clear about the following. We
appreciate very much the enormous contribution the
Russian Federation has made to advance the cause of peace
in Kosovo and in the Balkans, in particular in the context
of the Contact Group. The Group's efforts to uphold human
rights and to negotiate an equitable settlement to the crisis
have been endorsed on several occasions by this Council.

The avenue to peace is clear. In resolutions 1199
(1998) and 1203 (1998) the Security Council laid out the
steps Belgrade must take to resolve this crisis. Belgrade,
however, has chosen to defy repeatedly the will of the
international community.

The draft resolution before us today alleges that
NATO is acting in violation of the United Nations Charter.
This turns the truth on its head. The United Nations Charter
does not sanction armed assaults upon ethnic groups, or
imply that the international community should turn a blind
eye to a growing humanitarian disaster.

NATO's actions are completely justified. They are
necessary to stop the violence and to prevent a further
deterioration of peace and stability in the region. The
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could
quickly bring NATO's actions to a halt by ceasing their
brutal attacks against the people of Kosovo and moving to
a peace agreement.

This draft resolution should be defeated. If adopted, it
could only encourage President Milosevic to continue or
even to intensify military repression of the civilian
population of Kosovo. Furthermore, if adopted, it would
damage prospects for a negotiated settlement and make
further bloodshed more likely. In short, the draft resolution
does nothing to advance the cause of peace in the Balkans,
a cause that the international community and the Security
Council have worked long and hard to achieve.

