Mr. Kolby (Norway): From Kosovo to the Congo,
from Sierra Leone to East Timor, the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of
former combatants is playing an increasingly important role
in United Nations peace operations.

Norway would therefore like to commend the Security
Council and you, Mr. President, for calling this formal
meeting, and to thank the Secretary-General for an excellent
report on the subject. We would also like to commend the
delegation of Malaysia for its efforts. Norway fully supports
the objectives and recommendations of the Secretary-
General.

Following armed conflict, particularly internal
conflicts, a comprehensive approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is necessary in order to
prevent the recurrence of violence. Incorporating political,
security, economic and social objectives, DDR provides a
bridge from the cessation of hostilities to sustainable peace.
As such, DDR must not only focus on short-term
demobilization programmes, but also be an integral part of
the longer-term process of reconciling formerly hostile
communities and reintegrating ex-combatants, with a special
emphasis on child soldiers and other vulnerable groups.

It is essential that United Nations officials and others
who take part in DDR verification operations have in-depth
knowledge of all the mechanisms involved in this process.
Excellent work has been done by the United Nations and
other organizations and countries to strengthen education
and training. The Lessons Learned Unit study on DDR in
a peacekeeping environment is among the substantial
contributions to this work. Norway is pleased to have had
the opportunity to support this study and will participate in
its follow-up.

One important aspect is the security of ex-combatants
who comply with United Nations requests to hand in their
weapons. For many, this is a difficult choice. Their
comrades who do not make this courageous decision often
see them as traitors. They can therefore become victims, of
aggression not only by former enemies, but also by former
brothers in arms. To avoid a situation where those who
comply with United Nations requests are in fact punished,
the security of disarmed soldiers must be an integral part
of any DDR programme.

The proliferation, misuse and excessive accumulation
of small arms and light weapons is an area of great
concern in carrying out peace operations. Most
contemporary conflicts have been fought with small arms
and light weapons; international humanitarian law is often
disregarded and civilians, as well as humanitarian
operations and United Nations and other personnel, are
often targeted. Proper safeguarding or destruction of post-
conflict stockpiles of small arms and light weapons can
alleviate such problems. Norway renders support to
individual States, regional and multilateral organizations
requiring assistance in weapons collection and destruction
programmes. In this connection, Norway supports the
United Nations Development Programme's trust fund for
weapons collection, which is providing development for
communities in return for arms they surrender.
Furthermore, it is important that disarmament and
weapons destruction be incorporated as an element of
peace settlements and that peace operations are given
clear mandates in this regard.

Funding for DDR activities is a crucial challenge
and responsibility for the international community.
Inadequate financial support can undermine peace
implementation efforts. Norway will continue to provide
a high level of voluntary contributions to the activities of
the United Nations system in this field. My Government
intends to further increase our assistance to peace-building
efforts in Sierra Leone and elsewhere, particularly in
Africa, in line with our large and long-standing
engagement in that region. Like the Secretary-General and
other speakers, Norway is encouraged by the experience
of Mozambique and would like to commend the United
Nations and the Government of Mozambique for the
successful efforts made.

As the Secretary-General points out, reintegration
represents a particularly complex part of the DDR
process. The support of the international community for
national plans for reconciliation, reconstruction and long-
term social and economic development is crucial in order
to persuade ex-combatants to rejoin civil society and thus
to obtain lasting peace. In the View of the Norwegian
Government, combating poverty and underdevelopment is
vital to preventing conflicts and their recurrence. The
international donor community must follow up on the
Secretary-General's call for increased development
assistance to get at the root causes of violent conflicts.

 

My Government is committed to continue Norway's efforts
in this regard.

