Mrs. Cordeiro Dunlop (Brazil): I first wish to
congratulate the United States on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I also commend your delegation, Madam
President, for holding this open debate well in advance
of the scheduled renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
This meeting provides an opportunity for the wider
membership to express its views to the Council in a
timely manner.

I warmly welcome Prime Minister Michele
Duvivier Pierre-Louis to the Council today. Her
outstanding leadership has certainly contributed to the
recent success in Haiti. 1 thank her for her statement. I
am also pleased to welcome President Clinton among
us today. His appointment as the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti attests to the importance that
the Secretary-General attaches to that country.
Mr. Clinton's generous decision to put his remarkable
prestige, leadership and experience in the service of the
Haitian people is truly commendable.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
informative briefing.

Brazil would like to associate itself with the
comments made by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

Brazil welcomes the recent positive
developments in Haiti, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his latest report (S/2009/439). The holding
of elections for the Senate, the achievements in the
consideration of the legislative agenda, the enhanced
dialogue on the main national questions through
presidential commissions and the gradual strengthening
of domestic institutions are all encouraging indicators.
Also noteworthy are the domestic macroeconomic
stability and the positive forecast for economic growth
in 2009. The cancellation of Haiti's bilateral and
multilateral debt is yet another positive indication of
progress.

Last but not least, the personal involvement of
former President Clinton will certainly contribute to
keeping Haiti high on the international agenda.

All of this allows for the cautious optimism that
many, including the Secretary-General, have expressed
with regard to Haiti. There is a feeling that a priceless
window of opportunity has been opened and conditions
seem ripe for the country to consolidate the gains
achieved in recent years and lay the foundation for
long-term development.

For this positive scenario to become reality, the
Haitian authorities and the international community
must renew and improve their partnership. The
political and economic leadership of Haiti must show
practical commitment to the well-being of the people.
This implies delivering a modicum of public services
to all Haitians and, just as important, putting aside
differences in order to agree on and implement the
constitutional and other reforms that will ensure
adequate governance in the years to come.

For its part, the international community must
improve the quality and quantity of its assistance to
Haiti. Increased coordination among donors and full
alignment of their aid with Haiti's national priorities
are indispensable. It is also vital that the prompt and
full disbursement of pledges made in April at the
Washington donors conference be guaranteed.

Such partnership is particularly relevant in
addressing what the Secretary-General describes in his
report as the most acute problem in Haiti's human
rights landscape: the lack of progress in the realization
of economic, social and cultural rights of the people.
We all know that the progress achieved in the area of
security is not enough to ensure the country's stability.

The key to the sustainability of our common
peacekeeping and stabilization efforts is employment
generation. Peace will thrive only once poverty and
deprivation are substantially reduced. It is imperative
to address the current infrastructure bottlenecks, attract
private investment and generate new jobs. We are
confident that President Clinton will contribute to
disseminating this vision and encourage the fulfilment
of the pledges that will make available the resources
needed by the country.

Brazil very much praises the excellent work of
MINUSTAH, in particular its role in maintaining
stability throughout the country and supporting the
Government's efforts to build institutional capacity.
The latter task is of crucial importance. Without
capacity-building, our collective and individual
political and financial investment in Haiti will be lost
and United Nations success short-lived. This is
especially true in the case of the Haitian National
Police. Every effort must continue to be made to ensure
that Haiti can soon rely on security forces capable of
operating in a professional and autonomous manner.

The quick-impact projects executed by
MINUSTAH have proven increasingly important for
the lives of many Haitians. As recommended in the
most recent report of the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti
(E/2009/105), it would be important to envision
possibilities for greater synergy between the mandate
of the mission and the development needs of Haiti.

In the light of the foregoing, Brazil welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
mandate of MINUSTAH for one year. We have
consistently indicated that Brazilian forces are ready to
stay in Haiti for as long as the Haitian Government and
the Security Council deem necessary.

We also support the proposed reconfiguration of
the security forces of the mission. The changes actually
mirror positive developments on the ground, while
maintaining the same overall size of the contingent,
which is the correct approach to take given the still-
fragile security situation.

