Hungary aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). We thank the Secretary-General for his statement and leadership, as well as the briefers for their insightful remarks. On the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), Hungary reaffirms its commitment to the full and effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Hungary has demonstrated its firm dedication to delivering on the agenda at the national level since its inception. Last December, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Trade organized a workshop for the relevant ministries, institutions and academia, which was dedicated to the effective and full implementation of the agenda, with special attention to gender-based violence in armed conflict. The Hungarian Defence Forces have incorporated training and education on resolution 1325 (2000) - including on sexual exploitation and abuse, and conflict-related sexual violence - into national predeployment training courses and international courses, such as the International Military Observer Course. In addition, they regularly carry out intensive training courses related to the women and peace and security agenda for non-commissioned officers and officers. Moreover, women contribute significantly to the work of the Hungarian police and military forces; they account for 23 per cent of law enforcement and 20 per cent of the armed forces. The participation of female officers in all civilian crisis management and peacekeeping missions is ensured and encouraged. In order to increase the number of deployed female personnel, we are working on projects that contribute to recruiting a higher percentage of female soldiers for deployment, such as creating a better work-life balance or atypical forms of employment. Our efforts should be embedded in a wider agenda for the empowerment of all women and girls, and ensuring the full enjoyment of all their human rights. The twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the entry into the Decade of Action for Delivering the 2030 Agenda, as well as the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year provide remarkable momentum for taking a holistic approach and accelerating efforts to this end. Women should be free from the scourge of conflict-related sexual and gender- based violence, as well as sexual exploitation and abuse. They deserve comprehensive, survivor and human rights-centred, immediate and long-term support, as well as accountability and redress. Hungary has been regular contributor to the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women to support this endeavour. Peace is not possible without women. Women's full, equal, meaningful and institutionalized participation at all stages and levels of peace processes, post- conflict recovery efforts, in the implementation of peace agreements and wider decision-making structures, as a key to preventing conflict and putting societies on the track of sustainable and inclusive peace. These efforts require the cooperation of all stakeholders: Member States, regional and international organizations and civil society. Hungary is firmly committed to protecting and empowering women and girls belonging to minorities, to upholding their rights, including their freedom of religion and belief, and to amplifying their voices globally, with special regard to persecuted religious communities, such as Christians. History has shown that women's participation is crucial to achieving sustainable peace, and we call on the Security Council to keep this important issue on its agenda as a priority.
