The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

We are meeting once again to discuss a report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/724) that clearly
outlines how the principles and rules of humanitarian
law are repeatedly and systematically violated.
International calls for an end to the violence in Syria,
for humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
are ignored, and the resolutions of this very Council are
disregarded. Yet we must continue our efforts to push
for a political solution to the conflict and to alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people. In our response to
the plight of the Syrian crisis on children, we should be
able to come together.

As we have heard today from Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock and Special Representative Gamba,
our action is urgently needed. Time is running out
for a generation of Syrian children. Syria is the most
dangerous conflict-affected country for children. Last
year was the deadliest yet, and unthinkably, the plight of
Syria's children continues to worsen, with the number
of children killed and injured in the first two months of
2018 almost surpassing last year's total. The Council,
the parties to the conflict and all Member States
listening today must now act to improve the situation
of children trapped in the nightmare of the Syrian war.

To that end, I want to highlight four areas of the
humanitarian response where we can and must do better.
Acting to protect children in Syria today in these four
areas will not only improve their lives, but will help
build peace in Syria and prevent a relapse into conflict.

First is access. Over 5 million children are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Resolution 2427 (2018)
calls on all parties to allow and facilitate safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to children, and it
condemns unlawful denial of humanitarian access and
depriving civilians, particularly children, of objects
indispensable to their survival. Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock has reported to us today, and indeed
every month, on the unlawful denial of humanitarian
access. That is also having far-reaching indirect
consequences that are not always understood, but
include negative coping mechanisms such as increased
child labour, the recruitment of children to armed
groups and an increase in child marriage. Aid workers
report that 14-year-old girls are mothers to more than
one child.

We call on all parties to immediately grant access
to all those in need, keeping all options open for the
United Nations to reach as many people as possible,
including cross-border options,increased United
Nations cross-line access, including to areas that have
recently changed control, and to protect humanitarian
workers so that they can continue to do their job.

Secondly, with regard to education, as we have heard
today from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Virginia Gamba, one in three schools in Syria
is closed. The result is that over 2 million children are
denied their right to education. School should offer
a place of stability and safety for children. However,
attacks on schools have been systematic and rampant.
Last year 67 attacks were reported, most of which
inflicted by air strikes. Children who have been
besieged, such as those in eastern Ghouta, have often
been robbed of several years of schooling.

Resolution 2427 (2018) again urges all parties to
refrain from actions that impede children's access to
education and strongly condemns attacks on schools.
All parties to the conflict must cease all attacks on
schools and give all children, including those without
civil documentation, access to schools. We call for the
deconfliction of schools to be stepped up, particularly
in Idlib province. All attacks against schools, in
contravention of international humanitarian law, must
be investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
We also call on all of us donors to step up funding for
education as part of the emergency response.

The third area is mental health. The stress of war
is often too much for adults; the effects on children
can be profound and lifelong. Resolution 2427 (2018)
stresses the importance of funding mental health and
psychosocial programming in humanitarian contexts
and ensuring that all affected children receive the
support they need. The war in Syria has created a
mental health crisis among children, with children
exhibiting frequent symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder. Two thirds of children have lost a loved
one, had their homes bombed or suffered war-related
injuries. The situation is further exacerbated by sexual
violence, forced marriages, sexual enslavement and
trafficking of both girls and boys. Less than 5 per cent
of humanitarian funding in Syria is channelled towards
protection, mental health, psychosocial services or
education in emergencies. We therefore encourage
donors and the humanitarian community to help us
change that today.

Fourth is protection. The year 2017 saw the highest
number to date of grave violations against children in
Syria. The majority ofthe children killed and injured are
victims of air strikes, with systematic attacks against
hospitals and medical facilities contributing to the high
numbers of child casualties. Many have been separated
from their families. Girls in internally displaced person
camps are particularly vulnerable to sexual violence.
Children with a perceived association with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant or Da'esh have unique
protection concerns. Resolution 2427 (2018) emphasizes
that children that have been recruited by armed groups
should be treated primarily as victims of violations of
international law, and it urges a focus on rehabilitation
and reintegration for children formerly associated with
armed groups. Syria should be no exception.

I reiterate our call on all parties to immediately
implement resolution 2401 (2018) and existing de-
escalation agreements in Idlib and the south and to
fully respect their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law. We
specifically call on Syria to implement the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
it has ratified, and to immediately cease committing
the six grave violations listed.

Accountability for all violations and abuses against
children and others must be ensured. We will not relent
in our demands for justice at the international and
national levels, We continue to believe that the situation
in Syria should be referred to the International Criminal
Court. Until that time, we support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and other relevant mechanisms in their efforts
to bring about justice for crimes committed in Syria.
We also call on our humanitarian partners to integrate
protection earlier into the first response, and on
donors to step up funding to protection efforts. That is
particularly urgent in the south.

We will not stop calling for full respect for
international law, including international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles, not least with regard
to access. Together we must shoulder the responsibility
entrusted to us. I want to voice my support for the three
very concrete asks made just now by the representative
of the United Kingdom. In particular, we are deeply
concerned about the safety of humanitarian and medical
personnel, civil defence workers, civil society, human
rights activists and journalists who are at particular
risk of being targeted by the Syrian forces We will
follow developments closely until our next meeting,
when we will take stock of the implementation of those
three requests.

Were it not for the brave and determined efforts of
humanitarian, health and child protection workers, the
situation of children in Syria would be even worse. I
want to commend the United Nations and its partner
organizations for all the work that is being done to
assist children in Syria. On a monthly basis, UNICEF
alone reaches 3 million people in Syria. I hope that
today's meeting can help to renew our efforts to help
and protect those children, to avoid losing an entire
generation that deserves and needs our support.

I now resume my functions as President of
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

