Ms. DiCarlo: The conflict in eastern Ukraine is
now in its fifth year. It may no longer make international
headlines, but it is neither dormant nor frozen. It is very
much alive and requires our attention, in particular to
alleviate the human cost.

Repeated pledges to respect the ceasefire have
not stopped the fighting, far from it. While there has
been an overall reduction of violence and casualties
since 2015, the killing, destruction and immense
suffering continues. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the civilian death toll of the conflict stands at more
than 2,700, with up to 9,000 injured. An estimated
1.6 million people remain internally displaced - the
largest uprooted population in Europe and among the
10 largest in the world.

Today's Council meeting is the first on the situation
in Ukraine since 2 February 2017 (see S/PV.7876),
when an upsurge in violence threatened to spiral out of
control. In the intervening period, diplomatic talks have
continued - in the Normandy format, the Trilateral
Contact Group and through bilateral processes. Despite
such commendable efforts, the security situation on
the ground remains volatile, with the continued use
of weapons proscribed by the Minsk agreements. The
relative calm that held in the early weeks of 2018 was
followed in April and May by a sharp increase in the
number of victims.

The United Nations is deeply concerned about the
recent deterioration of the situation at the contact line,
including in the area around the Donetsk filtration
station. We join the calls by Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chief Monitor,
Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, on 18 May and by the
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office
in Ukraine, Ambassador Martin Sajdik, on 22 May
for an immediate cessation of fighting. The violence
puts civilian lives at risk and causes destruction of
infrastructure, on which people depend for their basic
needs on both sides of the contact line. In the light
of recent reports of increased military preparedness
along the contact line, we highlight the need for the
utmost restraint.

On 17 February 2015, the Council adopted resolution
2202 (2015), which endorsed the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
The Council called on all parties to fully implement
the package of measures, including a comprehensive
ceasefire. The Minsk agreements remain the foundation
for the international community's commitment to
restoring peace in eastern Ukraine. Yet, more three
years since the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015),
the Minsk provisions remain largely unimplemented.
Negotiations appear to have lost momentum, with the
main stakeholders unable to reach agreement on key
steps. Except for the exchange of detainees during
the Christmas period last year, efforts to move the
talks forward have achieved little so far. Practical
solutions are often identified but not followed through.
Meanwhile, discussions on a potential international
peace operation have so far been inconclusive.

The United Nations continues to provide
humanitarian assistance, human rights monitoring
and development support, including in the framework
of Ukraine's reform efforts. But the scale and urgency
of needs resulting from the conflict remain immense.
There are more than halfa million civilians living within
five kilometres of the line of contact, subjected night
and day to shelling, gunfire, landmines and unexploded
ordnance. Children miss out on vital education. Health
problems are worsening, with an increase in the number
of cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.
The area around the contact line is now the third most
mine-contaminated area in the world. Residential areas,
as well as critical infrastructure, are frequently shelled,
deliberately or accidentally. We call on all concerned to
take the necessary measures to protect civilians and to
uphold international human rights obligations.

The United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine continues to report on human rights
violations and abuses carried out on both sides of the
contact line. In accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, the monitoring of the situation
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sebastopol is being carried out, but with great difficulty
due to a lack of access.

As a consequence of the conflict, eastern Ukraine
is facing a serious humanitarian crisis. Restrictions and
impediments on international humanitarian access to
conflict-affected areas continue to limit aid delivery
to those in need. With 3.4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, we urge everyone to facilitate
humanitarian access and encourage Member States to
do more to support efforts to address the crisis. The
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, will shortly report further on the
humanitarian situation.

The conflict has also had a tragic impact on
families from other nations. We are all aware of the
recent update on the investigation into the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. In its resolution 2166
(2014) the Security Council demanded that all States
cooperate fully with efforts to establish accountability.
As the Secretary-General has expressed, establishing
the truth about that event is an important part of
achieving justice for the victims and their families.

The United Nations strongly supports the lead
efforts on Ukraine of the Normandy four, the Trilateral
Contact Group, the OSCE and other key actors. The
work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission takes
place under extremely difficult circumstances. The
Mission suffered its first fatality in April of last year.
The United Nations calls for full respect for the OSCE
Mission's freedom of movement and for an immediate
end to all use of force and threats against its monitors.
We look forward to hearing an update today from the
Chief Monitor of the Mission, Ambassador Apakan.

The Secretary-General travelled to Kyiv early in
his tenure to highlight the serious concern ofthe United
Nations with regard to the situation in Ukraine and the
plight of the people affected by the conflict. The visit in
July 2017 demonstrated support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly resolutions.

The Secretary-General has consistently called
for a demonstration of the necessary political will to
cease hostilities and to end the suffering of the civilian
population - a call he reiterated in his statement
of 23 December 2017, on the eve of the so-called
Christmas ceasefire. In his New Year message to the
General Assembly this year, the Secretary-General also
called for revitalizing relevant mediation initiatives
in Europe, including the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine. We hope the
intensification of diplomatic engagements in recent
weeks will generate the necessary political impetus for
progress in implementing the Minsk agreements and
improving the prospects for a settlement of the conflict.
To overcome the status quo, it is imperative to inject
efforts with new political energy.

The Ukraine conflict is first and foremost a tragedy
for the Ukrainian people, but it also takes place in a
context of increasing challenges to the international
peace and security framework. The conflict continues
to test the credibility of international and regional
organizations and erodes the trust Member States need
to work together in the interest of the stability of Europe.

Despite the efforts to reach a settlement, a
breakthrough remains elusive. We cannot allow
ourselves to give in to fatigue or complacency. We
must continue to pursue peace with renewed vigour and
ensure the implementation of resolution 2202 (2015). In
that regard, we reiterate our support for the lead efforts
of the OSCE and the Normandy format. For its part,
the United Nations remains committed to supporting
the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
a manner that fully upholds the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine, in accordance
with all the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
