The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Faki
Mahamat for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire.

I am particularly honoured to preside over this high-
level Council debate in the framework of the activities
chosen by Cote d'Ivoire to distinguish its Security
Council presidency during the month of December.
This is an important moment for my country, coming
27 years after its last term on the Security Council.
Our presidency also comes more than one year after the
removal of Cote d'Ivoire from the Security Council's
agenda and the closure, in 2017, of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) after 13 years of
presence on our territory. It must be said that it was a
genuine success story.

Cote d'Ivoire assumes the rotating presidency of
the Security Council at a time marked by upheaval
at the international level, with a reshaping of certain
balances. Our presence in this prestigious forum offers
us the opportunity to reiterate our faith in a balanced
multilateral system that allows everyone to make their
voice heard, howsoever weak it may be, and to see their
aspirations taken into consideration. In this pivotal
period, our world is called to show greater solidarity and
understanding so as to overcome the peace and security
challenges we all face. In that context, our presidency
will be characterized by openness, the sharing of
experiences and collaboration in order to create the
conditions for consensus on the most difficult issues at
all times. We also want to expand the range of Security
Council responses to the various issues before it.

Moreover, during its presidency my country will
pay close attention to African issues - and here I
thank Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat for his
presence - which sadly and overwhelmingly dominate
our agenda and require the special attention and
full commitment of each of the African countries. I
therefore invite Council members to respond favourably
to Africa's expectations and calls for greater solidarity
in financing its peace support operations, and I thank
the Secretary-General for all his initiatives in this area.
In view of the many challenges to international
peace and security in our ever-changing world, the
United Nations and the Security Council are more
indispensable than ever before in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts. I would therefore like to express
my encouragement to the Secretary-General for the
ambitious reform of our shared Organization that he
has initiated, the outcome of which will be an even
more effective Organization.

As I said, C6te d'Ivoire enjoyed the unprecedented
commitment of the international community,
particularly the United Nations and the Security
Council, for more than a decade. Indeed, in managing
the crisis that my country endured, the Security
Council adopted more than 50 resolutions. Some of
those resolutions, in particular those relating to the
certification of elections and the protection of civilians,
constitute new and courageous developments that will
remain engraved in the annals of the Council.

I can speak to the Council today thanks to the
determination and efforts of the Ivorian people who
elected me and to the remarkable commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union - whose high
officials, Mr. Faki Mahamat and Mr. Jean-Claude
Brou, I welcome here today - as well as of the United
Nations, through UNOCI. I pay warm tribute to
ECOWAS for the role it played in those initial moments
of crisis recovery.

I express my gratitude to then-Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire at the time of
the crisis, Mr. Choi Young-Jin, for their courage, their
determination and their commitment to defending the
ideals of peace of the United Nations.

On behalf of the Ivorian nation, I pay tribute to the
memory of the 150 peacekeepers who sacrificed their
lives to save others and to bring peace and stability to
my country. I express the appreciation of the Ivorian
people to their countries and their families, as well as
to the great family of the United Nations.

I also pay tribute to a worthy son of Africa - the
seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations - for
his outstanding contribution to peace in the world. That
is Mr. Kofi Annan, the great humanist, who passed
away on 18 August and whose voice and wisdom will
be missed by the great causes of the world.

The theme of our debate - "Post-conflict
reconstruction and peace, security and stability" - is
of great importance to my country, given its recent
history. That theme offers us the opportunity to share
our experience in post-crisis reconstruction. It also
gives us an opportunity to discuss the priorities we have
set in order to render irreversible the peace, security and
development that Cote d'Ivoire has enjoyed since the
end of the post-election crisis. We hope that the lessons
learned from our experience will contribute modestly
to enriching the Council's peacebuilding practice,
which has evolved in recent years. Our experience may
also be useful to countries facing similar situations.

In 2011, Cote d'Ivoire emerged from a decade of
crisis a post-election crisis. My country was weakened
in economic, social, human and security terms.
Insecurity was widespread. All economic indicators
were in the red, and economic infrastructure and basic
public services were in a state of worrying disrepair.
That situation could have jeopardized the country's
return to lasting peace and stability if urgent measures
and a comprehensive strategy for reconstruction and
development had not been implemented as soon as the
clashes had come to an end. Recovery became possible
thanks to the restoration of State authority, which
we were able to secure in spite of our four and a half
months of confinement in the Hotel du Gulf in Abidjan,
the economic capital of Cote d'Ivoire.

As has been demonstrated in several situations
considered by the Council, post-crisis reconstruction,
peace and stability depend heavily on the existence
of State structures and institutions capable of fully
performing their functions.

Since 2011, Cote d'Ivoire has based its strategy
for post-crisis reconstruction, peace and stability on
the restoration of its economy, on demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration and on security-sector
reform and reconciliation. We began working on all
those issues while we were confined to the Hotel du Golf
for four and a half months. The fact that our economy
has bounced back so quickly has given the Government
the necessary leverage not only to respond to the
people's immediate social and security needs but also
to work on the country's long-term development. That
was what we had in mind when we were designing and
implementing our presidential emergency programme
during those sleepless nights in the Hotel du Golf,
with the aim of restoring basic social infrastructure,
particularly in fragile rural areas, so as to accelerate
the re-establishment of Government authority in every
region of the country.
We backed up the emergency programme with
national development plans for the periods from 2012 to
2015 and 2016 to 2020, at a total cost of approximately
$72 billion, or almost CFAF40,000 billion, spread over
those years, with major private-sector involvement. The
goal was to have the private sector provide at least 60 per
cent of the financing, because we firmly believe in its
ability to revive the economy and create jobs. Those
investments have enabled a massive transformation
of the economy and brought a growth rate averaging
almost 9 per cent a year between 2012 and 2017. In some
years, in fact, the growth rate has actually reached 9 per
cent, and today it is around 7.5 per cent.

With regard to peace and stability, and with the
support of the United Nations and our financial and
technical partners, we initiated and implemented a
reform of the security sector and a vast and ambitious
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The programme cost $200 million, 72 per
cent of which was funded by the State of Cote d'Ivoire,
and has resulted in the reintegration of more than
65,000 ex-combatants. Beyond that process, which
we managed to carry out in three years, the country's
economic improvement has provided young people and
ex-combatants with many employment opportunities. A
country of 24 million inhabitants has created more than
2 millionjobs since 2012. I am sure that the members of
the Council themselves can see the importance of that
job creation.

Besides that, we are continuing to restructure and
modernize the army, the security services and the
judiciary to make them more effective and professional.
At this point, I would like to pay tribute to our security
and defence forces for their commitment to serving
the nation, their professionalism and their respect for
human rights, in particular during the terrorist attack
on Grand-Bassam in March 2016.

On the political front, the Government has taken
almost complete charge of all the elections that have
been held since 2012, including the 2015 presidential
election and the 2016 referendum, which gave Cote
d'Ivoire a modern Constitution that does a much
better job of guaranteeing the rights and freedoms
of our citizens, especially women. All the elections
have helped to consolidate democracy and the
normalization of national political life in Cote d'lvoire.
Incidentally, we have just concluded a second round of
local elections. The Government has also worked to
strengthen good governance through the establishment
of a high authority for good governance whose mission
is preventing and combating corruption. We have also
funded compensation for victims of the successive
crises we endured, through a process that began in 2015
with the establishment of a special fund with an initial
allocation of CFAF10 billion.

Finally, we have launched several initiatives
to promote and strengthen national reconciliation
and social cohesion, including the establishment of
structures such as a dialogue, truth and reconciliation
commission, a national commission for reconciliation
and the compensation of victims, and a Chamber of
Kings and Traditional Chiefs, based on their role in
settling conflicts and mediating at the local level. In
August, acting on my desire to strengthen reconciliation
and definitively settle the dispute relating to the 2010
post-electoral crisis, I introduced an amnesty law,
aimed at the 800 or so individuals who had been
prosecuted or convicted of offences related to the post-
electoral crisis or to offences against State security.
These initiatives have had significant results. Today
all internally displaced persons have returned to their
places of origin and virtually all Ivorian refugees have
returned to Cote d'Ivoire. We live together in peace and
tolerance.

The case of Cote d'Ivoire should encourage the
Council and the international community to take action
when considering other post-crisis situations, however
complex they may be. First and foremost - and here I
completely agree with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission - post-conflict reconstruction,
peace and lasting stability require a Government that
derives its legitimacy from democratic and transparent
elections. After that, what we found essential was
the establishment and redeployment of a reliable and
trustworthy Administration. Thirdly, what is needed
is a credible reconciliation process and security-
sector reform designed to create a professional army
and security services. And the last requirement is an
emergency investment plan both for providing basic
social services and, of course, creatingjobs, especially
for young people. That process requires sustained
political and technical support and significant financial
resources, which post-conflict countries do not
have. That is why it is important to ensure that the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, remains decisively and resolutely engaged
in such countries while evaluating the conditions it
needs for an orderly withdrawal, as was the case in
Cote d'lvoire.

However, we must recognize that peace, stability
and development in a country emerging from crisis are
also dependent on the regional security environment,
as with my country in West Africa. When we see the
situation in West Africa in general and in the Sahel,
where there is intense terrorist activity in some regions,
we must address those threats together as resolutely as
possible. In that regard, I call on the Council to provide
adequate and sustainable funding for peacekeeping
operations in Africa, especially that of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, an area that continues to be of major
concern for Cote d'Ivoire and all the countries in the
West African subregion.

In conclusion, I want to once again express my
sincere hope that I will see my country's experience
enrich the recommendations and decisions on States
engaged in the complex processes involved in emerging
from crisis and rebuilding post-conflict. Cote d'Ivoire
is determined to spare no effort in providing help to
that end, and that is why we will provide the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and any other theatre of operations in Africa
that may need our help with contingents that we have
trained and equipped.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono
Angue, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Equatorial Guinea, to take the floor.

