Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your work
as President of the Security Council for the month of
November and to thank you for convening this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement and to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
informative briefings.

Colombia has an irrevocable commitment to
international humanitarian law. The current
Government, through the democratic security policy,
has achieved impressive results in the fight against
scourges that threaten civilians and prevent them from
enjoying their rights, such as the activities of illegal
armed groups, drug trafficking and terrorism. We stress
that, given those scourges, the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians rests with the State.
The citizens of my country are supported by one
of the continent's oldest democracies, which over the
past five years has been strengthened and deepened in
all its aspects. In that context, and with the
understanding that international humanitarian
assistance must abide by the principles of humanity,
neutrality and independence, Colombia values the work
being done by the relevant United Nations organs to
support national authorities. That work must be carried
out in accordance with the priorities established by the
national Government.

I should like to reiterate the observation, made by
my delegation in other forums and on previous
occasions, that it is important that the information
prepared by the United Nations organs objectively
reflect the reality of our situation and, particularly with
respect to humanitarian issues, that the efforts and
progress made by the Government in taking measures
to protect civilians be adequately reflected.

In that connection, I should like to refer to the
sixth report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2007/643), which
states in its paragraph 6, "Overall, there are 2.1 million
registered internally displaced persons in Colombia,
though some estimate the total at 3 million". Although
the first figure agrees with our official records, the
second figure cited is significantly higher than the total
number of persons who have registered in the country
over the past 10 years, according to the only
registration system that has existed in Colombia since
1997. That figure is between 7 and 10 times higher
than the number of all people who received assistance,
which is contained in the Global Report 2006 of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the proposed budget for 2007. The figure
seems to be a general estimate for a longer period of
time that does not take into account the number of
families who have resumed their lives or the number of
verified returns.

Although this issue was addressed in the
Secretary-General's report, I should like to put it in
context by referring to the progress made in preventing
displacement, assisting and protecting victims and
developing sustainable solutions for their social and
economic stabilization. Colombia has progressive
legislation and an assistance programme for displaced
persons that is implemented in a decentralized manner.
The programme's budget, which is coordinated by a
presidential agency, has increased from $40 million to
nearly $500 million a year. That amount will be
maintained for the period 2008-2010, as provided by
the national development plan.

Thanks to the democratic security policy and the
mass demobilization of illegal armed groups, the
number of new displacement cases per year has fallen
by 44 per cent compared with the data for 2002.
Approximately 82 per cent of the total number of
households in the national registry of displaced persons
have received emergency humanitarian assistance. In
the area of social services, 232,000 displaced children
and young people entered the educational system in
2006 with State support. The national vocational
education service provided technical training to
234,000 displaced persons and offered occupational
guidance to 201,000. Last June, 670,000 displaced
persons were enrolled in the social security health
system. Through the new network aimed at overcoming
extreme poverty, 443,000 displaced families will gain
access to State social services. By August 2007,
375,000 displaced families had been able to return to
their places of origin with that programme's support.

Colombia has developed a benchmark system to
measure the programme's impact on displaced
households in terms of fundamental rights. Likewise,
reparation for displaced persons is a priority in the
activities of the national reparation and reconciliation
commission, which was established within the
framework of the process of demobilizing illegal
armed groups.

In the same way, we have been able to enhance
the capacity for State action and a State presence
through the national police and civil authorities in all
municipalities throughout the country. Five years ago,
that situation was not guaranteed in 157 localities.
Approximately 46,000 former members of illegal
armed groups have been demobilized, out of an
estimated total of 60,000.

Colombia believes that the concept of democratic
security includes the State's obligation to protect
groups of great significance for democracy. We have
strengthened the special programme that today
provides direct State protection to more than 6,000
people.

The dissemination of objective information
regarding the situations of countries contributes to
accurate analysis of their situations and to effective
support on the part of the international community.
Consulting with countries before reports are published
by the United Nations system can contribute positively
to that end.

In the past, my delegation has emphasized that it
is important that the humanitarian system, in following
the principles of transparency and objectivity - which
must govern humanitarian affairs - maintain a clear
distance from considerations of a political nature.
Therefore, we are somewhat concerned by some of the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General's
report, because they delve into thematic issues that are
outside the area of competence assigned to the Security
Council in the Charter of the United Nations. It should
be noted that, in the current circumstances, it is already
quite difficult to draw a precise dividing line for
carrying out the responsibility to protect.

While my delegation shares the serious concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
concerning serious crimes such as the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict, we believe that the existing
resolutions and the support provided by the relevant
United Nations bodies provide an adequate framework
for addressing that problem. Similarly, the
consideration of issues such as the right to housing,
land and property falls within the purview of the
General Assembly and its specialized agencies.
Suggesting that these issues, per se, become part of the
agenda of the Security Council will only continue to
crowd its programme of work and divert its attention to
issues beyond its competence.

In this context, my delegation wishes to
underscore the importance for the Security Council to
adopt measures in a non-selective manner.

For the Government of Colombia, the protection
of civilians and their enjoyment of their rights is one of
its highest priorities. We consider of the utmost
importance that international support in this area be in
line with the sovereignty of States and that it be
coordinated with national authorities according to the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. We trust that the decisions that the
Security Council will eventually adopt will be guided
by that course.

