The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Banya
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, document 8/2000/832
and Add.l.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2000/882, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:

Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1321 (2000).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.

