The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Booto
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda) took seats at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council commends the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Rwanda for their joint
communique on a common approach to end the
threat posed to peace and stability in both
countries and the Great Lakes region, signed in
Nairobi on 9 November 2007, which is an
important milestone towards the definitive
settlement of the problem of illegal armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
for the efforts undertaken in this respect by the
Secretary-General through the special mission
the

carried out by Assistant Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and looks forward to a continuation of
this involvement, including further consultations
with the Governments concerned and regional
and international partners.

"The Security Council recalls that the continued
presence of illegal armed groups, in particular the
Forces Democratiques de Liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), ex-FAR/Interahamwe and the dissident
militia of Laurent Nkunda, is one of the root
causes of conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and constitutes a threat to
regional stability. The Council reiterates its
demand that these groups lay down their arms
and engage voluntarily and without preconditions
in their demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration, as appropriate.

"The Security Council encourages the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Republic of Rwanda to implement fully their
commitments in the Nairobi communique and to
continue to cooperate to solve their common
security concerns.

"The Security Council stresses its readiness to
facilitate and support the implementation of these
commitments, in particular through measures
against additional individuals and entities,
including the FDLR and ex-FAR/Interahamwe, as
appropriate, pursuant to resolutions 1596 (2005)
and 1649 (2005).

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
to the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for
its action on the ground, and encourages it to
support, within its mandate and capabilities, the
measures agreed by the Congolese and Rwandan
Governments".

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/44.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
07-60827

