Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
welcome this important meeting at the request of
Jordan, following an urgent request by the Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine. I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his briefing.

The situation is serious. The Israeli project to
expand settlement units in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, makes a contiguous Palestinian State
each day more difficult. If nothing is done, the two-
State solution risks becoming an abstract concept,
inapplicable on the ground. If nothing is done, very
soon nobody will be able to believe in such a solution.

The international community, in particular the
Security Council, should not resign itself to doing
nothing. We must act, calling for an end to the
provocations and inflammatory statements on both
sides and the acts that spread hatred and further poison a
delicate situation. The Security Council must condemn
calls to violence and extremist acts committed by
both sides, either by Palestinian militants or by Israeli
settlers. Those extremist acts have recently cost the lives
of victims, even of children, including young Israeli
Chaya, age three, and a young Palestinian, age five.
The Security Council should also condemn the ongoing
unrestrained demolition of Palestinian structures and
the decisions to build additional settlements in the West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem. I think particularly
of the decision recently taken on Givata Hamatos, Har
Homa and Ramat Schlomo.

Why should we condemn those settlement decisions?
We should do so because they pose an obstacle to peace,
because they are illegal under international community,
because they directly threaten the two-State solution
and because they are not at all compatible with the
aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian people to
live in peace and security. Nobody will believe in the
success of peace efforts, as fragile as they are, if active
settlement continues. If they are left in place, those
decisions will serve to confirm the doubts about the
commitment of Israel to a negotiated settlement with
the Palestinians. How can we reconcile the construction
of thousands of settlement units and the confiscation
of Palestinian land, when all efforts should rather be
targeted to settling the conflict by making the two-
State solution a reality.

Israel wants to live in peace and security. Israel
has the right to live in peace and security. Why then
should it take measures that undermine the viability
of prospects for peace? We call on Israel to revoke its
decision and to put an end to its settlement activities
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. We
specifically call for a halt to all measures affecting the
demographic balance of Jerusalem, the destiny ofwhich
is to become the capital of two States, the capital of
the sovereign democratic, sustainable, viable Palestine
living in peace and security side by side with Israel.

I should now like to turn to the violent incidents
in the Holy City, especially the will displayed by
some to change the status of the Temple Mount. That
will trigger a major crisis, one that will constitute a
direct challenge to the Muslim and Christian worlds.
Luxembourg recalls its commitment to free access
to the holy sites by the faithful of all religions. Any
change of the status of the holy sites would pose a major
risk of destabilization.

I wish to conclude by stressing how urgent it
is to provide a new impetus to creating a credible
political horizon for peace efforts between Israelis and
Palestinians. Poverty, violence and despair serve only
to swell the ranks of extremists on both sides who are
driven by their incendiary acts and words. The time to
implement the two-State solution cannot be extended
indefinitely. The situation is critical. The time has
come to put an end to the measures that undermine
confidence and exacerbate tensions and suffering. The
time has come to take daring, specific measures in
order to arrive at a fair, lasting peace.

In our View, the Security Council has a role
to play in that regard by assuming its institutional
responsibilities and by playing a more active role to
support and preserve the two-State solution. It is our
hope that we will all be able to play a constructive
role to build peace, to encourage and facilitate efforts
to save the two-State solution and to put an end to the
occupation. Luxembourg is prepared to support those
efforts.

