Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank both
briefers, Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging,
for their comprehensive briefings. I should like in
particular to thank Staffan for having shared with us
what he calls cautious optimism and by bringing hope
to our deliberations. He has our full support.

Allow me to focus on two points: the political
process and the humanitarian situation in Syria.

On the political track, let me once again reiterate
our strong support for the relaunching of a United
Nations-facilitated political process through the
establishment of a constitutional committee. During
the conference hosted in Sochi by Russia along with
Iran and Turkey, it was agreed that the United Nations
would provide assistance with forming a constitutional
committee, including help with defining its mandate,
terms of reference, powers, rules of procedure and the
selection criteria for its composition.

We support an inclusive, Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned constitutional committee under United Nations
auspices in Geneva. It should be implemented now as
a priority, and further steps should swiftly follow so
as to enable a negotiated political transition process. It
requires the full and constructive engagement of all the
parties to the conflict, especially the Syrian authorities,
to participate in the negotiations in good faith and
without preconditions. We welcome the participation of
women in this process as important actors for peace
and mediation.

Unfortunately, military logic continues to drive
developments in Syria. We still face continuous and
widespread violence and violations of international
law, including abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The most striking example of this
are the recent events in the south-west de-escalation
zone, where the Government started a military
offensive earlier this month. Taking into consideration
the recent events in that zone, we strongly condemn the
intensification of military operations and call for an
immediate end to the violence in the south-west.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
critical. Safe and sustainable humanitarian access must
be guaranteed, as called for in resolution 2401 (2018).
Fortunately, after taking control of eastern Ghouta and
Yarmouk, the Government has continued to provide
regular access to United Nations humanitarian actors,
which is necessary in order for needs to be assessed and
for assistance and protection to be scaled up.
The difficult humanitarian situation in the south-
west of Syria is exacerbated by the military escalation
there. Military operations by the Government's forces
with the support of Russia have already displaced
thousands of civilians in the south-west de-escalation
zone, the majority of whom are moving towards
the Jordanian borders. In that context, it should be
emphasized that there are already more than 2 million
people in need in areas accessed through cross-border
operations. Deliveries to those areas remain critical and
should be ensured by all parties, first and foremost by
the Syrian Government.

Humanitarian imperatives should be our primary
priority. We call upon all stakeholders who have
influence on the parties to the conflict to ensure the
implementation of the cessation of hostilities. In that
regard, let me emphasize the importance of protecting
vulnerable groups, especially children, women and the
religious minorities, who are far too often affected by
the conflict in Syria.

The recent offensive in the region of Dar'a, in south-
west Syria, is also very worrisome. It is taking place
in the de-escalation zone that the Astana guarantors
committed to safeguard. Necessary measures to protect
civilians, as well as safe and sustainable humanitarian
access, need to be ensured.

I would also very briefly like to express our concern
about the so-called Law Number 10. We underline
the need for the Security Council to remain seized of
that matter.

In conclusion, let me stress the need for
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question of
the full implementation across Syria of the Council's
humanitarian resolution 2401 (2018). Unfortunately, we
are seeing the continuation of a new military offensive.
That worries us, as we may again face an increase
in violence. The adoption of resolution 2401 (2018)
was just the beginning of the process. We call on all
stakeholders with influence on the ground to the take
the steps necessary to ensure that the fighting stops, the
Syrian people are protected and, finally, humanitarian
assistance is delivered.

