Mr. Lovald (Norway): Since the debate on

peacebuilding that the Security Council had in January,

the Peacebuilding Commission has made considerable

progress, as pointed out in its annual report, including

in its Burundi-specific configuration, which I have the
pleasure of chairing.

Bearing in mind the Security Council's original
request for advice on Burundi, I would like to focus my
intervention on the progress made and the challenges
ahead in the Peacebuilding Commission's work on
Burundi.

First, I should like to emphasize the importance
of national ownership and commend the Government
and people of Burundi for their active and constructive
cooperation in peace consolidation. Based on that
cooperation, the Peacebuilding Commission has been
able to identify priorities for peacebuilding and how to
address them, not least through the development of the
Strategic Framework for peacebuilding in Burundi,
which was a significant achievement. The consultative
process in Burundi during the development of the
Strategic Framework was appreciated, and we
encourage continued and open dialogue between all
stakeholders in the country.

Secondly, while we have focused so far on
peacebuilding priorities, we are now, in this second
year of work, shifting our focus to how to deal with
those priorities. We are now in the process of setting up
a monitoring and tracking mechanism for the Strategic
Framework. In other words, we are moving from
identification to implementation. We hope to finalize
work on the mechanism in the near future. It will be
crucial in our efforts to make sure that consolidation of
peace actually happens. Again, the Government carries
a special responsibility, but so do other stakeholders.
Resource mobilization will be a crucial element in that
regard. The present precarious budgetary situation in
Burundi bears strong testimony to that.

Thirdly, also in the case of Burundi, there is no
development without security and no security without
development. As regards the security situation, I wish
to draw the Council's attention to the conclusions and
recommendations on peacebuilding in Burundi
forwarded to the President of the Security Council in
my letter dated 20 September 2007. The conclusions
and recommendations addressed some of the key
challenges facing the country at this time, including the
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire

Agreement between the Government of Burundi and
the Palipehutu-Forces Nationales de Liberation
(Palipehutu-FNL). A specific recommendation was
given to the Government of Burundi to continue to
explore all ways to resolve its differences with the
leaders of the Palipehutu-FNL. A specific
recommendation was also given to the Palipehutu-FNL
to resume promptly, without condition, its participation
in the work of the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism and constructively to re-engage with the
Government with a View to resolving differences. This
is an issue that is still a matter of concern.

I recall that the Peacebuilding Commission, in its
recommendation to the Security Council, asked the
Council to continue to closely monitor the situation in
Burundi, in particular with respect to the effective
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement and to consider, if necessary, undertaking
appropriate action with a View to the effective
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement by the set
deadline.

The regional initiative and the South African
facilitator are working actively to facilitate dialogue
among the parties and to bring the Palipehutu-FNL
back to the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. Their efforts need our support. I would
therefore wish to reiterate the call on the Security
Council to address that issue and to take concrete
measures, as it might see fit, with a view to
contributing to the resolution of that outstanding issue.

The importance of the resolution of the issue
cannot be emphasized enough. The people of Burundi
deserve peace so that other pressing issues in terms of
political stabilization and economic development can
be achieved. The Security Council's concrete
contribution to the achievement of that objective would
be timely and invaluable.

