Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening
today's debate. We also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their useful briefings.
We would like to express our support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen in an attempt to prevent a further escalation
of the conflict and for the sense of duty that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
demonstrated in such difficult circumstances.

Peru deplores the ongoing violence in Yemen and
the unique impact that it has had in recent weeks on
the south of the country, following the clashes reported
in Aden between separatist forces and the legitimate
Government of Yemen, which could have led to the
fragmentation of Yemeni institutions. We hope that the
most recent developments that resulted in the partial
withdrawal of separatist forces from Government
positions in Aden will give way to strengthened dialogue
and a genuine commitment to reconciliation, which will
have a positive impact on the peace process promoted
by the United Nations. In that regard, the meeting
being proposed is timely and essential. Nonetheless,
we would like to express our deep concern about the
lack of tangible progress in the implementation of the
important agreements reached in Sweden, owing to
the rigid positions adopted by the parties, and how the
stalemate continues to undermine the momentum and
credibility of the peace process and affect the image of
the Organization.
In such circumstances, we would like to stress that
it is important for the Council and countries with the
greatest influence on the parties to exert the necessary
political pressure in order to reaffirm their commitment
to what was agreed in Stockholm and make their
positions more flexible on crucial issues, such as the
composition of local forces and the channelling of port
revenues through the Central Bank.

The Council must also be consistent with regard
to its responsibility to protect Yemeni civilians, in
particular when all parties to the conflict continue to
violate international law and international humanitarian
law. We also stress the importance of addressing in
tandem the humanitarian situation, which, as we just
heard from Ms. Mueller, appears to be deteriorating.
We are particularly concerned about the alarming
levels of food insecurity, the outbreak of diseases, such
as cholera, and the deterioration of economic indicators
that deepen the suffering of the Yemeni people.

Against that tragic backdrop, we wish to express
our full support for the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and other agencies deployed in Yemen
and reiterate the moral and legal duty to allow them
full access to those in need. That is why we continue
to expect that the recent agreement between the
World Food Programme and the Houthi authorities on
the selection and registration of the beneficiaries of
humanitarian assistance will be fully implemented.
Similarly, like other delegations and in line with
Ms. Mueller's remarks, we await the disbursements
pledged at the donors conference in February to ensure
that the operations of the humanitarian response plan
are no longer disrupted.

Lastly, our belief that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Yemen compels us to continue actively
supporting the work of the Special Envoy to end the
conflict and the suffering of the Yemeni people.

