Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I welcome Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and thank him for his statement. I also wish to
commend Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative of
the Secretary-General for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his comprehensive briefing.

Looking back at the early 1990s, we feel great
satisfaction at seeing the country, which was then the
scene of the most brutal crimes against humanity and
of pain and suffering, has overcome its tragedy and
begun to regain its strength, re-establish links among
its peoples on a civilized basis, guarantee the rights of
all, and pave the way towards overall security, stability
and prosperity for all its citizens. We note that
important achievements have been made towards the
establishment of a Bosnia and Herzegovina united with
its three peoples on the basis of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, despite the differences among the parties,
which are fuelled by the painful memories of the past
and a lack of trust among the various parties. I wish to
commend the efforts of the High Representative to
persuade the parties to pursue the implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement and to respect their
attendant obligations.

Despite the positive developments of recent
years, the country continues to move very slowly in
implementing the constitutional reform process and in
establishing conditions conducive to the transition of
the Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative mission. The slow pace
can be ascribed to the lack of trust and constructive
dialogue among the leaders of the parties, as well as to
one party's challenges to and defiance of State
authority, its failure to meet some of its obligations,
and its attempts to reduce the powers and authority of
the State and the federal Government. All these
obstacles have hindered the implementation of the
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy, the
appointment of some judges to the Federation
Constitutional Court, and the achievement of
consensus on the distribution of tax revenues and of an
acceptable and lasting solution to the problem of State
property and other problems requiring the willingness
of all parties to fulfil their obligations in good faith.

Among the problems of concern to us is the fact
that 120,000 Bosnians are still registered as internally
displaced and unable to return to their villages. We
deeply regret the fact that the politicization of the issue
of internally displaced persons and refugees has
obstructed their return and prolonged their suffering.
We believe that this issue must be prioritized and that
all the State's energies and power should be dedicated
to its solution, which would contribute strongly to
stabilizing the State as a whole. We also feel that the
tracking and prosecution of those guilty of crimes
against humanity and war crimes could help to ease
the suffering and erase the memories of the past, and
contribute to the search for a better future for all the
peoples of the country.

Peace and security will not be achieved if each
party clings stubbornly to its own positions; they can
be achieved only through consensus, mutual
understanding, a sense of realism, and the fulfilment by
each and every party of its obligations and
commitments. We therefore urge all actors and parties
to shoulder their obligations, act responsibly, engage in
constructive dialogue, respect State institutions,
cooperate fully with the High Representative and abide
strictly by their commitments under the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its annexes, the Paris accords and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. That is the

09-6164!)
best way to ensure the stability and multi-ethnic and
multicultural nature of a Bosnia and Herzegovina
working towards sustainable development, prosperity
for all its people and the enhanced stability of the
Balkan region as a whole.

