Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation, to extend to you our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. We
are convinced that your diplomatic experience and skills
augur well for the success of the work of the Council. I
should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Jean-Bernard Merimee, the Permanent
Representative of France, and to the members of his
delegation for the exemplary and wise manner in which
they guided the proceedings of the Council last month.

A full year has elapsed since the humanitarian
catastrophe in Rwanda, in all its violence, genocide and
horror. My delegation is pleased to note the return of
relative security and stability to Rwanda and that there are
indications that life is beginning to resume its normal
course. This is reflected in the fact that the Rwandese
have resumed various day-to-day activities such as
farming, trade and so on, children are returning to school,
basic services are being restored and reconstruction is
beginning. These are all reasons for some degree of
optimism.

However, many challenges remain which the
Government of Rwanda, with the support of the
international community, must deal with effectively. The
most dangerous of these are the military raids carried out
by elements from the armed forces and militias of the

 

former regime. Their military activities and the fact that
they still have weapons cause us deep concern. We believe
that the international community must continue to give
assistance to the Rwandese Government to help it deal with
the danger posed by these elements and prevent the
outbreak of a new wave of violence and genocide in
Rwanda.

My delegation believes that the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) has played an
extremely important role, in circumstances that were often
difficult, in alleviating suffering in this humanitarian crisis
and in encouraging national reconciliation. My delegation
shares the view that UNAMIR is still a necessary tool for
restoring confidence and that its presence in Rwanda adds
an important dimension to the efforts under way to create
a climate of stability, confidence and security. Similarly,
UNAMIR's presence helps create favourable conditions for
the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons, and for guaranteeing assistance for reconstruction.

Accordingly, my delegation welcomes the resolution
just adopted by the Security Council in which it extends
UNAMIR's mandate for a six-month period, until next
December. We are particularly pleased to note the changes
that have been made to UNAMIR's mandate, as set out in
operative paragraph 2 of the resolution, and we believe that
the Mission's mandate should reflect developments in the
field.

My delegation, in the firm belief that the United
Nations is following the proper course of action in Rwanda
and that the Government of Rwanda still intends to
cooperate with UNAMIR's efforts, supports the resolution,
and indeed voted in favour. We hope that the resolution
will play an effective part in the restoration of peace and
national reconciliation in Rwanda.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the
constructive role that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has played in favour of the restoration of
peace and stability in Rwanda and in the reconstruction of
the country.

