Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for focusing the Security Council's attention on the
purposes and principles of our Charter of the United
Nations. I also thank the Secretary-General and His
Excellency the former Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for their briefings today.

Today's meeting, as the President has said, takes
place around the twenty-seventh anniversary of the
liberation of Kuwait, which was a clear example of
the United Nations fulfilling one of its main purposes,
namely, to maintain international peace and security.
As States Members of the United Nations, we have a
responsibility to adhere to the Charter's ideals and to
work within the United Nations framework to solve the
most challenging global problem. When the horrific
violence in Rakhine state forced the Rohingya to flee,
the Security Council played a vital role, focusing the
world's attention on the situation and encouraging
action by the authorities on the ground. We must now
take further action to ensure safe and voluntary returns
take place, and we should visit the region.

The Council must work together to achieve the
Charter's purposes. When we do, we are successful. We
have remained united in our commitment to providing
the tools to achieve peace in Colombia and in our support
for the peace process in Cyprus. We were successful
in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. We have remained
united in our condemnation of Da'esh and the need
for accountability for that group's atrocious actions,
and we have remained united in our condemnation
of the flagrant violations by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea of international law, where we have
used sanctions to constrain the that country's pursuit
of illegal nuclear and ballistic-missiles programmes. In
this context, sanctions play a crucial role in maintaining
international peace and security. The implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which
balances sanctions reliefwith strict nuclear restrictions,
is another significant achievement of the Council and
marks a major step forward in preventing Iran from
developing a nuclear-weapon capability.

However, there are instances where Council
disunity halts our progress. We cannot ignore Russian
attempts to redraw the boundaries ofEurope. This month
marks the fourth anniversary of the illegal annexation
of Crimea, in breach of Article 2 of the Charter. We
remain deeply concerned by the degradation of human
rights in eastern Ukraine, and we call upon on Russia to
abide by the Minsk agreement commitments that it has
undertaken. It is crucial that we uphold the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

Nor can we ignore the conflict that continues to rage
in Syria or its causes. The Syrian conflict in all of its
abhorrent acts and human misery is an example of what
we all set up the United Nations to prevent. We have
proved that we can work together to ease the suffering
of the Syrian people. When we adopted resolution 2393
(2017), the United Nations was empowered to continue
to deliver urgently needed humanitarian aid across
conflict lines and borders.

Knowing that we can deliver results makes our
failures even more frustrating. These failures are having
devastating consequences. The Al-Assad regime's
brutal assault of eastern Ghouta, including reports
of chemical-weapon use, is causing unprecedented
levels of suffering. The targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure is a violation of international
humanitarian law. Eastern Ghouta is not a de-escalation
zone; it is a zone of death and destruction. We must work
together to end the conflict and prevent further suffering
of the Syrian people, and I hope the Council will soon
be able to pass a resolution to that effect. The Geneva
talks represent the only sustainable path to peace. The
opposition continues to engage constructively and in
good faith and without preconditions. The Al-Assad
regime must do the same.

We must also hold the Syrian regime and others
to account for the repeated use of chemical weapons.
Our failure here is acceptable. We must demonstrate
that such abhorrent actions have consequences. An
independent expert international investigation set up
by the Security Council concluded that the regime and
Da'esh have used chemical weapons. We must not allow
Russian actions to force the closure of this investigation
to deter us from pursuing accountability.

Despite our differences in the Security Council, we
have demonstrated our capacity to show unity in the
face of adversity. We must strive to do this more and to
think creatively about how we find common solutions.
The United Kingdom is a proud signatory to the code of
conduct put forward by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, and we are committed to never
voting against a credible draft resolution on preventing
or ending a mass atrocity.

We fully support the Secretary-General's efforts
and proposals to improve the United Nations ability
to prevent and respond to conflict and promote
development. That includes reforms to peacekeeping,
and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
millions of military, police and civilian personnel who
have helped to protect civilians around the world.

We must also continue to tackle relentlessly the
scourge of sexual violence and sexual exploitation
and abuse, and recognize the disproportionate adverse
effects of conflict on women and the important role of
women in peacebuilding.

We must encourage increased cooperation with
regional organizations and arrangements, as set out in
the Charter, whether with the African Union Mission in
Somalia in its fight against Al-Shabaab, the Economic
Community of West African States in its resolution of
conflict, or the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel to combat terrorism in West Africa.

Our predecessors drafted the Charter of the United
Nations in the name of the peoples of the world to help
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
In some places, we are succeeding; elsewhere, we are
falling woefully short. Let us all reflect on what more
we can do to live up ideals of the Charter - our Charter.

