I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. I also listened carefully to Ms. Qaddour's briefing. China is closely following the humanitarian and economic situation in Syria. We are deeply worried that the country is now going through a severe economic collapse. The loss of currency value, rising unemployment, increased food insecurity and insufficient medicine supplies all add to the suffering of the Syrian people. Saving the Syrian economy is fundamental to saving more lives and preventing a more severe humanitarian crisis. The fact that unilateral sanctions gravely impact the humanitarian situation in Syria is undeniable. Years of economic blockade and illegal sanctions have worsened the socioeconomic and humanitarian situations in the country and undermined the livelihoods of innocent civilians. At this critical time, unilateral sanctions further compromise the capacity of Syria to effectively respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic. Lifting unilateral sanctions is more important and urgent than ever. Secretary-General Guterres, Special Envoy Pedersen and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have made repeated appeals for waiving unilateral sanctions. These appeals have also received overwhelming support of States Members of the United Nations. There should be a positive response to these appeals. China urges relevant countries to demonstrate genuine sympathy and support for the Syrian people by trying to alleviate the suffering they are imposing on them. We do not believe that the so-called humanitarian exemptions can justify their actions or make the situation any different on the ground. The Security Council should fulfil its mandate and take concrete steps in this regard. We also request a comprehensive report by United Nations Secretariat on this issue. The international community should increase humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. In this regard, China's position on the cross-border mechanism remains unchanged. Considering the current situation, we do not object to retaining the cross-border mechanism at this stage. We note that since the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020), United Nations agencies have been making full use of Bab Al-Hawa. We have learned that, according to OCHA, it has been possible for this crossing point to handle the increased deliveries. We reject the irresponsible comments made by the representatives of the United States and other countries with respect to China. China has always adopted a constructive and responsible approach in dealing with the cross-border issue. In fact, it is the United States that should reflect on its own behaviour. When addressing the cross-border issue, the United States voted six times against reasonable draft resolutions and amendments aimed at narrowing differences and finding solutions. If the United States truly cares about the humanitarian situation in Syria, it should stop politicizing the humanitarian issue and cease its hypocritical political show. If the United States truly cares about the humanitarian situation in Syria, it should immediately lift unilateral sanctions against the Syrian people, instead of creating groundless excuses. If the United States truly cares about the humanitarian situation in Syria, it should stop its policies of hegemony and regime change and its bullying practices in the Middle East and other parts of the world, which have led to endless chaos and instability. We reiterate that the Syrian Government should always bear the primary responsibility to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is encouraging to see continued efforts and progress in cross-line operations into both the north-east and north-west of Syria. China calls upon relevant parties to remove obstacles to cross-line operations and give priority to providing humanitarian relief from within Syrian territory. We appreciate the efforts of humanitarian workers on the ground, guided by the principles of humanitarian emergency assistance as set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182. The Syrian issue should be addressed through a holistic approach, taking into account the political, counter-terrorism, security, humanitarian and other aspects all together. China calls upon relevant parties to respond to the ceasefire appeals by the Secretary-General, strengthen dialogue and consultation, and actively promote a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process. China will continue to play a responsible and constructive role in the efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful, just and proper settlement of the Syrian issue at an early date.
