Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Nicaragua wishes to reiterate its
congratulations to the People's Republic of China for
the outstanding work in the presidency of the Council
this month and for having convened this extremely
important debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

First and foremost, we would like to express
our feelings of solidarity with the peoples and the
Governments of Ecuador and Japan in the wake of the
earthquakes that occurred, as well as to the victims and
their families.

Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement
delivered by the representative of Namibia on behalf
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.

Sixty-eight years have elapsed and we continue
to denounce Israel's occupation and its expansionist
policies, which undermine all efforts to achieve peace,
while the Government of Israel continues to reject
the establishment of an independent, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State. Every time we address
the Security Council on this topic, we express our
opposition to the occupation, the suffering of the
Palestinian people and its victims. However, the pleas of
the Palestinian people and the voice of the international
community continue to be neither heard nor heeded.
And we see 5.5 million Palestinian refugees ignored in
this global refugee crisis. They are ignored by those
who continue to promote Israel's impunity and to
obstruct a solution with regard to the ongoing use of the
veto against the creation and recognition of a Palestine
State as a full member of the community of nations.

On its seventieth anniversary, the United Nations
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (General Assembly resolution 70/1) as an effort to eradicate
poverty and misery and create decent conditions
for the common welfare of all peoples. But we must
ask ourselves: Will it be possible for the Palestinian
people to exercise that right to development? And,
furthermore, will they be able to achieve the agreed
Sustainable Development Goals if the political space
for the Palestinian State is occupied by Israel?

The answer is obvious. The Palestinian economy
is an economy of occupation, in particular in the Gaza
Strip, which applies to all levels and in all spheres of
the Palestinian people's lives - from the occupation
of their lands, the use of their natural resources, the
denial of their right to freedom of movement and the
return of refugees, the confinement of its citizens and
the daily destruction of their infrastructure. With each
passing day it fragments the little amount of territory
that they have left and destroys with it any possibility

of two States.

Once again, we condemn and reiterate that this
vicious circle of agression-reconstruction-aggression
must stop. Israel continues to colonize the occupied
Palestinian territories, in particular East Jerusalem, in
full view of an acquiescent international community.
Urged on by the alarming increase and worsening of
Israeli abuses of Palestinians, once again we again call
on the Security Council to demand that Israel fully halt
its occupation of Palestine, lift the criminal blockade of
Gaza and release all Palestinian prisoners, to whom we
reiterate our full solidarity.

Moreover, Nicaragua stands in solidarity with the
Palestinian cause and demands the immediate creation
of a Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital, thereby laying the
foundation for a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, with the two States fiPalestine and Israel - living
side by side in peace.

We cannot fail to note that the policies of
interference, intervention and change of Governments
undertaken by the NATO countries in the Middle
East and North Africa have benefited Israel. They
have diverted attention away from the needs of the
Palestinian people and their struggle for a State, and at
the same time it allows Israel to pursue more aggressive
practices and policies against the region.

Peace in the Middle East does not just involve
a solution for the Palestinian question, but must
necessarily include Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon
and all the occupied Arab territories - from the Syrian
Golan Heights to the other occupied Arab territories.
It is also imperative to end foreign interference and
intervention in the region in order to finally bring
about a region of peace and security for the Arab and
Israeli peoples.

