Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. We also welcome the presence here today of
the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.

At present, the situation in Darfur is generally
stable, and the improvement on the humanitarian front
continues. Thanks to the good offices of President
Kiir of South Sudan, the transitional Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan Revolutionary Front, along
with other groups, launched formal negotiations
on 14 October with a view to reaching a final peace
agreement by 14 December. China welcomes those
efforts and commends South Sudan for its active role
and the Sudan for its efforts to relaunch the peace
process. The current progress is the hard-won result
of the efforts of all parties. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
been performing its duties actively and effectively. The
African Union and other regional and international
partners have fully cooperated, thereby contributing to
the continued improvement of the situation in Darfur.
The international community must further increase
its efforts in Darfur, consolidate the results achieved
so far and facilitate the reconstruction process. The
peace process must be relaunched without delay. The
relevant parties in Darfur must seize this window of
opportunity in the political process in the Sudan,
relaunch the peace process as soon as possible and use
dialogue, consultations and other political means to
resolve disputes and differences, while refraining from
military action, with a view to achieving lasting peace
in Darfur.

The reconstruction process must be speeded up.
The international community must provide effective
humanitarian and economic assistance, help to resolve
issues such as the return and resettlement of displaced
people and assist the Sudanese Government in achieving
self-reliance in its economic development as soon as
possible. The Sudanese Government must be supported
in bearing the primary responsibility for security in
Darfur. The international community can actively
assist it by bolstering its capacity in security and
governance and by supporting UNAMID's scheduled
withdrawal, in accordance with the relevant Council
resolutions, and the appropriate and smooth transfer
of responsibility for Darfur's security to the Sudanese
security forces.

China has consistently supported the peace process
in Darfur. As a major contributor of troops to UNAMID,
we have made an enormous contribution to peace and
stability in Darfur over the years. China stands ready to
work with the international community and to continue
its constructive role in achieving peace, stability and
development in Darfur.

