Mr. Hyseni: I should like to make a few points
on the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and in reaction to some of the stipulations that
we have heard today. The question put to the Court was
drafted by the Republic of Serbia, the sole sponsor of
General Assembly resolution 63/3. And the Court was
very clear in its deliberations and its response.

We have heard much repetition here today of the
mantra that the independence of Kosovo is "a
universally applicable precedent that provides a ready-
made model for unilateral secession". Nothing could be
farther from the truth; any reader of the Court's
opinion can see that. The opinion is very clear and

speaks for itself.

Kosovo, the Court has said, is a unique and
special case. I should like very briefly to say why it is a
unique case. Kosovo is a former constituent unit of a
federation that, unfortunately, no longer exists. It
disintegrated and has ceased to exist, and that was not
because of Kosovo; it was because of the efforts of the
Republic of Serbia to bring all constituent units of the
former Yugoslavia under its rule and domination. That
federation fell apart in a non-consensual manner. If it
were up to Kosovo, that federation would still exist.

Secondly, the Court found very clearly that
Kosovo's declaration of independence was effectively
in full compliance with international law. Furthermore,
the Court found that Kosovo's declaration of
independence was in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999). Furthermore, the Court found that the
declaration of Kosovo's independence was in
compliance with the interim constitutional framework
of Kosovo adopted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

I should like to make a small correct
interpretation. The correct interpretation of the Court's
opinion is the following. In part, the declaration of
Kosovo's independence was effectively the
accomplishment - that is, the implementation - of
resolution 1244 (1999). This is the correct
interpretation of the Court's opinion. I am afraid, and I
do agree, that misinterpretations of the Court's opinion
are very dangerous for future relations between our
countries. That is why I appeal once again to the
Republic of Serbia to cease throwing up diplomatic
roadblocks on the path to reconciliation and a
European future and to working together with Kosovo
for a common European future.
With regard to the much talked-of draft resolution
presented by the Republic of Serbia, yet again in full
contradiction of the Court's findings, I must say that
the language used in that draft resolution is, in the best
case, I am afraid, disastrous. That is why it is high time
for Serbia to live up to its responsibilities, to respect
the Court, to respect an opinion that Serbia itself
requested, and to work with us for a better future for
all.
