Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their informative briefings. Our special thanks go to
the Special Envoy for his tireless efforts to resume the
political dialogue between the parties to the conflict.
He has our full support in all his endeavours.

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me to welcome the Permanent Representative
of Yemen and to wish him every success.

(spoke in English)

During our last briefing on the situation in Yemen
in November (see S/PV.8404), we all agreed that a
window of opportunity to relaunch a credible political
process had presented itself and that it was vital to
take full advantage of it in order to restore peace and
stability in Yemen. We are encouraged by the positive
developments that followed that meeting, especially
the first round of consultations between the parties
in Rimbo. We thank the Government of Sweden and
all other countries that contributed to making that
conference happen. We commend the agreement
on the exchange of prisoners and the statement of
understanding on Taiz. Most importantly, we welcome
with enthusiasm the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities across Al-Hudaydah governorate and in the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa. We consider
that arrangement to be a major achievement, as it has
the potential to lead to the much-needed reopening of
the humanitarian corridors.

Poland strongly believes that the outcomes of
consultations in Rimbo are the first significant step
towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict. It is vital
that the parties now deliver on the commitments made
in Sweden. We encourage them to take advantage of
that progress to continue to build trust, as well as to
carry on their engagement with the Special Envoy, in
order to pave the way for the resumption of formal
peace negotiations. We look forward to the next round
of consultations in January. In that vein, we would like
to underscore the need to include underrepresented
groups, including women and young people, in the
political process.

We strongly believe that the support of the
international community, and especially the Security
Council, is also essential to increase the prospect of
peace in Yemen. We therefore stand ready to engage
with our partners in the Council on the draft resolution
that is to be presented by the United Kingdom.

Although we greatly welcome the progress on the
political track, there are still major challenges that need
to be addressed in the weeks to come, including the
reopening of Sana'a airport and measures to improve
the economic situation. We must also remember that
the humanitarian situation still requires urgent action,
including by implementing the five asks presented by
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock. The grave
risk of a widespread famine in Yemen will not be
reduced until unhindered and sustainable deliveries of
humanitarian assistance are guaranteed. That is why
the swift and full implementation of the cessation of
hostilities in Al-Hudaydah is of paramount importance.

To conclude, the consultations in Sweden have
proved that despite significant differences, a political
dialogue between the parties is possible. There is
hope for Yemen. There is hope for improvement of the
security situation in the country and for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The window of opportunity
is still open.

