The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
mission by the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser to Myanmar, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
reaffirms its strong and unwavering support for
the Secretary-General's good offices mission as
mandated by General Assembly resolution
61/232, and expresses its appreciation for the
personal engagement of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council strongly deplores the
use of violence against peaceful demonstrations
in Myanmar and welcomes Human Rights
Council resolution S-S/l of 2 October 2007. The
Security Council emphasizes the importance of
the early release of all political prisoners and
remaining detainees. It also calls on the
Government of Myanmar and all other parties
concerned to work together towards a
de-escalation of the situation and a peaceful
solution.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
the Government of Myanmar to create the
necessary conditions for a genuine dialogue with
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and all concerned parties
and ethnic groups in order to achieve an inclusive
national reconciliation, with the direct support of
the United Nations. The Security Council
the

encourages the Government of Myanmar to
consider seriously Mr. Gambari's recommendations
and proposals. The Security Council also calls on
the Government of Myanmar to take all necessary
measures to address the political, economic,
humanitarian and human rights issues that are the
concern of its people and emphasizes that the
future of Myanmar lies in the hands of all of its
people.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Government of Myanmar's public commitment to
work with the United Nations and the
appointment of a liaison officer with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. The Security Council stresses the
importance that such commitments be followed
by action. It acknowledges that the Government
of Myanmar had invited Mr. Gambari to
Myanmar. lt underscores its support for his return
as early as possible in order to facilitate concrete
actions and tangible results. The Security Council
urges the Government of Myanmar and all parties
concerned to cooperate fully with Mr. Gambari.

"The Security Council welcomes the
important role played by the ASEAN countries in
urging restraint, calling for a peaceful transition
to democracy, and supporting the good offices
mission. It notes that the good offices mission is a
process, and encourages the sustained support
and engagement of the international community
in helping Myanmar.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.
07-53786
