Ms. Miintefering (Germany): Before I begin my remarks, let me thank the Secretary-General and Her Excellency Mrs. Robinson for their briefings. I also congratulate Viet Nam on joining the Security Council and assuming this month's presidency. We should all applaud Viet Nam for the topic of today's debate. I certainly do, because the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are, in fact, the fundamental reason for our work here at the United Nations. They guide our peaceful coexistence as nations large and small. Seventy-five years after their adoption, it is not clear how we will be able to transmit this remarkable progress for humankind to the next century. What will the world look like another 75 years from now, on the threshold to the twenty-second century? Written at the end of the darkest days in the history of humankind, the Charter represented new hope for the peoples of the world. Threats to peace and security were to be resolved thereafter through the force of the law rather than the law of force. Germany became a Member of the United Nations in 1973. With our accession to the United Nations not even 30 years after the horrors of Second World War, my country was given a seat at the table of nations once again. Our past instils in us a particular responsibility to champion the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As a member of the Security Council, we are also guided by the will to defend and strengthen the rules-based international order and to promote universal respect for human rights. We firmly believe that respecting the Charter and commonly agreed international rules is the best way to help to foster peace and security and the well- being of all nations and peoples. My plea today to all representatives around this table and the wider United Nations is to return to the roots of this Organization, which was built on the basis of sharing power, mutual respect and joint responsibility. That shared power came from a position of power, from lessons learned and conviction. And, talking of founding fathers and mothers, Eleanor Roosevelt said: "Tt is not enough to talk about peace. One must believe in it. And it is not enough to believe in it. One must work at it." Conflict after conflict in the past - from the Sahel to the Balkans, from Asia to North Africa - has taught us the lesson for today, that lasting peace and security can never be achieved by military means. We need to prioritize prevention and look at long-term drivers of conflict. Without respect for human rights, good governance and social inclusion, peace will remain elusive. The Security Council has increasingly embraced the advancement of human rights as a critical element of promoting peace and security and preventing conflicts and atrocities. Germany attaches great importance to that. The women and peace and security agenda is also a priority of Germany's Security Council membership. With the upcoming twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), this year will be critical for expediting the agenda's implementation, including resolution 2467 (2019), on ending sexual violence in conflict. In its second year on the Security Council, Germany continues to call for respecting international law, including the law of the sea and international humanitarian law, and promoting and upholding human rights. We will continue to advance the disarmament agenda and we will fight for accountability for grave human rights violations, atrocity crimes and crimes against humanity. Multilateral cooperation is the backbone of our foreign policy, and promoting the rules-based global order with the United Nations at its core is at the heart of our interests. That is why German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas, his French counterpart, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, and other partners co-founded the Alliance for Multilateralism last year. Its objective is to support and strengthen the international rules-based order with the United Nations Charter and other international law at its heart. More than 50 countries are already working together in that framework, both with the United Nations and within it. We will strive to tackle emerging threats through the development of new multilateral agreed rules and principles. Examples include the Humanitarian Call for Action and the principles agreed in Geneva on lethal autonomous weapons systems. We will also strive to promote norms and principles for upholding stability in cyberspace. In that vein, we encourage the Security Council, in line with the Charter of the United Nations, to address new threats to peace and security, including gross human rights violations, the effects of climate change and the risks emanating from new technologies, which often act as drivers of conflict. The recent events in the Middle East are of serious concern to all of us. Regional security and stability are at stake. A military confrontation, let alone a full- scale war, would have terrible consequences for the lives of the people in the Middle East and beyond. We are relieved to see signs of de-escalation and call for maximum restraint. The United Nations was founded on the central aspiration to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. We must be clear - conflicts can be solved only by political means. It is up to us whether our grandchildren will remember us with pride and hope for a better future as we today commemorate the work of the pioneers who founded the United Nations, as the power of justice is justice of power.
