Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): In
adopting this resolution on the situation in Kosovo, the
Security Council today finds itself at a historic turning
point. Through this action the Council is conferring the
international legitimacy necessary to settle this situation,
which is both tragic and complex.

The members of the Security Council have followed
with great concern the entire series of events that have
taken place in that Province, beginning with the Kosovo
Serbs' deportation of and commission of acts of violence
against Kosovar Albanians. The burnings, rapes and other
acts of violence recalled recent events in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which perhaps gave the Serbian forces
harmful experience of all forms of violence. That violence
was given its harshest expression in Kosovo, especially
since some of those who perpetrated it continue to hold
sway and are thus able to persist in their abusive
violence.

The resolution adopted today establishes rules and
regulations for the withdrawal of Serbian troops from the
province of Kosovo under the supervision of an
international security and civil presence. But we should
not forget that the substantial international efforts that
gave rise to this resolution should, in the final analysis,
guarantee the return of refugees displaced from their
homes, who represent over three quarters of the
population of the province. This is outrageous.

In our view, the urgent question is where, when and
how these displaced persons will return. Their houses and
farms have been demolished and burned and their identity
cards have been taken from them. Will they return to
their own territory to live in temporary tents and again be
refugees and displaced persons? This is indeed a tragedy,
whether created unwittingly or purposefully by the
Belgrade authorities, which will have consequences for a
long time to come. It is discouraging to know that some

 

refugees and displaced persons from Bosnia have still not
yet returned to their homes and territory. Joint international
efforts must therefore be made quickly to ensure that
refugees and displaced persons from Kosovo can return to
their homes, and priority must be given to that issue before
a decision is taken on a political settlement in Kosovo.

The delegation of Bahrain took part in the adoption of
resolution 1239 (1999), on the humanitarian aspects of the
situation in Kosovo, and bearing that resolution in mind, we
recommend that we give priority to the future of refugees
and displaced persons who, in the final analysis, are the
legitimate population of the province of Kosovo. By voting
in favour of the resolution today we have reaffirmed that
position, because we could not contemplate a settlement of
the situation in the province at a time when its own
population has been displaced.

