The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend invitations to the representatives of Ghana,
Ireland and Japan to participate in the meeting without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedures.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana
and current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States, His Excellency Nana Akufo-
Addo.

At the invitation of the President, Nana Akufo-
Addo (Ghana) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States, Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, and invited him to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Egeland to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Zephirin Diabre, Associate Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zephirin Diabre to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on ways to combat
subregional and cross-border problems in West Africa,
document S/2004/200.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and invite him to take the floor.


