The President (spoke in Russian): 1 thank the
representative of France for his statement. I shall
now make a statement in my national capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.

We congratulate Gary Quinlan on assuming his
role as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We hope
that under the Australian leadership the Committee
will continue to act in an impartial and objective
manner to find a political and diplomatic settlement to
the situation regarding Iran's nuclear programme. The
Chairman can count on our solid support.

The Committee has worked hard over the past
three months to continue efforts in different areas
of its activities, including investigations of possible
sanctions violations, processing information received
and agreeing on different draft documents. We note the
work ofthe Panel ofExperts in providing the Committee
with valuable assistance. We continue to feel that the
Panel must work on an impartial and objective basis
guided by the Committee.

With regard to the investigation of possible cases
of sanctions violations, an important area of work,
we should like to underscore that the conclusion and
assessments of the Committee must be based only on
verified and reliable information with a careful analysis
of the conditions surrounding the incidents. Hasty
conclusions have no place in that regard. That pertains
equally to the work of the Panel.

Russia has consistently called for a political and
diplomatic settlement of the situation with regard to
Iran's nuclear programme and sees no alternative to
a negotiated settlement. Efforts here must be carried
out on the basis of the principles of consistency
and reciprocity and in accordance with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We
remain convinced that the collective activities of the
international community in resolving pending matters
pertaining to Iran's nuclear programme are undermined
by unilateral sanctions, which in a number of cases
are extraterritorial in nature. That is categorically
unacceptable under international law.

We call for progress in the negotiations process in
the six-party talks, as well as in talks between Iran and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
hope that the forthcoming six-party talks with Iran next
week will be effective and allow for both sides to come
together in their positions.

On the whole, we understand the indisputable
right of Iran to develop a civilian nuclear programme,
including enrichment, after resolving all outstanding
issues and bringing Iran's nuclear programme come
under the reliable and comprehensive oversight of the
IAEA. Russia continues to do all that devolves upon it to
achieve progress in resolving the situation surrounding
Iran's nuclear programme.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan to respond
to comments and questions.

