Major General Finn: I thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Security Council for
your statements and supportive comments. I think, in
relation to the queries raised, that I can perhaps stay
with them and make a few general comments, starting
with the United States query regarding how troop-
contributing countries notify us of their caveats. By
the way, a caveat for myself is the Force Commander
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), who is the operational commander in the
Golan. I hope that I do not step on his toes in any way.

In relation to caveats, we should recall that UNDOF
existed for many years in a very benign situation, with
both parties to the agreement, Israel and Syria, largely
abiding by the terms of the Disengagement Agreement,
a situation that completely changed from 2012 to 2013.
We had issues of observation posts being overrun, car-
jackings, observers - even UNDOF members - being
detained for short periods, and deficiencies in medical
evacuation and casualty evacuation. That was well
described by the representative of New Zealand, which
was one of the countries that imposed caveats, and
has been raised by all the countries that have imposed
caveats.

It is completely understood what drove the
imposition of those restrictions. In short, UNDOF
underwent a big reorganization, and by the end of 2013
and in early 2014, it had become a much more assertive
force with a robust force reserve and capability.
As mentioned by the representative of New Zealand,
countries with UNDOF and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), have
mitigated the problems to a large extent with better
medical evacuation facilities, contingency planning,
armoured vehicles, strict movement control and special
surveillance, among other elements. The conditions
were such that the Secretary-General in his reports
to the Security Council was able to point out those
mitigating measures and encourage troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) to lift their caveats. There were also
many briefings to TCCs by UNDOF and to UNTSO
TCCs by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Thankfully, countries like New Zealand and many
others did lift those caveats, but, as I said, there are still
some that did not. With regard to how the caveats were
reported, there were no major sudden notifications.
They were done in a reasoned way, I think, through
the Permanent Representatives to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

The representative of Spain asked a question as
to what extent we can still carry out our mandate.
Observer Group Golan is doing that to the best of its
ability, meeting the tasks set by the Force Commander
of UNDOF. It is still manning observation points on the
Alpha line, and it has taken up additional temporary
observation posts - all ofwhich, to some extent, fill the
gaps created by having to leave the area of separation.
In that regard, Observation Group Golan and UNDOF
are well placed to continue to carry out the mandate as
best as they can, within the constraints that currently
exist, while not being able to position themselves within
the area of separation to the extent that we would want.

I think that that more or less covers what I wanted
to say in response.

