Mr. Kim Won-soo: At the outset, I too would like
to thank the Spanish presidency ofthe Security Council
for organizing this open debate and allowing me to
brief the Council.

I congratulate the Security Council on its adoption
of resolution 2325 (2016), endorsing the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004). My deep appreciation
also goes to the Government of Spain, and in particular
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for their tireless work
in chairing the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for the past two years. Under
Spain's stewardship, resolution 1540 (2004) has been

enhanced as a bulwark against the possible proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.

I also congratulate the Plurinational State of Bolivia
for taking up the chairmanship of the 1540 Committee
in anticipation. Bolivia has big shoes to fill, but we also
hope that it will take the work of the 1540 Committee
to a much higher level.

The Deputy Secretary-General has just given us a
sharp reminder that the threats and risks of a non-State
actor acquiring a weapon of mass destruction are not
receding. How to tackle these threats and risks is a
decision for Member States to make, but I would like to
highlight three priorities.

The first is biological weapons. The resolution
just adopted recognizes the growing threats and risks
associated with biological weapons. The need to
address these threats and risks is all the more important
given that the recent Review Conference of the Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention fell short
of expectations. There is much more work to be done
in implementing preventative measures for biological
weapons. One near-term step, as reflected in the new
resolution, could be to enhance the information sharing
mechanism on biological threats and risks between
States, international organizations and regional
organizations. For our part, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs will continue to strengthen
the Secretary-General's Mechanism for Investigation
of Alleged Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons,
in line with the recommendation of the 2013 lessons-
learned exercise. The Mechanism is the only
instrument at our disposal to investigate if a biological
instrument occurs.

The second is disruptive technology. I welcome
the resolution's call for Member States to take into
account the rapid advances in science and technology
and to control intangible transfers of technology and
information. The international community cannot
afford to lag behind a technological curve. The 1540
Committee could build on the request made in resolution
2325 (2016) and hold an open meeting next year on
technological and scientific issues. Such a meeting
could address the following two issues. First, emerging
technologies and scientific development could have
potential weapons of mass destruction capabilities or
can be adapted as a means of delivery must be assessed;
and secondly, we must consider how to prevent their
misuse while safeguarding peaceful applications. The
1540 Committee could also utilize its interaction with
the industry through the Wiesbaden process, in order
to further elaborate how the private sector can self-
regulate to prevent the misuse of technology. That might
include the development of industry codes of conduct
and ethical standards on dual-use technologies with
proliferation risks for weapons of mass destruction.

The third priority is capability. Since the last
comprehensive review, the 1540 Committee and its
Expert Group, in partnership with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, our Office, have
substantially expanded their outreach. In the last five
years, 188 States have participated in those outreach
activities. That is a significant achievement but it is
not enough, given the growing threats and risks, as
well the needs of Member States. Unfortunately, our
capacity to respond to requests for help from Member
States is declining. Donors have been generous, but
the gap between the needs and the available resources
is growing. We commend the call of resolution 2325
(2016) on all States to voluntarily contribute to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities. We want to reiterate our
readiness to better match donors with recipients. We
intend to raise the quality of assistance alongside
the quantity.

Last, but not least, are the institutional issues.
As recognized by the Council, the 1540 Committee
needs institutional support that is fit for purpose in our
fast-changing security environment. We must ensure
that the resources at the disposal of the Committee,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Expert
Group - through both a regular budget and voluntary
funding - are being used in the most efficient and
effective way possible. For that purpose, our Office will
do our best to support the Chair and the members of the
Committee in their assessment of how to make the best
use of the available resources, including streamlining
support structures.

Today's debate is a welcome reaffirmation of the
gravity with which the Security Council treats the
threats and risks posed by weapons of mass destruction.
We count on Council members to continue to safeguard
international peace and security, not only by announcing
preventative measures through resolution 1540 (2004),
but also by looking ahead at response challenges in the
eventuality that prevention fails. The consequences of
an attack would be disastrous and we must be prepared.

I would like to close by repeating the Secretary-

General's many calls, and the Deputy Secretary-
General's call made this morning before my statement,
that the ultimate guarantee against any use of a
weapon of mass destruction is through their total and
irreversible elimination.

