Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Mr. President, my
delegation is grateful to you for having organized this
important open meeting ofthe Council this morning.

I wish to thank Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury
of Bangladesh for the important briefing he has just
given us as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132
(1997) concerning Sierra Leone. Thanks to his able
stewardship of the Committee, we have before us today
a comprehensive report by the Panel of Experts on
Sierra Leone Diamonds and Arms, as mandated by
Security Council resolution 1306 (2000). The
preparation of this important report no doubt required
enormous courage, determination and dedicated hard
work by the Panel. We are grateful to the Chairman and
all the Panel members for this and thank them very
warmly for their highly professional, well-researched
and bold report and for the important recommendations
they have proposed. We welcome the presence of the
Panel members in our discussion today.

As I speak on the Panel's report, the image that
comes to mind is that of numerous children, women
and men who have suffered cruel death or have been
severely maimed and disabled in the senseless conflict
that has gripped Sierra Leone for several years now. It
is not without a sense of revulsion that we note from
the Panel's findings that the misery inflicted on the
people of Sierra Leone is not really for a legitimate
political, social, economic or humanitarian cause
championed by the rebel forces, but actually for the
self-enrichment of individuals and their friends, at
home and elsewhere, utilizing the natural resources of
the country and diamonds from Sierra Leone in
particular. It is indeed outrageous that the lives of so
many innocent Sierra Leonean children, women and
men have been extinguished and so many others have
been condemned to live miserably for ever with vital
limbs cut off simply because a powerful few have
entertained a sinister dream to amass unlimited wealth
through illegitimate means. It is our firm belief that the
collective conscience of mankind, represented here in
the United Nations, must demand answers from all
those who stand accused of involvement in the heinous
crimes against the people of Sierra Leone.

The nexus between unbridled political ambition,
weapons trade and diamonds was established earlier by
a similar panel on Angola, where again a meaningless
civil war, financed through the illegal exploitation of
diamonds in rebel-held areas, has left countless dead or
maimed for life.

Sierra Leone was the next victim of such a nexus,
and now we have another panel investigating the same
phenomenon in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The international community cannot afford to allow the
diamond-arms-politics nexus to cross yet another
frontier, be it in Africa or elsewhere. This deadly
phenomenon is too costly in every respect. It is
extremely costly, in particular, in terms of human
suffering. It also drains national and international
resources, which normally should be allocated to the
development agenda. We have seen that civil
conflicts- as in Sierra Leone, Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - spill easily
across frontiers, and whole subregions get embroiled in
them one way or another. I wish to commend the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for its tireless efforts to help resolve
conflicts in the West African subregion despite the
meagre resources ofthe member countries.

The international community, through the United
Nations, has invested heavily in peacekeeping
operations in Sierra Leone, as in other conflict
situations. The sanctions regime put in place by the
Security Council for Sierra Leone is for the purpose of
ending the civil war in the country as soon as possible.
The fact that the sanctions have been violated, and the
conflict has thus been prolonged, is reprehensible and
needs to be condemned most vigorously.

It is already well known that the Sierra Leone
sanctions are being violated with impunity by vested
interests in the illicit diamond trade and by suppliers of
arms to the rebels. The report of the Panel has not only
confirmed this, but has also identified the guilty in
many cases.

The Panel has also proposed a number of
measures for the Security Council to take to better
enforce the sanctions regime. We have examined the
recommendations carefully and believe they are
appropriate. We welcome in particular the
recommendations of the Panel to establish a global
certification scheme to regulate all trade in diamonds.
Such a measure will help put an end to illegal trade in
diamonds and to the consequences of this nefarious
practice. We also welcome the Panel's
recommendations aimed at controlling the flow of
arms. In this regard, we believe that the greater onus
must rest with the countries where the arms originate.
We also support the proposal that a proper mechanism
be set up within the United Nations system to better
enforce sanctions imposed by the Security Council.

We have no doubt that before making its
recommendations the Panel researched the issues fully
and pursued every lead to its logical conclusion. We
also believe that if any party feels aggrieved, it should
have the opportunity to explain its position - backed
by proper evidence and within a specified time
frame- to the Security Council. In this regard, we
wish to underline the need for the Council to take
action as quickly as possible on the Panel' s
recommendations.

The role of Liberia in sanctions-busting, as well
as in destabilising its neighbours, is clear and beyond
any doubt. My delegation has taken note of the draft
resolution under consideration to further strengthen
sanctions against Liberia. We propose to support the
draft resolution, and we shall participate actively in its
finalization so that it can be adopted by the Council.

