Mr. Auviieirt (Estonia): Estonia welcomes the
opportunity to explore the ways that contribute to
successful reconciliation processes. Estonia aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by observer of
the European Union.

Our intervention focuses on the role of justice and
international courts as a tool to reconcile communities
that must learn again to live together in a single society.
The need for reconciliation often follows a violent
armed conflict. Even when conflicts come to a physical
end, suffering, pain and humiliation continue to occupy
the minds and souls of those affected. The risk of
resurgence of conflict is especially high in cases of
large-scale human rights violations. A society can start
healing only when reliable and objective diagnoses of
the conflict are provided, the truth is told and justice
is served. Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan once
said that if we do not have justice and people do not
feel that their grievances have been dealt with, it is
extremely difficult to get serious reconciliation.

In order to ensure justice, the Security Council has
established or assisted in the establishment of several
ad hoc international courts and tribunals to try those
responsible for the most serious crimes committed
during previous or ongoing conflicts. The establishment
of the International Criminal Court expresses
the equally strong conviction of the international
community that justice is an intrinsic part of building
peace, security and the well-being of society. Estonia
recognizes that these justice mechanisms can provide a
valuable platform for elucidating the truth of what has
happened, giving victims the opportunity to have their
voices heard and providing accountability. At the same
time, we recall that it is the primary duty of States to
prevent and respond to international crimes and that
international mechanisms must complement and not
replace national courts.

First, ensuring that perpetrators are held responsible
for the atrocities they have committed and delivering
justice to victims of their crimes, in particular sexual
and gender-based crimes, assists in tackling and
preventing the stigmatization of victims by the rest
of society. Justice and accountability mechanisms
offer victims an objective and public forum where the
atrocities committed are, perhaps for the first time, not
denied or even depicted as national victories. These
platforms give the victims an opportunity to have their
stories and grievances heard and to bring a lawful
closure to the conflict. We would also like to stress
here the need to fully include the gender perspective in
peace processes and reconciliation efforts.

Secondly, the ruling of an international court or
tribunal expresses the strong condemnation by the
international community of the crimes committed.
That kind of condemnation has the effect of stripping
perpetrators of their influence and power and thereby
preventing them from sustaining violence and hatred,
which could lead to further conflicts.

Thirdly, beyond the specific cases that are submitted
to international courts and tribunals, the authority of
those bodies contributes to establishing guidelines for
justice and respect for the rights of victims, which serve
as guidance for all States in the area of atrocity crimes.
That is how the work of international criminal justice
mechanisms contributes to strengthening peace and
security throughout the world.

To conclude, Estonia recognizes the contribution
that justice in general, and the international courts
and tribunals in particular, can make to reconciliation.
We firmly believe that the delivery of justice creates
conditions that are conducive to reconciliation and that
the Security Council needs to play its role in ensuring
that justice prevails.

