Ms. Giammarinaro: It is a privilege for me to
have this opportunity to participate in this open debate
of the Security Council under the Italian presidency.
The Security Council has been actively committed to
this topic since the presidential statement adopted in
December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/25), and subsequently
through the annual reports of the Secretary-General
and the Council's resolutions.

In fulfilment of my mandate, I have reported
twice on this subject to the General Assembly and to
the Human Rights Council, and recently submitted a
joint report with the Special Rapporteur on the sale and
sexual exploitation of children, focused on children's
vulnerabilities deriving from conflict. I am convinced
that trafficking in persons in the context of conflict and
post-conflict situations, trafficking in persons fleeing
conflict, and the protection of the rights of victims
and potential Victims require urgent, concerted and
effective action.

The shocking video broadcast a few days ago by
CNN showing an auction of young migrants, publicized
as slave workforce sold for a few dollars, shows that
trafficking for the purpose of exploitation and slavery
is a tragic reality nowadays. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his strong and inspiring words
on the subject.

Research carried out by United Nations
agencies - including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the International Organization
for Migration and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees - as well as by
non-governmental organizations, such as Caritas
Internationalis, among others, confirms that this human
rights violation is a systematic component of conflict
that, in certain circumstances, amounts to war crimes
or crimes against humanity. Trafficking is always
fuelled by political instability, and happens on a regular
basis in the context oflarge migration flows. Moreover,
as a form of gender-based violence, it disproportionally
affects women and girls, especially for the purpose of
sexual exploitation, and children and young adults on a
massive scale.

Egregious patterns of trafficking, forced labour
and slavery have been found to be a strategy of terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh, Boko Haram and others. Furthermore,
such gross human rights violations are systematically
perpetrated in the context of every conflict, or in areas
at risk of conflict, by criminal or armed groups that
take advantage of the breakdown of the rule of law to
carry out the dirty business of trafficking in persons
and to become more powerful and dangerous. That is
one of the reasons that the prevention of trafficking for
any purpose is directly linked with the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In that light, a human rights perspective is crucial.
Human rights Violations such as trafficking in persons
are not only a consequence but also a cause of conflict,
when they reach a massive dimension and amount
to gross human rights violations and serious crimes
perpetrated by criminal or armed groups, including
in the context of migration, and especially in transit
countries. Therefore, the Security Council agenda on
trafficking should be linked with the process leading
to a global compact on migration and refugees, as
well as the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development.
Moreover, trafficking should be addressed in connection
with the women and peace and security agenda and
with that on the six grave violations against children
during armed conflict.

A particular concern relates to the situation of
children who are used as child soldiers or sexual slaves
during conflict and are disproportionally affected by
displacement, often travelling alone to reach a safe
country and being subject to every form of trafficking,
exploitation and abuse. It is an obligation under
international law to protect them at all times. In that
context, States should ban the detention of children for
violations of immigration laws and regulations.
States are required by international law to take
effective measures to ensure that victims of trafficking
are protected from further exploitation and harm,
including during conflict and humanitarian crises.
They also bear an obligation to prevent the violation
of, and respect and fulfil, the human rights of victims
of trafficking, including by exercising their due
diligence in holding non-State actors, including armed
groups and criminal groups, accountable at all times.
Moreover, an innovative approach is needed, based on
the good practices of some United Nations agencies,
regarding early screening and identification - not
only of victims of trafficking but of people vulnerable
to it among displaced populations, asylum seekers and,
in general terms, people fleeing conflict - aimed at
adopting tailored solutions to protect vulnerable people
from trafficking and exploitation. I am confident that
such an approach will be reflected in the new draft
resolution to be adopted later today.

Preventing and combating human trafficking
cannot be achieved by one State alone. The lack of
international cooperation is often a source of further
human rights violations, especially in the context of
migration. I would like to recall here the many who lost
their lives in an attempt to reach safe shores, in Europe
and elsewhere, and the many who survived their perilous
journeys to end up in situations oftrafficking for forced
labour or slavery. States must respond quickly and
effectively and adopt a shared responsibility approach in
order to incorporate anti-trafficking in all humanitarian
interventions in conflict zones as a lifesaving activity,
to establish wider channels for regular migration, to
ensure full respect of the principle of non-refoulement,
to implement relocations in a preferred country, family
reunification procedures and effective child protection
systems, as powerful means to prevent trafficking and,
simultaneously, to ensure stability, peace and security.

