Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like at the outset to thank the Nigerian presidency
for having convened this debate and the Secretary-
General for his very thorough and detailed briefing.

We have said repeatedly that the vision and
contributions of regional organizations are crucial and
irreplaceable in preventing conflict and strengthening
peace processes. That is why these organizations must
strengthen their ability to act, taking account of new
approaches and strategies, in order to take on a more
direct role in terms of peace and regional security,
in accordance with the spirit of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

The conduct and interests of local actors and
networks as well as emerging threats characterized
by their intensity must be considered from a regional
perspective in order to adequately prevent and tackle
the crises that emerge.

The Latin American and Caribbean region is
a zone of peace that through cooperative efforts
promotes sustainable development as one of the pillars
of stability and cooperation for peace, a vision that is
present in the various bodies and mechanisms in that
region. Here we wish to acknowledge the important role
played by the Organization of American States (OAS)
in strengthening cooperation in security matters. For
more than a decade, it has incorporated the concept of
multidimensional security in order to tackle emerging
threats, including terrorism, transnational organized
crime, the global drug problem, corruption, money-
laundering, illicit arms trafficking, human trafficking
and the possession of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State groups. At the same time, the OAS
recognizes that extreme poverty and the exclusion
from society of broad sectors of the population affect
stability and democracy, eroding social cohesiveness
and undermining States' security. The OAS's approach
constitutes a significant contribution to the ways
in which regional organizations can deal with new
threats, i.e. by addressing their underlying causes and
promoting inclusive development in order to maintain
international peace and security.

We appreciate the fact that cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional bodies is

becoming more structured, given the concrete role that

those bodies have to play in managing conflicts. In that

context, interaction between the Security Council and

the Peace and Security Council of the African Union

can promote a more effective partnership involving the

multiple actors that negotiations and inclusive dialogue

aimed at building and consolidating peace require.

We also appreciate the role played by the African

Union peacekeeping operations conducted within the

context of United Nations mandates, and emphasize
the importance for them of being able to rely on
funding that is predictable, sustainable and flexible, if
they are to be as effective as possible. Ensuring that
standardized procedures and training in human rights
and international humanitarian law issues are used in
equipping those missions and their contingents is also a
crucial area to which regional organizations can make
a positive contribution.

Recent experience such as that in Sierra Leone
have shown how the United Nations, working together
with the African Union and subregional organizations,
can help to consolidate peace processes, based on the
principles of national ownership and inclusiveness,
while ensuring the involvement of civil society and,
of course, the participation of women. In that regard,
regional and subregional organizations are crucial to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), and we would
like to highlight the African Union's proclamation
of 2015 as the Year of Women's Empowerment and
Development towards Africa's Agenda 2063. The
Agenda refers specifically to the role of regional
organizations in consolidating democratic governance,
human rights and the rule of law in Africa and is an
example of the strategic vision that dealing with that
issue requires. Finally, we would like to emphasize
the commitment of African countries and regional
and subregional organizations to the second five-year
review of the peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations, illustrating how regional experiences can
influence global processes.

We would like to conclude by reaffirming the high
priority that Chile assigns to regionalism's contribution
to ensuring greater effectiveness in our system as a
whole, especially through an understanding of local
contexts. We believe that cooperation should be at the
heart of that approach if we are to achieve a functioning
multilateralism.

