Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. My thanks
go also to the other members of the Council for
providing Sheikh Hamad bin J assim bin Jabr Al-Thani,
head of the Arab Ministerial Committee on Syria, and
His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, with the opportunity to
enlighten the Council on the tragic situation in Syria
and on the League's determined efforts to address the
crisis.

My delegation has listened carefully to the two
briefings on the crisis in sisterly Syria and the
consequences of a confrontation that has claimed
innocent lives, led to the severe suffering of civilians
and caused the displacement of families within Syria or
to neighbouring countries.

We have noted in particular that the two Arab
officials have stressed the importance, utility and
viability of the Arab initiative for addressing the
situation in Syria and laying the ground for a solution
based on dialogue and national reconciliation and
concord. We have also noted their emphasis on calling
upon Council members to endorse the Arab plan and
extend to it the support necessary to ensure its earliest
possible implementation in order to end the
increasingly painful situation in Syria. We express our
sincere hope that the Security Council will support the
Arab plan, allowing Syria to regain its national
harmony, tranquillity and stability.

The phenomenon now commonly called the Arab
Spring has highlighted the aspirations of Arab peoples
to entrench democracy and respect for human rights
and to live in dignity and social justice. The Arab
countries have responded to those legitimate demands
according to their respective specificities, abilities and
experience. Building on their active solidarity with
those aspirations, the Arab countries have contributed
when necessary, through the League of Arab States or
subregional groupings, to resolving intractable crises,
which cannot be likened to interference in the internal
affairs of the concerned countries. Such involvement
has been undertaken in accordance with the provisions
of the United Nations Charter, which calls on regional
organizations to strive to prevent conflicts and their
escalation and to seek their resolution by available
peaceful means, without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Thus, in view of the escalating situation in Syria
and the thousands of victims felled, the widening
confrontations and the absence of dialogue between the
parties, the League of Arab States took the initiative to
stop the bloodshed by sending a team of observers to
monitor the Syrian Government's implementation of its
commitments and to protect unarmed Syrian civilians.

Morocco was among the first countries to
contribute to the Arab League's observer mission,
which had access to areas where confrontations had
been taking place. Morocco kept its observers in the
field until the end of last week, despite the difficulties
and obstacles they faced in fulfilling their humanitarian
mission.

In that regard, while we applaud the efforts made
by the members of the mission, who worked devotedly
under very difficult and dangerous conditions, we fully
understand the motivations and reasons that led the
States of the Gulf Cooperation Council to withdraw
their own observers from the mission. We also consider
the decision of the League of Arab States to suspend
the mission as being fully justified. That decision was
prompted by the dangerous escalation of the situation
and by Syria's choice of the security option, which has
claimed an increasing number of victims.

We believe that the mission afforded a good
opportunity to establish conditions conducive to the
calm required to turn the page and begin a new period
free of violence. However, the Council of the Arab
League, at its ministerial meeting of 22 January,
concluded in its assessment that Syria's implementation
of some of its commitments was insufficient.

The presentation of the report of the observer
mission (S/2012/71, enclosure 4) has coincided with a
very serious escalation of violence and an
unprecedented increase in the number of victims,
including children and sometimes entire families. That
led the League of Arab States to reassess the situation
and launch an Arab initiative that addresses all aspects
of the crisis. It is a political approach based on the
non-use of force, dialogue, the formation of a national
unity Government and preparations for democratic
elections.

It is worth recalling that, during all phases of the
Arab endeavours, the Arab countries have consistently
stressed the following cardinal principles. The first
involves the immediate and full cessation of all acts of
violence and use of force, as well as the promotion of
political dialogue. The second principle is to allow the
Syrian people to fulfil their legitimate aspirations to
build their national institutions. The third is to preserve
Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the
cohesiveness of its pluralistic society. Finally, the
fourth principle is to exclude any foreign military
intervention.

In accordance with paragraph 7 of the latest
decision of the Council of the Arab League, taken at its
ministerial meeting of 22 January, and in its capacity as
the Arab member of the Security Council, Morocco has
introduced a draft resolution that enjoys the support of
Member States both inside and outside the Security
Council.

The objective of the draft in particular is to seek

Security Council endorsement of the road map adopted

by the Arab League in order to reach a political

solution to the crisis in Syria. It also seeks the

Council's support for Arab decisions aimed at ending
all acts of violence and the bloodshed in Syria.

We sincerely hope that negotiations on the draft
will produce consensus in the Security Council that
gives impetus to the launching of a political process
involving both the Syrian Government and the
opposition, through serious and responsible dialogue
that leads to a new era in the great history of our
brotherly Syrian people.

