The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to ask that all those present now stand and
join in observing a minute of silence in solemn
commemoration of the one-year anniversary of the
devastating earthquake that struck Haiti on 12 January
2010 and of those who lost their lives or were injured
on that day.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilerice.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2006/920)

Report of the Secretary-General on the request
of Nepal for United Nations assistance in
support of its peace process (8/2010/658)

The President: I should like to invite the
representative of Nepal to participate in this meeting
under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/658, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"As the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) completes its preparations for its
departure on 15 January 2011, the Security
Council expresses its appreciation and thanks to
the Secretary-General's Representative, Karin
Landgren, and the UNMIN team for their efforts
in assisting the people of Nepal as they work to
complete the peace process.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the peace process and calls on the caretaker
Government of Nepal and all political parties to
redouble their efforts, to continue to work
together in the spirit of consensus to fulfil the
commitments that they made in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and other
agreements, and to resolve expeditiously the
outstanding issues of the peace process. The
Security Council encourages Nepal to complete
its new constitution within the foreseen time
frame to help it build a better, more equitable and
democratic future for its people.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing engagement of the Secretary-General
and United Nations bodies as they continue to be
supportive of the peace process and the people of
Nepal.

"The Security Council will continue to be
supportive of the peace process in Nepal."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/201l/l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
11-20684

