Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes to
express its solidarity with those who have perished in
the recent terrorist attacks in their places of worship in
Sri Lanka, the United States of America and, yesterday,
in Burkina Faso, which the Council visited last month.
May their souls rest in peace.

We also express our solidarity with Mozambique,
which has been visited repeatedly by devastating
cyclones this past month, setting its development
agenda back decades.

The Council deals with the maintenance of
international peace and security on a daily basis. It is
our primary responsibility to ensure that all peoples
of the world are able to live without the threat of the
scourge of war and enjoy the ability to live in larger
freedom. In carrying out that mandate, the Council must
act in a fair and balanced manner. When responding to
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations, we must act in a consistent manner.
When we act, or rather do not act, when it comes to
the matter of Palestine, we jeopardize the integrity and
credibility of the Council.

The Council must act decisively, as it does on other
matters on its agenda, to ensure that there is a resolution
to the conflict through a negotiated process. We must
reaffirm that there can be no sustainable solution to
the crises in the Middle East that does not include two
independent States, one for the people of Palestine and
one for the people of Israel. The only credible solution
must be built on the two-State solution, within the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
Palestinian State, where Palestinians and Israelis can
live side by side in peace and security. The Security
Council must make every effort to bring both parties to
the negotiating table in order to reach a solution.

The guidelines for those negotiations, as the
representative of France pointed out, must be based on
the established international legal framework, which
includes General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, to name but a few.

Unilateral actions by Israel, including its refusal
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron and its continued withholding of the
tax revenue that it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority have done nothing but exacerbate the security
and humanitarian situation in Palestine. As long as the
situation remains unresolved and the territories remain
occupied, we run the risk of changing the facts on the
ground. The recent unilateral developments related to
the occupied Syrian Golan are a case in point. Final
status issues cannot be pre-empted by Changing
the conditions and facts on the ground, but must be
negotiated by the parties.

We commend the German presidency for
highlighting women's issues during this month. When
discussing issues in the Middle East, it is also important
to focus on the impact of the conflict on Palestinian
women. A recent study indicated that the occupation
disproportionately impacts the daily lives of Palestinian
women. As we delay action and the Security Council is
immobilized, lands and cities are being systematically
handed over to Israel. We do not recognize that. United
Nations agencies are immobilized and emasculated.
More and more settlements are being built in occupied
Palestinian territories. We do not recognize them. No
people in history have accepted oppression forever. The
same is true for the Palestinians.

In conclusion, the United Nations cannot abdicate
its responsibility and outsource its core mandate of
maintaining international peace and security. The
United Nations, its membership and the Security
Council cannot sit back and wait for the solution to be
presented to it by somebody somewhere. This is not
and has never been the role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. We must do all we can to carry
out this vital responsibility bestowed upon us by the
Charter of the United Nations.

Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in 
Spanish): We join others in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for her ever-concise
briefing, and Nada Majdalani and Gidon Bromberg
for briefing us on the environmental dimension of the
peace process and the precarious situation in Gaza
and the West Bank in the face of such challenges as
serious water shortages. We are convinced that the
transboundary nature of water makes it necessary for it
to be included in any attempt to build peace, so we take
this opportunity to congratulate them on the admirable
work they are doing in helping countries collaborate on
such a crucial issue as cooperation on shared waters.

We would like to begin by congratulating the new
Palestinian Prime Minister, Mohammad Shtayyeh, on
the formation of his Government, in the hope that it will
overcome the great challenges facing the Palestinian
people and its nation-building project. Similarly,
we congratulate Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu on his victory in his recent election to a fifth
term of office, hoping that he will continue to lead his
country along the path of development.

The exercise of democracy through elections,
Government formation and fresh governing mandates
marks a new stage of optimism, ideals, hopes and
renewed energy, which gives us the opportunity to
revive those things that have been stagnant or inert,
such as the will to resolve this conflict, which is the
pivotal point for peace in the Middle East.

We continue to witness with regret the increase in
tensions between the parties because of the persistence
of elements that gave rise to it: widespread violence,
particularly against civilians, including women and
children, provocation and use of inflammatory rhetoric,
actions against and in violation of international law
and order, and the lack of internal reconciliation. The
safety and well-being of the civilian population must
be our highest priority, overcoming all differences and
obstacles to sustainable peace. We therefore strongly
condemn any act of violence and intimidation against
the civilian population, especially the indiscriminate
firing of rockets, mortars and incendiary devices, and
the excessive use of force.

With respect to the population, it is also with
great disquiet and concern that we see the persistent
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, which is experiencing a severe state of
insecurity and lack of basic necessities for well-being,
including delivery of such key services as electricity,
water and health, as well as the lack of jobs. In this
regard, we acknowledge the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, in providing, with international support,
relief to the inhabitants of Gaza.

The picture described by our speakers today of
the impact of water scarcity on the region's economic
and social development exacerbates an already fragile
social situation and increases vulnerability to food
insecurity, which itself puts at risk the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and the human
development obj ectives forthe most affectedpopulations.
Such aspects as water pollution, overexploitation,
urbanization and a long conflict have come together
and resulted in the current worrying situation.
Another situation of great concern is the delicate
financial situation that the Palestinian Government is
going through, with several factors that exacerbate it,
including the involuntary withholding of collected taxes
and the decrease in international assistance, which have
generated a loss of 65 per cent of its income, inducing
its leaders to take austerity measures that, in a vicious
circle, create greater pressure on the economy, thereby
increasing demands on people's living conditions.

We need to be aware of the critical moment in which
we find ourselves if we are to achieve a negotiated and
lasting peace in the Middle East that recognizes the right
of all peoples to self-determination, independence and
sovereignty, and the right to live in peace and security
within clearly recognized borders. We must embrace
the positions that bring us closest to a definitive solution
to the conflict - indeed, the solution that is the most
fair and inclusive - based on previous initiatives and
consensus agreements, and on a renewed political will,
with a view to our future generations and the most
vulnerable populations - women and children - while
remaining faithful to our responsibilities as individuals
and nations of the world that respect the multilateral
framework and identify with universal rights and
development goals towards the fulfilment of a two-
State solution.

