Mr. Juppe (France) (spoke in French): The
United Nations Charter entrusts to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. The Organization also recognizes
the sovereignty of nations and non-interference as
fundamental principles. In 2005, the evolution of our
work led us to recognize that the Council had the
obligation to act when the responsibility to protect was
not assured and when gross violations of human rights
took place before our eyes, and that Governments were
accountable for acts of commission and omission alike.

That is the context in which we hold today's
meeting, and I thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in calling it. It is an opportunity for us to
consider what the Council can and should do to help
make the Arab Spring a force for peace and security in
the region and the world.

For more than a year, the Arab world has seen
unprecedented sweeping changes. With extraordinary
courage Tunisians, Egyptians, Libyans, Yemenis and
Syrians have braved oppression to demand their rights.
With admirable determination they have arisen to call
for their legitimate rights to freedom, human dignity
and democracy. France sees that thrust attests to the
universal aspiration to democracy, confirming yet
again the lessons of history that regimes that squelch
their people's voices have no future, and that sooner or
later Governments that stifle human rights end up
crumbling.

The Security Council would not have known
about the situations in question but for the fact that a
number of them had degenerated under the obstinacy
of archaic Governments. In Tunisia and Egypt, the
people themselves gained the ouster of discredited
authorities and the beginnings of democratic
processes - not without difficulty, but nevertheless
without unleashing bloodbaths. In Jordan and
Morocco, the political authorities bravely chose
dialogue, reform and elections. I was in Morocco only
a few days ago, and that country is a hopeful example
for the entire region.

Of course, nothing has been settled once and for
all. Of course, as we all know, every democratic
revolution carries in itself the risk of disappointment
and retrogression. We all know that democratic
transitions take time. But history is on the march, and
the changes sweeping the Arab world are an
opportunity for the region - and for peace.

Libya, meanwhile, was not as fortunate, and the
Council's obligation immediately became clear. The
Libyan people rose up against a dictator and a regime
determined to drown its hopes for freedom in blood.
On 26 February 2011, in an expression of universal
condemnation, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1970 (2011), imposing sanctions
and calling on the International Criminal Court to deal
with the brutal repression, which its Prosecutor
classified as a crime against humanity. In the face of a
dictator threatening to massacre the population of
Benghazi, regional organizations, led by the League of
Arab States, but also including the African Union,
called on the Security Council to act. That was the
reason for resolution 1973 (2011), which France fought
tirelessly for.

France is proud to have played a part in the
adoption of that resolution. We strongly believe that in
it the Council collectively made the only right and
honourable decision. With that resolution, we saved
thousands of lives and protected the Libyan population.
Because of it, Benghazi will go down in history not as
a town of martyrdom but as a symbol of freedom. I
want to affirm unequivocally that to call into question
the legitimacy and legality of our actions, and to
insinuate that they themselves were tantamount to
criminal acts - despite all evidence to the contrary, as
the Human Rights Council's Commission of Inquiry
confirmed yet again - is an utter distortion of history
and an insult to all Libyans who bravely fought to win
their freedom. Today, in adopting resolution 2040
(2012) to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, the Council has continued to
shoulder its responsibility for helping the country to
build the rule of law and the foundations of its progress
towards democracy.

In Yemen, the Council has also met its
obligations. The unanimous adoption of resolution
2014 (2011) last October led to a peaceful transfer of
power, based on the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council. After months of crises and conflicts, a
national unity Government was established, a new
President was elected with wide support, and tensions
were eased. Of course, not all problems have been
solved, but a new era of Yemeni history has dawned. In
both cases, the Council acted effectively because it
answered not only the calls of populations but also
those of regional organizations, which provided clarity
and pointed the way to political solutions.

Today, the Council is faced with a tragedy in
Syria. For the past year, ever since the first large
peaceful demonstration took place in Dar'a on
18 March 2011, the situation has grown more
unacceptable every day. Deaf to the voice of its people
and to all the appeals of the international community,
including those of the Arab League and its close
partners, the regime has plunged into ever more bloody
repression and ever more brutal violence. That
headlong rush has been unequivocally condemned in
the strongest possible terms by the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council and the report of the
Commission of Inquiry, whose indictment of the
regime is overwhelming, and which again today
confirms that crimes against humanity are taking place.

The urgent necessity is clearly to stop the
violence and to secure the population's access to
humanitarian aid. Ms. Amos will soon give the Council
an account of her visit, and she has already said that
she is horrified by what she has seen. We are already
familiar with the criminal acts, violence and horrors
that Syrian civilians live with every day. Like Hama
30 years ago, Homs will live in human history as a
town whose martyrdom haunts our memory.

Only a political response to the legitimate hopes
of the people and the enactment of the reforms so
loudly called for will lead to a resolution of the Syrian
crisis. That will be possible by means of a transition
based on the plan proposed by the League of Arab
States on 22 January, with the broad support of the
international community, as evidenced by General
Assembly resolution 66/253 of 16 February and the
4 February Security Council vote. No other peaceful
solution is possible.

As I stressed before the Human Rights Council a
few days ago, the Syrian regime's crimes must not go
unpunished. The day will come when that country's
civil and military authorities will have to answer for
their actions in court. We should set in motion an
action by the International Criminal Court.

Let us make no mistake. The Council has a
historic responsibility for the crisis in Syria. We have
the obligation to put an end to the gross violations of
human rights and the downward spiral that threatens
the peace in Lebanon and the region. By failing to act,
we are abandoning the oppressed to their oppressors
and the Syrian people to violence and brutality. Every
day we fail to act, we are letting civil war gain yet
more ground over a peaceful solution. To be a member
of the Council is to be firmly engaged in the cause of
world peace and security. It is also to place the
common good above all other considerations. It is our
responsibility to act - and to act now - to finally put
an end to the martyrdom of the Syrian people and
allow them to regain control of their own future.

A draft resolution is being discussed to respond to
the emergency and to find a credible solution to the
ever worsening crisis. I say again today what I said on
31 January (see S/PV.6710). It is unacceptable for the
Council to be prevented from assuming its
responsibilities. Let us all support Kofi Annan's
mission and the Arab League plan. After months of
deadlock, I call on China and Russia to heed the voices
of the Arab people and the global conscience, and to
join us.

Acting in favour of freedom for the Libyan,
Yemeni and Syrian peoples puts in sharp relief the
issue of the impotence of the Security Council in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In the Middle East there is another people whose
aspirations must be recognized. Are the claims of the
Palestinians not as legitimate as those expressed in the
rest of the region? Is it not natural for Palestinians to
wish for a Palestinian State to emerge? The security of
the Israeli State must also be ensured. France will
always stand by Israel to guarantee its security and will
not compromise. Today, we all know that the solution
of two States living side by side in peace and security
is the only viable one and the best guarantee of Israel's
security.

After so many repeated failures of the peace
process and so many years of suffering and
disappointed hopes, the time has come to change
method. That is the very direction of the appeal to the
General Assembly launched by President Sarkozy on
21 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.11). We are
convinced that we can no longer continue to do without
a multilateral forum as such, that of the Council, and
the support of all partners, in particular regional and
European. In the coming months, France will do
everything in its power so that a just and lasting peace
is at last established in the Middle East.

In talking of peace and security in that region of
the world, how can we not mention Iran? In that
country, the situation is becoming a little more
worrying every day with a regime that is pursuing a
nuclear programme that is clearly military, in violation
of the decisions of the Council and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, that vows to erase Israel from
the map, that undermines freedom of movement in the
Strait of Hormuz, that is of concern to its neighbours,
that oppresses the aspirations of its people to freedom
and democracy, and that daily isolates itself a little
further from the international community.

The Council has spoken firmly and must remain
resolute, as we know that there are two equally
unacceptable outcomes: a nuclear Iran or a bombed
Iran.

In recalling the peaceful revolutions and
developments under way on the southern shores of the
Mediterranean, what the tragedy taking place in Syria
proves to us is that the principle of legitimacy is
fundamental to any Government. The day when a
Government loses its legitimacy in the eyes of its
people, it is doomed. In that region of the world, one of
the major questions being asked is that of the
possibility of ensuring that communities and minorities
live together in national unity, respectful of the mutual
rights of the individual and human rights for all. The
promise of the Arab Spring is the universal right to
freedom, and I have confidence in its achievement.

