Mr. Campbell (Ireland): Mr. President, allow me to
offer you my congratulations and pay tribute to your
leadership as you have assumed the presidency of the
Council.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries,
Cyprus - the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Malta,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - have aligned
themselves with this statement. Iceland and Norway also
wish to align themselves with this statement.

For all too many years, the conflict in Angola has
drained the resources of the country and brought
destruction and deprivation to its people.

 

With the signing of the Lusaka Protocol and the
establishment of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), the opportunity has at last been
given to the Angolan people to reclaim a society free from
the ravages of war and open to the economic development
and progress which they so richly deserve. The international
community attaches the greatest importance to seeing this
process put in place and brought to a successful conclusion.
It is for this reason that the European Union urges that
commitments entered into under the peace Accords, the
Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council resolutions
be honoured. The Union reminds UNITA in particular that
the quartering of troops, their demobilization and
disarmament, as well as the completion of the formation of
the Angolan Armed Forces, are crucial components of the
peace process and must be adhered to in full and without
further delay. This includes the return of the deserters to
quartering areas.

It is with great concern that the European Union has
received the latest progress report of the Secretary-General
on UNAVEM. III. The Secretary-General states that the
progress achieved towards the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol has been disappointing. It is clear that the
implementation process is substantially behind schedule and
that the lack of mutual trust between the Government and
UNITA continues to jeopardize the attainment of lasting
peace.

It is essential that no effort be spared to ensure the
early formation of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We accordingly call most ardently on
UNITA and its leader to respond more rapidly to the
demands of their own people and of the international
community as a whole, and to fulfil the terms of the
agreements which they have freely entered into. As this
debate clearly demonstrates, UNITA bears the main
responsibility for the problems arising at this crucial
juncture in the peace process. The European Union will be
following closely any action which the Security Council
may decide to take in this regard.
The European Union stands ready to assist the long-
suffering people of Angola and is confident that the
international community as a whole will not be found
wanting in this regard. The European Union and its member
States have already provided considerable amounts of
humanitarian, reconstruction and development aid over the
years and can be counted upon to continue to respond as
specific needs are identified. Recent security incidents
involving humanitarian organizations have hampered the
delivery of humanitarian aid and are a source of great

 

concern. The security of international personnel must be
guaranteed.

Another matter of particular concern to the European
Union - and indeed, to the entire international
community, and, of course, first and foremost to all
Angolans - is the widespread presence of anti-personnel
land-mines throughout much of Angola. We are gratified
that UNAVEM. III has accomplished so much already
with regard to demining, but we call earnestly for an
acceleration of the programme. The European Union and
its member States have been among those that have
provided significant political and financial support for
these activities. We therefore View with the greatest
concern the obstacles which UNITA has been putting in
the way of the demining operations.

The European Union wishes to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the efforts of the Southern African
Development Community, whose leaders met in Luanda
last week and whose Foreign Ministers we are pleased to
see participating in the debate in this Chamber today. We
also acknowledge the contributions of the three observer
States - Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United
States - which have done so much to bring the peace
process to its present stage, and of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye,
whose untiring efforts are so valued by all.

The European Union furthermore recognizes the vital
role of UNAVEM. III in support of the peace process and
wishes to express its appreciation to the troop-contributing
countries, without whose participation UNAVEM. III
would not be in a position to undertake its important
work.

In conclusion, the European Union joins with others
in stressing that the peace process in Angola can be
successful only if the leaders of the Angolan people
themselves exert the political will to follow through on
their commitments and obligations. An essential element
on their part must be a firm resolve to see the
consolidation of peace as the paramount objective.

