Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia)(sp0ke in Spanish): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Oshima for the
information he has given us on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It seems to me that the
Council has taken a wise decision in pausing, making
an assessment and endeavouring to increase the
efficiency of the way in which it addresses this item.

I wish to refer to one of the requests made by the
Security Council President in his communication of 21
June, which was that several workshops be held on this
topic. It was also suggested that one be held before the
briefing. Mr. Oshima has told us that three workshops
have already been held and that several United Nations
agencies were invited, as were representatives from
interested Governments, together with experts. He also
announced that there would be a meeting of experts in
January or February.

For this reason, I would like to ask Mr. Oshima
how we can get invited to these workshops. It seems to
me that, despite the Security Council communication
and the expressions of interest that have been very
clearly made - in the case of my delegation - as to
interest in this topic, we have as yet not received an
invitation to be able to take part in those deliberations.
We think that the workshops are essential for involving
Council members in the assessment of the Council's
link to the topic, in particular with issues such as the
protection of refugees and internally displaced persons,
access by humanitarian personnel to vulnerable
populations, the delivery of humanitarian assistance
under secure conditions and, naturally, the protection
of humanitarian personnel. So I might ask, how can we,
the members of the Security Council, participate in
those workshops, as requested in the communication?

Now then, there will be an assessment in one
year. Mr. Oshima has told us about the work that has
been done in these three areas, and, in this sense, we
would like to ask that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs or the Secretariat provide us,
either now or in due course, with the schedule of the
work plan, whether the format of the plan was foreseen
during this year. Even if it is true that it is not going to
be the object of direct Security Council activity, we
indeed can begin to participate, to begin to be more
closely connected to that work so that we can be better
prepared when the time comes to take decisions after
the November report.

