Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I welcome Deputy Foreign Minister Kyslytsya to our meeting today. I wish to begin by thanking the Russian representative for calling for this briefing today, after having witnessed yet another attack in Luhansk oblast by Russian-supported armed formations. Weapons that were prohibited by the Minsk agreements were used, leading to casualties. It is a grave violation of the Minskagreements and an unfortunate display of Russia's disregard for its recommitment to the ceasefire during the Paris meeting. However, let us not forget that this is only one chapter in the ongoing Russian aggression against Ukraine that has continued for the past six years. I am_ grateful to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her important and comprehensive briefing, as well as to the Special Representative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, Ms. Heidi Grau, and the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (SMM), Mr. Halit Cevik, for their updates on activities on the ground. Six years since Russia's military aggression against Ukraine began, we regret that Russia has not acknowledged and reversed its actions. Estonia reaffirms its strong support for Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, including territorial waters. We condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol and the occupation of certain territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. The use of force against the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine by the Russian Federation clearly violates the fundamental principles of international law. It violates paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the Helsinki Final Act. The Minsk agreements remain the basis for a political resolution to the conflict in Donbas. The Russian Federation, however, has continued to breach the Minsk agreements on a regular basis since they were adopted, as we have also witnessed today. It has breached, in particular, the first point of the Minsk agreements - to end the interference and ensure a comprehensive ceasefire. Its actions have left more than 27,000 people wounded and over 14,000 dead, including the 298 passengers on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was shot down by a Russian BUK missile system. Moreover, Russia's initiatives - such as conducting illegal elections, conscripting Ukrainian citizens into the Russian army and pursuing the illegal passportization of Ukrainian citizens - all run counter to the spirit of the Minsk agreements and further obstruct the settlement in Donbas. Let me recall that there is a 400-kilometre uncontrolled border between Ukraine and Russia. That uncontrolled section is a gateway for the free flow of weaponry and military personnel. Russia's actions in Ukraine pose numerous threats to international peace and security. We therefore call on Russia, as a party to the conflict, to fully implement its commitments under the Minsk agreements, including those undertaken at the Normandy Four summit in Paris on 9 December. We also call on Russia to immediately withdraw its armed forces from Ukraine and stop its political, financial and military support to the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics - that is, Russia's proxies in Donbas. We commend President Zelenskyy for his strong efforts towards resolving and de-escalating the conflict in Donbas, including initiatives and bold actions that have brought positive developments, such as the exchange of prisoners, the proposal to disengage forces in three areas and the reconstruction of the bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. We would like to thank the OSCE, including the Special Representative of the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the Special Monitoring Mission, for all their indispensable work in Ukraine. The SMM remains the most reliable source of information on the situation on the ground in Ukraine. It is therefore regrettable that the restrictions posed on the SMM's freedom of movement have persisted in non-Government-controlled areas, hindering the Mission from fully implementing its mandate. The SMM's full, secure and unimpeded access to the entire territory of Ukraine should be guaranteed. Recently, we heard about OSCE efforts and restrictions on the work of the SMM directly from OSCE Chairperson-in- Office, Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama, right here in the Security Council (see S/PV.8714). He mentioned the idea of a United Nations peacekeeping mission to Ukraine that would monitor the Russian-Ukrainian border and provide a safe environment and for the restoration of the sovereignty of Ukraine. However, in March 2015, Ukraine's request for the Security Council to deploy a peacekeeping operation under the auspices of the United Nations was blocked by the Russian Federation - yet another example of the sheer reluctance to take any steps to resolve the conflict. We remain deeply concerned about the grave humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. Approximately 3.4 million Ukrainians still need humanitarian assistance and protection. In addition to psychological trauma and the lack of access to basicservices, about 2 million people live in areas that are heavily contaminated with landmines. Despite aid efforts, the 2019 humanitarian appeal remained only 50 percent funded. I call on the international community to intensify its financial support for Ukraine. International human rights law also continues to be violated in the civil, political, economic, social, cultural and religious domains in the occupied areas. Violations are targeted towards persons belonging to any minority group or organization that dissents from the views of the Government of the Russian Federation - mostly Ukrainian activists, Crimean Tatars and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons. According to the recent report of the Secretary-General on the human rights situation in Crimea (A/74/276), arbitrary arrests, house raids, groundless detentions, harassment, intimidation, unfair trials, degrading treatment of detainees, torture, sexual violence and other violations remain systematic and unpunished. Those violations must stop immediately. All persons detained illegally must be released. And international human rights monitoring mechanisms, including the International Committee of the Red Cross and non-governmental organizations, must be given access to the annexed and occupied territories.
