Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, first of all, I wish to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to pay tribute to the
Permanent Representative of Argentina for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Security
Council last month.

 

The Security Council is once again meeting to discuss
the deteriorating situation in the occupied territories and
another instance of the violation of international law by the
Zionist regime. The sacred land of Palestine and its holy
centre of Al-Quds continue to suffer under aggression and
occupation, and the people of Palestine are continuously
subjected to inhumane treatment by the occupying forces,
including the frequent imposition of curfews, the sealing or
closing of the occupied territories, the confiscation of land
and the expansion of settlements.

Numerous United Nations documents and various
reports of different United Nations agencies regarding the
very critical situations in the occupied territories indicate
that practices by the Zionist regime in the field of land
confiscation and the expansion of Jewish settlements,
particularly in Al-Quds, have gained momentum since
September 1993.

According to the latest report of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Palestinian People, 40 per cent of the
territory in the Gaza Strip is still taken up by settlements,
military installations and so-called security zones, and the
recent decision of the Zionist regime to continue housing
construction in settlements around the Jerusalem area
reveals the true intention of that regime to persist in its
occupation policies.

The imposition of curfews on Palestinian cities and
refugee camps, the sealing off or closing of areas and the
killing and detention of Palestinians have continued since
September 1993, and more than 5,000 Palestinians are still
held in jail by the occupying forces. On the other hand, the
tightening of existing restrictions during recent months has
aggravated even further the already critical economic
situation prevailing in the occupied territories. Israel's real
and ultimate objective has been, and continues to be, the
prolongation of its occupation, and today, under the
disguise of the peace process, this policy is being pursued.

Furthermore, it should be noted that whenever the
Zionist regime intends to divert the attention of the
international community from its own expansionist policies,
it depicts some countries as threats to the region. This old,
obsolete policy will not succeed, because the very nature of
the Zionist regime is becoming clearer to the countries of
the region.

The Zionist crimes are being committed at a time
when Israel is claiming to seek peace in the Middle East.
The continuation of the occupation of Palestine, the Syrian

 

Golan Heights and southern Lebanon and the violation of
human rights in those territories, as well as Israel's
intransigence in not allowing the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) to inspect its nuclear facilities,
have escalated the tension in the region.

In our View, the current process and the recent
agreements will not lead to the full restoration of the
rights of the Palestinian people. The comprehensive and
just solution of the question of Palestine lies in the full
realization of all the rights of the Palestinians, the
liberation of all occupied territories and the return of the
more than 50 per cent of Palestinians who live outside
their own land as Stateless refugees.
It is incumbent upon the Security Council to deal
effectively with Israel's continued violation of
international law and its threat to peace and security in
the region. The people of Palestine, including all
Palestinian refugees, are entitled to be protected against
continuous oppression and the occupation of their
homeland.

