Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I have
asked to speak before the voting on draft resolution
S/2014/348, which France had the honour to present,
in order to explain the reason behind our approach.
France's proposal is not a new chapter in the divisiveness
besetting the Security Council when it comes to the
Syrian crisis; on the contrary, it aims at re-establishing
the Council's unity around the values shared by its
members.

All of us around this table are horrified by the
tragedy being experienced by the Syrian people: more
than 160,000 deaths, more than 9 million displaced
persons and refugees, a country destroyed, hunger
and epidemics. That is already an overwhelming tally,
against the backdrop of the certainty that both sides have
committed atrocities against defenceless civilians. The
presentation to the Council and the media ofthe "Cesar"
report several weeks ago, on France's initiative, served
to underscore the barbarity. Thousands of photos,
verified by independent experts, showed starved and
tortured corpses in the regime's prisons.

Killing, torture and rape occur today in Syria notjust
as atrocious consequences ofa civil war, but as part ofa
deliberate policy to terrorize and punish. Commanders
give free rein to their troops to ignore the law - or put
more simply, humanity itself. The Government bombs
civilian neighbourhoods with explosive barrel bombs,
missiles and chemical weapons. Terrorist groups carry
out indiscriminate attacks. Tens of thousands of people
have been disappeared. Torture and starvation are
carried out on a large scale. In a country With an ancient
civilization, we are seeing the unleashing of brutality
and cruelty whose victims are not mere statistics,
behind which we too often hide, but men, women and
children with names, faces and loved ones.

In the face of so many trampled lives and the
negation of the values for which the Organization
stands, nothing is worse than silence. For silence
means acquiescence, compromise and complicity.
I do not ignore the divisions that exist Within the
Council; I know the differing analyses of members. I
respect them even if I do not share them. But certain
facts are clear to all. As Mr. Brahimi said here in the
Council a few days ago, there are no prospects in Syria
today for negotiation. This is not the time or place to
assign responsibility for that, but just to point it out.
To argue that the involvement of international justice
would undermine the peace process therefore makes no
sense, as there is no peace process and, in the short
and medium term, there are no prospects for any peace
process either.

They refuse to negotiate because they want to
be victorious and think they can be. They will not
negotiate because they think it is a matter of killing or
being killed. They will not negotiate with those whose
brothers and wives they have killed or tortured. They
are so afraid of their vengance that they must kill them
too.

In that context, France's proposal is based on the
belief that the impasse should not lead us to turn our
gaze away from the atrocities committed in Syria every
day. It aims at overcoming our differences in order
to focus on the asepct of our humanity we all share.
The draft resolution was rewritten in order to make it
acceptable to all. It aims to apply in the Syrian situation
a principle already agreed in resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2139 (2113), namely, to reject impunity. It also covers
the territorial integrity of Syria. With regard to the
responsibilities of the parties, it again includes language
repeatedly agreed and merely calls for recognizing
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in
the Syrian civil war in line with similar provisions in
resolution 1593 (2005), on the situation in Darfur, and
in resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya, against which no
Member State vote against.

Acting in unison, the Council would thereby say
that it would not forget the crimes being committed
today on a mass scale in Syria; that it would not
forget that leaders tolerated them or even encouraged
or ordered them; that in 2014 people could no longer
behave as they did in 1942 or 1994; and that it would not
allow the state of barbarity to return. Perhaps we could
stop an executioner on the verge of committing a crime.
In any case, we would restore the Council's honour by
allowing it to say the right thing and to re-establish
morality over its divisions. I am convinced that, those
divisions aside, we share the same values, the same
indignation and the same resolve. The time has come to
say so. The time has come to prove it.

The draft resolution I have the honour of presenting
to my colleagues for a vote is an appeal to human
conscience. It is not a political gesture; it is quite
simply a moral act. If the Council were not to adopt
it, that would be an insult to the millions of Syrians
who are suffering. It would be proof that some have
learned nothing from history. It would recall that some,
whatever they may claim, have opted for unconditional
support for the Damascus regime, whatever crimes it
commits, and by the same stroke to exonerate Al-Qaida.
Extending equal impunity to all criminals is not a
paradox; there is brotherhood in crime.

A veto today would recall that fact. A veto would
cover up all crimes; it would be a veto againstjustice. It
would give new justification to the French proposal to
limit the use of the right of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities.

