Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
other members of the Council in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the
Security Council today and in thanking him for his
statement. I especially congratulate him on the election
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the term
2010-2011. I also thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
thirty-sixth report on implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement (see S/2009/588*) and for his
comprehensive update.

As noted in previous meetings of the Council on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, advancing the cause of
building a secure, democratic and stable multi-ethnic
State has always been among the most important
objectives for the political leaders and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

However, my delegation notes with concern the
division among political leaders that is challenging the
Dayton Peace Agreement and, by implication, the
sovereignty and constitutional order of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are also disturbed by the limited
consensus on the main reform priorities, which is
detrimental to the implementation of previously agreed
reforms. The lack of substantive political dialogue is
yet another source of concern.

In this context, we are heartened by the relatively
stable relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its immediate neighbours. At this critical juncture, the
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina need to
work together towards a shared vision on the direction
of the country, so as to speed up the smooth operation
of institutions and create more functional and efficient
state structures.

We continue to strongly support the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
including the revised strategy for the implementation
of annex 7 of the Agreement, as it provides a firm basis
for resolving the problematic displacement of some
120,000 persons. We call upon the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make every effort to
promote the sustainable return of refugees and
internally displaced persons and guarantee their rights
to employment, health care, education and pensions.
Much more also needs to be done in the areas of border
and migration management, as well as the fight against
corruption and organized crime.

Finally, we support the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina in his efforts to facilitate
progress towards the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. At the same time, we wish to
emphasize the need to ensure enhanced ownership and
responsibility by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
political process of the country. We call upon the
international community to continue to play an
important role in promoting peaceful resolution of the
conflict and in facilitating Bosnia and Herzegovina's
transition to a stable, reform-oriented, modern and
democratic country.

