Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General's
report on South Sudan (S/2018/1103), as well as on the
peace process and the situation on the ground.

We are encouraged to report that, since the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, there has
been a significant improvement in the general security
situation in the country and the number of incidents
among signatory parties has decreased. Commanders
on the ground have reached out to one another, with
and without the facilitation of the United Nations, and
confidence-building measures have been initiated. That
has led to the reopening of roads, the free movement of
civilians, the movement of Government and opposition
groups in areas under the other's control and the
beginning of the return of some displaced populations
to their areas of origin.

In Upper Nile, routes between Malakal and
Renk and from Fangak to Tonga have been reopened.
According to humanitarian partners in Bunj, Maban
county, South Sudan People's Defence Forces (SSPDF),
formerly the Sudan People's Liberation Army, met with
their pro-Machar Sudan People's Liberation Army in
Opposition (SPLA-IO) counterparts in Beneshowa
and agreed to work together to ensure the unhindered
movement of civilians in their respective areas of
control. Similar arrangements were also agreed in a
trilateral arrangement with the pro-Lam Akol National
Democratic Alliance in the area. In Jonglei, as a result
of similar meetings between the parties, there are
reports that trade resumed from Ayod to Canal and
from Wau to Pagong and Mogok. In Central Equatoria,
a United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
patrol to Mugwo and Morobo in the Yei River area
observed the return of populations from refugee camps
to both places. In greater Bahr El-Ghazal, local state
authorities in Raja town allowed opposition fighters
to return, visit their families and interact with local
authorities. On 8 December, after negotiations between
SSPDF and pro-Machar forces in greater Bagari, road
corridors between Wau town and greater Bagari were
formally opened.

Despite those positive developments, sporadic
clashes also took place, indicating that improvements
remain fragile. Between 4 and 6 December, the pro-
Taban Deng-aligned forces allegedly carried out an
attack on pro-Machar forces in Bil, Guit county, which
resulted in 21 casualties. There are reports of fighting
between the SSPDF and the non-signatory group, the
National Salvation Front, in the Yei/Amadi area. We
also have serious concerns about the attacks against
civilians that continue unabated. More rape cases were
reported following the abhorrent incidents of rape and
sexual assault in areas along Nhialdiu and Guit roads
near Bentiu. Intercommunal violence and criminality
continue to affect the civilian population in general,
and women and children in particular, the latter being
the most vulnerable among civilians.

With regard to the horrific rapes in Bentiu,
UNMISS proactively held urgent meetings with
authorities and urged them to take immediate action
to protect women and girls in the area and to hold
the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to account.
UNMISS peacekeepers immediately sent patrols to the
area to provide a protective presence and the UNMISS
human rights team has launched an investigation to
identify the perpetrators. UNMISS engineers are also
clearing foliage from the sides of the road so attackers
will find it harder to conceal their presence. The
Mission has also been urging armed forces in the area
to guarantee command and control over their troops so
as to ensure that rogue elements within their ranks are
not involved in such criminal acts.

The humanitarian situation in the country remains
of grave concern and is a direct consequence of
the conflict. Attacks on humanitarian workers, the
dangers posed to them and the impediments created
by the parties to the conflict are unacceptable. We
remain deeply concerned about the two UNMISS staff
members arrested in 2014, whose whereabouts remain
unknown. It is incumbent upon all parties, in particular
the Government, to ensure a safer and more conducive
environment for humanitarian workers who work
tirelessly to deliver assistance to the most vulnerable of
South Sudanese civilians.

We condemn in the strongest terms the continued
prevalence of sexual violence, of which the recent
attacks in Unity are a stark reminder. Such brutality
is indefensible and the parties must spare no effort in
bringing to justice all those who were responsible for
those atrocities. There can be no meaningful peace
without an end to and accountability for the brutalizing
of innocent civilians. However, that is an issue against
which the international community must also continue
to speak out and remind the parties that with such
prevalent impunity, South Sudan will not be able to
find the place it deserves in the community of nations.

The responsibility to sustain the momentum in
the implementation of the agreement lies solely with
the parties. The positivity generated by the return of
many of the committees and commissions to Juba,
including opposition personnel, is mitigated by their
delays and the lack of substantive discussions so far.
The National Pre-Transitional Committee, the highest-
level implementation committee, has met but, most
recently, failed to achieve a quorum. The Independent
Boundary Commission, which is charged with settling
the critical issue of state boundaries and the subsequent
implementation of the Agreement within them during
the transition period, is yet to meet, although the
Technical Boundaries Committee met in Juba and
discussed modalities before adjourning for the year.

The security-related committees have made little
Visible progress, with discussions mainly focusing on
the cantonment of military forces, their sustainment and
subsequent reintegration process, rather than on a more
holistic approach to security-sector reform, focusing on
the requirements for a national army that is right-sized,
affordable, depoliticized and focused on preserving the
territorial integrity of South Sudan against external
threat. They are expected to meet again this week in
Juba and it is nonetheless encouraging that, over the
past weekend, some representatives of SPLA-IO and the
South Sudan Opposition Alliance are reported to have
returned to Juba without force protection to participate
in those meetings.

The initial pessimism and outright rejection of the
national dialogue by the opposition have transitioned
into cautious optimism since President Kiir stepped
down as convener. The national dialogue steering
committee has advanced as an independent and more
credible and transparent mechanism. As a result, the
opposition parties suspicious ofthe process have begun to
indicate possible willingness to engage in proceedings.
However, we should be under no illusion that the
participation of opposition groups in any subnational or
community-level dialogue remains largely contingent
upon the prospects they see for themselves within the
implementation of the peace agreement at the national
level. It is essential that the parties continue to build
confidence and show the political will to work together
to ensure a protective and inclusive environment that
will allow all South Sudanese stakeholders, including
civil society, women and youth, to meaningfully engage
in the full implementation of the agreement.

Moving forward, we strongly believe that there
are two critical benchmarks that must be given top
priority during the pre-transition period, which
ends in May 2019. First, the parties must come to a
comprehensive agreement on the security sector and on
the establishment of transitional security arrangements.
That is necessary to build confidence among the parties
and to ensure the return and permanent presence of all
the opposition in Juba. A security agreement will be
needed to be communicated within the ranks and to
reassure the commanders and combatants about their
future. Without those, the institutions of transition,
even when established, are unlikely to be functional.
Incidents are likely to occur and the peace process
will remain fragile. I would like to encourage the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to prioritize the finalization of the negotiations,
which the United Nations stands ready to support.
Secondly, a new Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) also needs urgently
to be appointed to shepherd the critical pre-transition
negotiations and bring the architecture of the peace
process to start substantive political preparations for
the transition.

We have been made aware of the IGAD Chiefs
of Defence forces proposal to increase the strength
of the Regional Protection Force (RPF) to support
the transitional security arrangements which, as I
mentioned, are yet to be agreed upon by the parties.
The proposal recommends that the Sudan, Uganda,
Somalia and Djibouti be added as troop-contributing
countries to the UNMISS RPF. We have taken note
of that proposal, which we understand will soon be
communicated to the Security Council.

On that issue, I would like to stress that the United
Nations continues to commend the active role of the
countries of the region, IGAD and the African Union,
which made possible the conclusion of the Revitalized
Agreement, and we are fully committed to supporting
its implementation as required and mandated by the
Council. With regard to a possible reconfiguration
of the UNMISS military component, I would like to
reiterate some of the principles that we currently uphold
with respect to all of our peacekeeping operations.

First, the reconfiguration of UNMISS to support
the transition must be preceded by the finalization of
the agreement on transitional security arrangements,
including a clear definition of the tasks that UNMISS
would need to perform, which will then allow us to
identify the capabilities required, their strength, and
possible additional resources needed by the Mission.
The RPF is a constituent part of UNMISS, and we will
have to consider the totality of the Force requirements
for its tasking.

Secondly, unity of command within all blue
helmets cannot be compromised. There can only be one
UNMISS force to implement the Mission's mandate,
and one chain of command for the force.
Thirdly, as a United Nations force mandated by
the Security Council, all future troop-contributing
countries to be considered must satisfy United Nations
standards in terms of training, equipment, human rights
vetting, and political neutrality and impartiality.

Last but certainly not least, in the light of the dire
humanitarian situation and the continued plight of
civilians, additional tasks that UNMISS could be asked
to perform to support the peace process should not be
at the operational or political cost of performing its
protection functions, which remain absolutely essential
in the current environment. In that regard, UNMISS
will need to continue to dedicate adequate resources
to its protection tasks in order to fully implement its
mandate.

In conclusion, as we find ourselves almost to
the day exactly five years after the beginning of this
conflict, I would like to re-emphasize our key message
to the Council here today. The chance for peace in
South Sudan has been created. More progress has
been made in the past four months than in the previous
four years. We need to acknowledge that new political
reality and commend the parties, IGAD and the
region for their efforts and achievement. Nonetheless,
the peace process is not yet assessed as being fully
sustainable and irreversible and will need positive
engagement and compromise from the parties and
continued reinforcement if it is to deliver genuine hope
and relief to the suffering South Sudanese populations.
I also need to reiterate the imperative for IGAD and the
African Union to continue their efforts in support of the
peace process, and I reconfirm the commitment of the
United Nations to assist their efforts.

