Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to join previous speakers in
condemning the recent terrorist attack perpetrated by
Da'esh in Suwayda province, which claimed hundreds
of lives.

My delegation thanks Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for their briefings.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria,
the result of a resurgence in the fighting that has
claimed many lives, as well as forcing the suspension
of United Nations humanitarian aid delivery owing
to a lack of security guarantees. We would like to
recall here that the cross-border aid authorized by
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and
2393 (2017) remains a vital element of United Nations
humanitarian action in Syria, which has saved many
lives and eased the suffering of thousands. While
reiterating our condemnation of the military escalation
in south-western Syria, C6te d'Ivoire once again calls
for strict respect for resolution 2401 (2018), which
demands an immediate cessation of hostilities in
order to enable the unhindered and safe delivery of
humanitarian aid to people in need. I therefore remind
parties to the conflict of their obligations, pursuant to
international humanitarian law, to protect civilians,
social and educational infrastructure such as schools
and health facilities, and humanitarian workers. Above
all, they must refrain from obstructing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in distress.

My delegation welcomes the agreements on the
cessation of hostilities that were reached between
Government forces and armed rebel groups at the
prompting of the Russian Federation. That truce should
allow the delivery of humanitarian aid to people in
need under safer conditions. My country also especially
welcomes the joint humanitarian operation of the
Russian Federation and the French Republic, which,
with United Nations assistance, delivered medical
assistance and basic necessities to people in eastern
Ghouta. At the same time as that operation in eastern
Ghouta, it is equally fortunate that nearly 40 Syrian Red
Crescent trucks were able to access formerly besieged
areas of the southern province of Dar'a to distribute
assistance to the people who stayed behind.

Similarly, my delegation welcomes the gradual
improvement in the security and health situation in
Raqqa, which has enabled some 138,000 civilians to
return to their homes since the liberation of the city
from the grips of Da'esh in October 2017. My country
encourages the international community to continue
its efforts so as to respond appropriately to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria and, in that regard, thanks
the border countries for the multifaceted assistance
provided to 5.6 million Syrian refugees.

Cote d'Ivoire, aware of the impact that that influx
of refugees can have on the economy and stability of
host countries, urges the international community to
consider the question of the return of Syrian refugees
to their homes of origin with the utmost attention.
That return must take place in accordance with current
international standards, which prescribe a voluntary
and sustainable return of refugees under safe and
dignified conditions to enable them to fully contribute
to the national reconciliation process and the overall
political settlement of the crisis in Syria.

My delegation believes that the international
community's efforts to provide a satisfactory
humanitarian response to the needs of the Syrian
people must be part of the overall framework of our
collective efforts to find a political solution to the crisis.
Only a credible and inclusive peace process, based on
the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), can
provide a definitive solution to the crisis in that country.

With that in mind, my country welcomes the
various initiatives aimed at relaunching the inter-Syrian
dialogue process and encourages Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
political process in Syria, to take the necessary steps,
within the framework of the Geneva process, to set up
a committee charged with drafting the new constitution
of Syria, as was decided at the Sochi meeting in Russia.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the Syrian
parties to embrace dialogue and to advance the political
process with a view to achieving a lasting solution to
the crisis, in accordance with the road map of resolution
2254 (2015). We commend the Special Envoy's personal
commitment to seeking a political settlement to the
Syrian crisis and assure him of our full support.

