Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): I too would like to join the
Secretary-General for briefing the Council and
providing us with a first-hand account of his recent trip
to Myanmar. Croatia commends the Secretary-General
for the continued personal leadership he has
demonstrated on this issue. Fully cognizant of the
challenges faced by the Secretary-General in deciding
whether to visit Myanmar, Croatia welcomes the visit,
which was aimed at pressing the Myanmar Government
to release political prisoners, including Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi, and to hold free and fair elections.

Croatia values the Secretary-General's frank
assessment of the outcome of his meetings with senior
members of Myanmar's leadership. We were
particularly interested also to learn of the Secretary-
General's impressions drawn from his meeting with
representatives of ethnic minority groups and
representatives and leaders of several political parties,
including members of the National League for
Democracy, as well as his impressions regarding the
status of humanitarian and reconstruction efforts in the
Irrawaddy delta since his first visit, in the aftermath of
Cyclone Nargis. We were encouraged to hear about the
good cooperation among the Government of Myanmar,
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

Croatia remains deeply concerned about recent
events in Myanmar concerning political prisoners and
the regime's treatment of ethnic minorities, in violation
of international humanitarian law, alongside its
continuing lack of respect for the basic human rights of
its population. In that respect, Croatia shares the
international community's increasing sense of
frustration with the Myanmar authorities' continuing
political blockage of international efforts to bring
about substantive progress towards an inclusive
process of democratization in the run-up to the 2010
elections.

Given the complexity of the political situation in
Myanmar, which has been further complicated by the
ongoing trial of Aung San Suu Kyi, Croatia deeply
appreciates the good offices of the Secretary-General
in conveying, in unequivocal terms, the fundamental
concerns of the international community directly to
Senior General Than Shwe and other senior officials.
We also believe that the visit serves another important
purpose: in laying out his vision for Myanmar in his
speech of 4 July, the Secretary-General also sent a
crucial message from the international community that
Myanmar has a choice about how to proceed. National
ownership of the political process is not in question
here, and primary responsibility for its progress lies
with the Myanmar authorities and the choices they
wish to make.

It is deeply regrettable, therefore, that Myanmar's
leaders chose not to use the unique opportunity of the
Secretary-General's visit to demonstrate any level of
commitment to the promotion of genuine democratic
reform. Indeed, their refusal to allow the Secretary-
General to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi is of great
concern to us, as was the leadership's resistance to
many of the Secretary-General's proposals. We
strongly urge the Myanmar authorities to utilize the
Secretary-General's good offices and begin to show
some readiness to cooperate, by translating into actions
the assurances they gave during the visit that they
would make the 2010 elections credible by releasing
all political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, as
well as resuming a general process of dialogue and
national reconciliation.

Croatia stands ready, along with the rest of the
international community, to continue to help the people
of Myanmar achieve their aspirations to a democratic
and prosperous future. In that respect, Croatia
reiterates its support for the continued important role
the Secretary-General must play in Myanmar through
his good offices mission and through the work of his
Special Envoy, Ibrahim Gambari.

