Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): On 2 May, I had the
opportunity to brief the Council on the Security
Council mission on the Kosovo issue, in my capacity
as Head of the Mission. At that time, I recalled the
nature and the objectives of the mission. I also briefly
commented on some of the highlights of its
programme.

After last week's meeting, Council members
worked together and agreed on the mission's report,
which was then distributed by the Secretariat as an
official United Nations document. Since the Council is
familiar with the content of the report, I will limit this
briefing to a brief overview of some of its conclusions.

Security is an essential pillar of any society, and
this is even more so for societies emerging from
violent and brutal conflict such as that in Kosovo. The
current security situation in Kosovo is often defined as
"calm but tense", and this is also how NATO
Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer described it
when we met him in Brussels on 25 April. The
mission's report subscribes to that assessment. While
the situation is calm, the conflict of 1998-1999 and the
violence that shook Kosovo in March 2004 have left
their traces.
One of those traces is that to a large extent
Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs still live
separately from each other. Full and lasting
reconciliation, with a View to the establishment of a
truly multi-ethnic society, will require a sustainable
commitment by all stakeholders. During the mission's
meetings with Kosovo's leaders, including Prime
Minister Ceku and President Sejdiu, they all
emphasized their committed to a multi-ethnic society
and their readiness to work responsibly towards that
goal.

Achieving that goal will to a large extent depend
on continued implementation of the standards for
Kosovo. Over the years, the Provisional Institutions,
with the support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, managed to make
serious progress in this regard. More is to be done, as
was recognized by Prime Minister Ceku and other
Kosovo leaders, who, in meetings with the mission,
expressed their commitment to continue and strengthen
standards implementation.

This is particularly important in two fields that
received considerable attention during the mission's
visit to the region - the living conditions of Kosovo's
non-Albanian communities, and the return of internally
displaced persons, a critical element in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Interlocutors in Belgrade, including President Tadic
and Prime Minister Kostunica, as well as
representatives of Serbian civil society, stressed that
the number of returns continued to be very low, despite
the fact that, as the mission noticed in Svinjare, houses
have been rebuilt and, more generally, that structures to
facilitate returns are in place. During the mission's visit
several explanations were given, such as the lack of
economic prospects or security-related concerns. The
mission heard opposing views on the question as to
whether a solution to the status of Kosovo would
facilitate or hinder the return process.

More than in previous Security Council missions
to the region, the status issue was a very important, if
not dominant, element. On Kosovo's status, the
positions of the sides remain far apart. Authorities in
Belgrade, as well as Kosovo Serbs who expressed
themselves on the issue, firmly rejected any form of
independence for Kosovo, in particular the settlement
proposal presented to this Council by Special Envoy
Ahtisaari. They asked for further negotiations, which
should lead to a solution based on substantial
07-33839
autonomy. In general, the Kosovo Serb community is
apprehensive about its prospects for the future.

The Kosovo Albanian community, on the other
hand, is confident about its future; it has very high
expectations for an early resolution of Kosovo's
status - a status that brings independence to Kosovo.
Kosovo Albanians, as well as non-Serb minority
communities, expressed strong support for
Mr. Ahtisaari's settlement proposal and status
recommendation, and they look to the Security Council
to move rapidly to a solution.

Despite the strongly opposed positions, both
parties agree that the status quo is not sustainable. That
message was also brought to us by representatives of
NATO and the European Union, who are prepared to
take up their responsibilities and look to the Security
Council to provide the necessary mandate.

I am confident that the first-hand information
which the Security Council received during this
mission will enable the Council to live up to its
responsibilities and take an informed decision on the
issue that is now before us.

