Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Lacroix for his
briefing. The current delicate phase in the Sudan's
history requires a concerted effort to respond to the
aspirations of our brothers and sisters in that country
to a bright future. We hope that our deliberations today
will serve their interests.

I will focus today on three main
points - the upcoming renewal of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the mission's exit and national
ownership. Regarding the mandate renewal, we
emphasize once again our willingness to work with our
colleagues inside and outside the Security Council to
ensure that UNAMID's upcoming mandate is adapted
to the developments on the ground. First, it must be
clear and concise in stressing that the mission will
definitely end. Secondly, it should align with the wishes
and capacities of the Sudan as the host country. Thirdly,
it should be precise regarding the mandate itself and the
various areas of the mission's work, such as capacity-
building, enhancing the rule of law, human rights and
strengthening national ownership. Fourthly, it must
promote a smooth transition process by consolidating
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
country team in Darfur. Fifthly, it should pave the way
for the post-exit phase.

At a previous Council meeting, we invited the armed
groups to participate in a dialogue. We are pleased to
note today that most of them did take part in the Juba
dialogue in good faith and without preconditions, with
a view to reaching a political solution and enhancing
peace in Darfur and the whole of the Sudan. With
regard to UNAMID's exit, the Juba dialogue creates
a new opportunity for a comprehensive peace in the
Sudan, especially in the Darfur, South Kordofan and
Blue Nile regions. For that reason, the withdrawal
should take account of opportunities for dialogue and
agreements reached among the Sudanese parties. We
will continue to follow the developments in Darfur
after the mission's exit, especially with regard to issues
related to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons, land and the effects ofclimate change
on sustainable development. We must appreciate all the
sacrifices that have been made during the years that
the mission has been deployed, and above all the lives
that have been sacrificed in order to achieve peace and
protect civilians. We hope that the future of Darfur and
its people can be fully assured.

With regard to national ownership, we thank the
brother country of the Sudan for its cooperation and
look forward to seeing that continue for the remainder
of the mission's existence, whatever its exit path may
be. The Sudan's views must be considered at every stage
in order to consolidate national ownership, support the
country's capacities, meet the aspirations of its people
and ensure sovereignty. A comprehensive peace is
possible if we work and agree together before we ask
the Sudanese to do so. It will be easy to achieve peace
if all Sudanese of different visions remain determined
to build their nation, as we have witnessed in their
historic consensus on the political agreement and the
Constitutional Declaration.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position
in support of the unity, sovereignty, stability and
territorial integrity of the Sudan. The new Sudan needs
all of our support, and the first thing we can do is to
lift the sanctions on it and remove its name from the
list of State sponsors of terrorism, as well as by ending
the international sanctions whose review we have
called for since last year. Then we will be talking about
supporting the Sudan in both word and deed.

