The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaf
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the 12 December terrorist
bombing in the suburbs of Beirut that killed
Lebanese member of Parliament, editor and
journalist Gebrane Tueni, a patriot who was an
outspoken symbol of freedom and the sovereignty
and political independence of Lebanon, as well as
three others, It expresses its deepest sympathy to
the families of those killed and injured.

"The Security Council reiterates its deepest
concern about the destabilizing impact of
political assassinations and other terrorist acts in
Lebanon. It reiterates also its warning that the
sponsors of today's and previous terrorist attacks
against political leaders and leading members of
civil society in Lebanon, whose obvious aim is to
undermine Lebanon's security, stability,
sovereignty, national unity, political
independence and press freedom, will not be
permitted to succeed and will finally be held
accountable for their crimes.

"The Security Council welcomes the
the

determination and commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to bring to justice all
those responsible for this assassination and others
before, and expresses its readiness to consider
positively any request for assistance in this regard
from the Lebanese Government.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1559 (2004), and reiterates once again
its call for the strict respect of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon. The Security Council
urges all States, in accordance with its resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1566 (2004), to cooperate fully
in the fight against terrorism."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/61.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

