Mr. Loncar (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I wish, on
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Serbia, to
express our appreciation for the opportunity to address
the Security Council. I wish also to thank Judge Fausto
Pocar, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Ms. Carla Del
Ponte, Prosecutor of the Tribunal, for their
comprehensive briefings.

I would like to emphasize that the Government
and all State authorities of the Republic of Serbia are
demonstrating clear political determination and making
every effort necessary to bring our cooperation with
the ICTY to a successful close. I would point out that
thanks to outstanding efforts by the Government of the
Republic of Serbia, since January 2005, 16 indictees
have been transferred to the Tribunal at The Hague. As
members know, they include the highest-ranking
military and police officers. All activities to date in the
framework of completing our cooperation with the
ICTY underscore the Government's commitment to
fully honour its remaining international obligations.

The break-up of the former Yugoslavia, followed
by a bloody civil war, was a reason why the Security
Council established a special international tribunal for
the prosecution and punishment of the gravest war
crimes and serious violations of humanitarian law. It is
in the interest of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, in particular, that the crimes committed in that
war not be forgotten, and that their instigators and
perpetrators be brought to justice.

The Republic of Serbia is making the utmost
effort to contribute to attaining the goals that guided
the Security Council when the Tribunal was
established, in 1993. Let me recall that those goals
included not only the punishment of those responsible
for serious violations of humanitarian law, but also the
creation of conditions for inter-ethnic and inter-
confessional reconciliation among the peoples living in
the territories of the former Yugoslavia.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
repeatedly and clearly stated that it is first and
foremost in Serbia's own interest to complete its
cooperation with the ICTY as soon as possible. At its
20 July 2006 session, the Government of the Republic
of Serbia adopted an action plan for cooperation with
the ICTY. To carry out the plan, an implementation
team was created. The coordinators of the team are
Mr. Rasim Ljajic, President of the National Council of
Serbia for Cooperation with the ICTY, and Mr. ladimir
Vukcevic, Prosecutor for War Crimes.

The State authorities are fully engaged in the
implementation of the action plan. At its 28 July 2006
session, the implementation team adopted an
operational plan of activities. As part of the
implementation of the action plan, operational
activities are undertaken daily to locate and transfer the
remaining indictees. The action plan implementation
team has prepared concrete proposals; procedures are
now under way to amend current regulations in the
Republic of Serbia in order to put in place a more
efficient normative framework for the implementation
of concrete operational measures for the completion of
the plan.

Since adopting the July 2006 action plan, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia has been
undertaking intensive and comprehensive activities,
through teams of skilled operatives, to successfully
bring to conclusion Serbia's cooperation with the
Tribunal. The measures and activities we have
undertaken are a clear indicator of the strong political
will of the highest State authorities to locate any and
all of the Hague Tribunal indictees, if they are hiding
in the territory of the Republic of Serbia, and to have
them transferred to the custody of the Tribunal in
accordance with Serbian law.

Let me take this opportunity to affirm our
readiness for effective cooperation with the ICTY
Prosecutor's Office, including regarding access to
documents and archives of the Republic of Serbia. An
overwhelming number of requests by the Prosecutor's
Office have gained a positive response from the
competent authority of the Republic of Serbia: the
National Council for Cooperation with the ICTY. So
far, we have received 1,386 requests, and the National
Council for Cooperation with the ICTY responded
positively to 95 per cent of them. It is estimated that
only a handful of urgent Prosecutor's Office requests
are still pending. Further requests from the
Prosecutor's Office arrive daily and are addressed with
the utmost urgency. Waivers have been granted to some
400 witnesses regarding State, military and other
official secrets.

Since June 2006 and through the thirty-seventh
session of the National Council of Serbia for
Cooperation with the ICTY, held on 23 November
2006, 58 requests for documents by the ICTY
Prosecutor's Office were responded to, and as many as
24 witnesses were granted waivers.

I would also like to note that, on 2 March 2006,
the Prosecutor's Office proposal on practical
modalities for enabling access to the State archives was
accepted. This will facilitate access by the Prosecutor's
Office to documents in the possession of State
authorities. Let me recall that in May 2006 a very
important law on freezing the assets of fugitive ICTY
indictees was adopted in the parliament of the State
Union of Serbia and Montenegro. That law is in force
today in the Republic of Serbia.

At the very beginning of my statement, I
emphasized that the Republic of Serbia was making
every effort to contribute to the attainment of the goals
of the Security Council on which the establishment of
the Tribunal was based. This is true also of Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004), which defines the
Tribunal's completion strategy. This requires the
efficient administration of international justice
regarding the perpetrators of serious war crimes and
justice for victims. But let me emphasize once more
that it also means the creation of conditions for
reconciliation among the peoples who were engulfed in
the brutal civil war in the territory of Yugoslavia.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia
supports the Tribunal's efforts to make its work more
efficient and more just in order to honour strict
deadlines and meet conditions stipulated under
Security Council resolution 1534 (2004). To that end,
the Government of the Republic of Serbia reiterates the
importance of transferring cases to national
jurisdiction. Domestic trials can contribute to reaching
the goals for which the Security Council established
the ICTY.

In trials before national courts, indictees are
exposed to the strict moral judgement of their fellow
nationals and cannot complain that the courts are
partial. At the same time, domestic courts can truly
contribute to achieving the noble goal of reconciliation.
That is why the Republic of Serbia reiterates its
readiness to enable its judicial authorities -
particularly the Special Prosecutor's Office for War
Crimes and the Council for War Crimes of the
Belgrade District Court - to undertake to process and
prosecute the indictees transferred from The Hague.

Despite the fact that the activities of the judicial
authorities of the Republic of Serbia have been highly
assessed by the Tribunal, the Prosecutor's Office and
many States, including some permanent members of
the Security Council, only one case has been turned
over to the Republic of Serbia. It involves a person in
poor health who is unable to stand trial. The
Prosecutor's Office also turned over to the Serbian
judiciary two cases which had been processed: Zvornik
and Skorpioni. Moreover, direct cooperation has been
established with the Council for War Crimes and the
Special Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes in other
cases tried before domestic courts. The ICTY
Prosecutor's Office has signed an agreement on
making archives available to the Republic of Serbia
Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes. In view of all of
this, I would like to reiterate our conviction that only
mutual cooperation and trust can significantly
contribute to the administration of justice.
I would like to assure the Council that the
Government of the Republic of Serbia remains firmly
committed to fully honouring all its remaining
international obligations in order to complete its
cooperation with the ICTY. The results achieved so far
are telling proof of that. The Government of Serbia is
resolute and will continue to do all in its power to
locate all remaining indictees hiding in the territory of
the Republic of Serbia and transfer them to the ICTY.
The Republic of Serbia is determined to bring all those
who committed war crimes to justice, before the ICTY
or domestic courts. The Government of Serbia will take
all available measures to fully honour its international
commitments and bring its cooperation with the ICTY
to a successful conclusion.

