The Secretary-General: I thank the United
Kingdom for convening this discussion. I would like
to start by offering my condolences to the Government
and people of France for the losses of life and injuries
in the atrocious terrorist attack of last Friday. In the
aftermath of other terrorist bombings in recent days
in Beirut and Baghdad, and the apparent bombing of
a Russian aeroplane, we see the continuing peril of
terrorism and, indeed, the mounting threat from Daesh.
No grievance or cause can justify such acts.

I have just returned from the Group of 20 leaders
meeting, which was held in Antalya, Turkey, where I was
encouraged by the shared resolve to combine security-
based counter-terrorism measures with preventive steps
that address governance failures, injustice, exclusion
and other drivers of extremist violence. There was also
consensus on the need for our response to uphold the rule
of law and to avoid being ruled by fear and inflaming
tensions further still. I am especially concerned about
reprisals or further discrimination against Muslims, in
particular Muslim refugees and migrants. That would
just exacerbate the alienation on which terrorists feed.
The world must come together to defeat terrorist groups,
to bring perpetrators to justice and to break the vicious
cycle of radicalization. Today's discussion here in the
Security Council is therefore especially timely.

I again thank the United Kingdom for focusing
the attention of the Security Council on security,
development and the root causes of conflicts. Members
will all recall that in the 2005 Summit Outcome,
world leaders declared that "development, peace and
security and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 9). The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) builds on that
understanding by taking an integrated approach, and by
including Goal 16 on achieving peaceful and inclusive
societies, providing access to justice and building
accountable institutions.

Today's violent conflicts and violent extremism
are often rooted in a mix of exclusion, inequality,
mismanagement of natural resources, corruption,
oppression, governance failures, and the frustration
and alienation that accompany a lack of jobs and
opportunities. Yet our responses have not caught up
to these realities. We are not yet properly integrating
United Nations action across the interdependent pillars
of our work: peace, development and human rights.
Today, I should like to make four main points.

First, we must focus greater energy on prevention.
We have long known this. Now the message is coming
through again from the recent major reviews of peace
operations, peacebuilding and the women and peace
and security agenda. Prevention demands the concerted
use of preventive diplomacy and good offices, but
it also means that the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable
Development Goals must become a bigger part of our
strategies. Development that leaves people behind sows
the seeds of instability and violence. Well-targeted
development assistance can help to address risk factors
such as inequality and marginalization. Well-timed
development measures can help at critical moments
when societies are emerging from conflict and risk
lapsing back into it. Prevention is not something to
be turned on and turned off; it should instead be an
integral part of United Nations action in all contexts.

Secondly, a heightened focus on prevention means
a sharper focus on human rights. Violations of human
rights are often our best early warning signs of trouble,
yet too often Member States and the United Nations
system itself have been reluctant to recognize the
centrality of human rights. Human Rights Up Front
calls for three types of change within the United Nations
system: cultural change to ensure that staff recognize
prevention and protection as a core responsibility;
operational change to streamline our analysis and
deploy teams with small footprints to assist national
authorities before crises emerge; and earlier and more
transparent engagement with national authorities and
other Member States on deteriorating situations.

The initiative is being rolled out. A system for early
warning and quick response is in place. Staffhave a better
understanding of how their work reinforces pillars other
than their own. And in a number of instances, Human
Rights Up Front has enabled the United Nations system
to react to warning signs more quickly and effectively
than in the past. We are grateful that the Council has
received briefings by the Secretariat on situations of
concern on a systematic basis. Now we should strive for
the day when Member States take early and effective
action on such situations. We look to Member States to
more fully embrace Human Rights Up Front as a means
to protect their people and strengthen their sovereignty.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen coherence among all
actors. The 2030 Agenda calls on us to move from silos
to synergy; to move from fragmentation to partnership.
The United Nations system must pool its strengths
to bring strong analysis to the Security Council and
Peacebuilding Commission.

Fourthly, we need adequate, predictable financing
for our good offices and mediation work; for our country
teams and for the Peacebuilding Fund. We also need
to be bold when necessary, for example in rebuilding
Syria and supporting the countries that are generously
hosting large numbers of refugees, including Jordan,
Lebanon and Turkey. There is a growing global call
for a recovery plan for the region, perhaps akin to the
Marshall Plan in scale. I urge the Security Council to
give this idea due consideration when the day arrives,
as I know we hope it will soon.

The human costs of our failures can be seen in all
too many places. The suffering and setbacks weigh
heavily on my conscience, as they should on us all.
At the same time, we have the tools with which to do
better. Let us use them.

