Mr. Ngongi (spoke in Spanish): Thank you,
Mr. President, for your very kind words.

(spoke in English)

I wish to follow up on the statement made by
Mr. Guehenno, which has already touched on the
critical areas, especially Ituri. I will focus on the
transitional process.

It is with a great sense of relief and pleasure that I
wish formally to inform the Council that yesterday, 17
July, Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba of the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC), Mr. Azarias Ruberwa of
the Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie-
Goma (RCD-Goma), Mr. Yerodia Ndombasi of the
former Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mr. Arthur Z'Ahidi Ngoma of the unarmed
opposition were formally sworn in as vice-presidents of
the Transitional Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It was a landmark event and a
decisive moment in the four-year-old peace process.
When I took over my functions almost two years ago, it
sounded like a dream, but today it is a reality.

This is a remarkable development in the light of
the fact that, following President Kabila's
announcement on 30 June, several developments
threatened to delay the calendar for the installation of
the new Transitional Government. Those included
RCD-Goma's unilateral decision on 10 July to
repartition three military regions, which include areas
from which the movement is to withdraw in accordance
with the Bujumbura Act of Engagement. That decision
came as a surprise to all, particularly as the issue was
still under discussion in the Commission de Suivi. In
addition, on 13 July the RCD-Goma ministerial
delegates bound for Kinshasa refused to board a plane
that had been dispatched by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) due to a disagreement relating to
the number of bodyguards. Those two manoeuvres led
to questions about the level of commitment of the
RCD-Goma to participating in the transition process
and to speculation that its ultimate intention might be
the continued exercise of control over regions currently
under its control. Following those developments, the
International Committee for Support to the Transition
(ICST) was convened on 13 July. It rejected the
distribution by RCD-Goma of the military regions and
of command structures and regretted that the
disagreement over the number of bodyguards had
impeded the RCD-Goma's arrival in Kinshasa.

On 15 July, at a meeting of the Commission de
Suivi, all parties, with the exception of the RCD,
agreed on a formula for the distribution of the military
regions: three for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, two for the MLC, two for the
RCD-Goma, one for the RCD/Kisangani Mouvement
de liberation (RCD/KML), one for the RCD-National
and one for the Mai-Mai. Of course, that distribution of
military regions currently presents the greatest
stumbling block, because RCD-Goma is contesting that
decision and wishes to see an early session of the new
cabinet discuss the issue.

I should like to inform the Council that following
the assumption of duties by the new Foreign Minister,
Mr. Antoine Ghonda, on 7 July, the formal handover of
power between the outgoing and incoming ministers
and vice-ministers took place on 15 and 16 July.
Representatives of all components and entities of the
inter-Congolese dialogue thus now occupy ministerial
positions in the Transitional Government and are
expected to be formally sworn in shortly.
There are several challenges on the way for the
Transitional Government. Mr. Guehenno has rightly
focused on Ituri. With respect to the situation in Ituri, I
can say only that it should not be regarded as just a
short-term deployment of troops. I am encouraged to
see the draft resolution, which contains wording for the
deployment to Ituri of a robust force with an
appropriate mandate. But additional action needs to be
taken to end the reign of impunity, not only in Ituri but
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As I leave, I reflect that the Security Council
adopts many resolutions deploying many troops around
the world, and that the main driving force behind all
those operations is the massive abuse of human rights
and the grave humanitarian situation faced by
populations. I would urge that those driving forces for
the deployment of troops not be overlooked. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, conditions are now
more and more favourable for major humanitarian
relief operations.

The establishment of the Transitional
Government - four years after the signing of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement - is a historic milestone.
During that period, the international community,
through MONUC and bilaterally, has played a decisive
role in pushing the parties to fulfil their commitments.
That effort should not be reduced. There will be crises
and problems in the process - and there are signs of
that already. But all the efforts that have been made to
bring the Lusaka Peace Agreement to this stage and to
implement all relevant Security Council resolutions
will have been wasted if the Security Council does not
maintain an active interest in moving the process
forward.

However, the formation of a Transitional
Government is not the end of the reconciliation
process. The installation of the new, inclusive
Government is only the beginning of a new chapter. As
the Secretary-General stated in his second special
report, immense challenges remain. A concerted and
unified effort by all is necessary.

(spoke in French)

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, very warmly and, through you, to extend
my thanks to the members of the Security Council for
the support that I have received for almost two years
now. I believe that, without that support, I would not
have been able to accomplish much of anything and,
above all, that the personnel of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) - which works in truly difficult
conditions - would not have had the courage
necessary to carry out their activities.

I wish also to express my heartfelt thanks to the
Secretary-General, who provided me with the
opportunity to participate in a peacekeeping operation.
That added a new dimension to my career at the United
Nations. Now, more than ever before, I am convinced
that there can be never be any progress without peace
and security in countries. I wish also to pay tribute to
the Congolese people, who supported me during those
two difficult years, sometimes marked by
misunderstandings due to the need to implement the
Security Council's decisions. But, ultimately, I think
that the Congolese can be proud of having been able to
resolve the problem. They are on the path to peace and
security.

