Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Force
Commanders back to this meeting of the Security
Council, which has now become a regular event. Lest
we forget, it was first held in August 2010 during the
Russian presidency ofthe Security Council (S/PV.6370).
It gives us a chance to better understand the current
problems that peacekeepers face in implementing their
Security Council mandates, as well as to get feedback
first-hand and to ensure that the Council's military
expertise remains relevant.

United Nations peacekeeping continues to be very
much in demand. Peacekeepers play a leading role in
supporting the efforts of national Governments towards
stabilization, peacebuilding, providing protection to
civilians and monitoring compliance with ceasefires.
United Nations peacekeeping activities are constantly
changing, both conceptually and operationally. It
is important to adapt them to emerging problems
and effectively react to new political realities and
challenges. In that light, the United Nations in recent
years has experienced an increasing demand for its
resources and, as a result, has been called upon to
tackle unprecedented tasks.

The events that peacekeepers have had to deal
with confirm once again the vital nature of the core
principles of peacekeeping. Peacekeepers must strictly
abide by their mandates and not get dragged into
internal political conflicts. They should not render tacit
support to one of the parties to a conflict. That can lead
to extremely negative consequences and can call into
question the reputation of the United Nations. Sadly, we
have seen such unfortunate precedents in recent times.

Of course, peacekeeping mandates should be clear.
They should not leave any latitude for malleable or
subjective interpretation. They should be practically
feasible and appropriate to the situation at hand.
Peacekeepers can carry out only primary tasks in
the field of peacebuilding. Inflating mandates to
include unmandated peacebuilding functions is
counterproductive.

An ongoing problem remains that of providing the
necessary level of military expertise for measures taken
within the framework of United Nations peacekeeping.
There is a Charter mechanism that exists for that
purpose; it is the Military Staff Committee. We believe
it should step up its activities.

In order to improve United Nations peacekeeping,
we should more effectively tap the resources of regional
organizations, in strict compliance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter. Useful improvements have been made in
that sphere. Putting them into practice will allow us all
to avoid repeating past mistakes in the future.

We hope that today's meeting is a good chance
for all of us to reach a common understanding when it
comes to further steps to enhance the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

