We thank Ambassador Ladeb and Ambassador Djani for their briefings on cooperation efforts among the three Committees they chair. We welcome the details on the increasingly close collaboration among the Committees, in particular given the major constraints and challenges caused by restrictions imposed due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Indeed, unyielding cooperation efforts and renewed energy are needed to continue to address the ongoing threat to global peace and security caused by terrorist acts, as we grapple with the devastating impact of the pandemic. The cruelty demonstrated by terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) knows no bounds. We are concerned that such groups will take advantage of the global disruption caused by the pandemic to incite and perpetrate new attacks. We see an increase in the number of incidents in conflict zones and further evidence of their ability to mutate and adapt to new modalities in response to external events. We commend the achievements of the offensive against ISIL - in particular the leaders of the organization - as a result of various strategic operations, which must continue to be strengthened. However, we again stress the importance of addressing in a holistic manner the key factors that incite violence and exacerbate the conditions that lead terrorism, in particular socioeconomic, political and humanitarian issues, which have been worsened by the pandemic. We also applaud efforts made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to ensure the prompt continuity of its work, despite the interruption caused by COVID-19, and provide us with materials and reports on the most recent trends in the activities of these terrorist groups. We trust that it will soon be able to resume its visits to States and the monitoring of the implementation of Security Council resolutions, as a mechanism for prevention and action against these dangerous groups. The resurgence in the use of chemical weapons and the development and ongoing efforts to enhance nuclear and ballistic programmes and their means of delivery again underscores the importance of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the need to achieve the resolution's universal adoption and full and effective implementation. We welcome the progress made by the States Members of the United Nations in this regard and recognize their commitment, as well as the tireless efforts of the Committee in support of these goals. Notwithstanding the progress made, the full and effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task that requires greater coordination among States, organizations and civil society at the national, regional and international levels. The Dominican Republic reiterates its firm commitment to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In the process ahead of the 2021 comprehensive review of the status of implementation, we submitted to the Committee our updated national report and national action plan, as well as substantive information on updating our matrix to reflect the significant progress made in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) since our 2015 report. In this regard, we take this opportunity to acknowledge the hard work of the Group of Experts, in particular in the process of reviewing the matrices. We sincerely thank the Group for its assistance, close collaboration and availability, despite the complex circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
