We join others in thanking the High Commissioner for his briefing and expressing our appreciation for the dedicated work that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), especially thousands of its staff, has been doing on the ground to help protect refugees around the globe. The tragic plight of refugees in many parts of the world has stirred up the concern of the international community. The latest statistics we heard today are alarming. For the last decade, every year we see a new record high of forcibly displaced people and every year we witness an unprecedented increase in refugee flows, driven mainly by decades-long conflicts in the world. But more worryingly than the numbers themselves, the figures show us a gloomy picture of the greater sufferings that those people are enduring. Their situation is fraught with inadequate living conditions, discrimination, stigmatization, limited access to basic services, among others. Emerging challenges, such as people smuggling and trafficking in persons, threaten not only their safety and security but also their lives. The adverse impact of climate change and the current coronavirus disease pandemic make their already desperate situation reach another level of severity. In that context, efforts by host countries are commendable more than ever, but their generosity should not be taken for granted. The international community needs to recognize and share the growing burden upon their shoulders. Accordingly, we particularly emphasize the importance of burden- and responsibility-sharing to assist refugees and host countries. The Global Compact on Refugees and the first- ever Global Refugee Forum, where more than 800 commitments were made, have engendered a new confidence in boosting cooperation at all levels in order to address refugee issues. Constructive engagement and dialogue among concerned parties is also the only way to guarantee the successful return and reintegration of refugees. In that connection, we call on all relevant stakeholders to focus on the humanitarian nature of our work to resolve refugee-related issues. Saving people is humane because that is the very nature of our moral norms and obligations. All genuine efforts must be people-centred, non-politicized and in accordance with the principles of respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned and of non-interference in internal affairs. Another crucial factor is the pursuit of a comprehensive and holistic approach in order to make sure that we do not overlook any aspects of the challenging situation facing refugees. Conflict prevention and resolution, sustainable economic growth and the maintenance of peace and security are all mutually reinforcing towards durable solutions. To address the root causes of conflict is to address the root causes of refugee issues. We call on all warring parties in the world to show political will and make greater efforts with a view to achieving permanent ceasefires and creating the conditions conducive to lasting political solutions to conflicts. Regarding emerging challenges to asylum, as mentioned by the High Commissioner, we would like to further emphasize the need to ensure transparency in the granting of refugee status to asylum seekers. At the same time, it is necessary to clearly distinguish between refugees and irregular migrants for economic purposes so as to develop suitable policies, especially in the context of growing non-traditional security threats, such as epidemics, natural disasters and climate change. For our part, Viet Nam attaches great importance to enhancing cooperation at the regional and global levels, including through participating in the Bali process, working with the UNHCR and implementing the Global Compact on Refugees. We will continue to play our part and work closely with other members of the global community in an active and responsible manner.
