The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan. We welcome the
participation in today's meeting of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative and Head ofthe United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Jan
Kubis. We also would like to thank the representative
of Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for his detailed briefing.

Afghanistan is approaching a watershed in
2014, when important events are scheduled to take
place - presidential and provincial elections, the
withdrawal of the international military contingents,
the re-hatting of the residual military presence and
the so-called international training mission. Although
there has been an ongoing process of national
reconciliation and tangible changes in the social fabric
of Afghan society, the current situation in Afghanistan
raises certain concerns with regard to the future of the
country and the region as a whole.

Terrorism, extremism and drug crimes are far
from being eradicated in Afghanistan. We have not
yet seen a breakthrough with regard armed combat
with the Taliban. Many Afghan provinces remain
fully or partially under Taliban control, and the
Taliban continues to carry out terrorist attacks across
Afghanistan. Of particular concern is the continuing
spread of terrorist activities from the northern
provinces of Afghanistan into Central Asian countries.
Those countries, along with the Russian Federation,
are member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and partners in the Commonwealth of
Independent States. The danger remains that leaders
of the International Security Assistance Force, NATO
and troop-contributing countries could unjustifiably
or artificially accelerate the process of transferring
responsibilities for the security of the country to
Afghan armed forces without taking into account the
true situation in those regions where the transfers occur
or the state of preparedness and military capacity of
the relevant sub-units of the Afghan National Security
Forces. For example, we do not understand how it is
that the completetion of the process is being planned
for the summer of this year, in terms of its fourth and
fifth phases, which cover the most problematic areas of
the country.

We attach great importance to the role of Pakistan
in the settlement of Afghanistan. It was our hope that
the conclusion of a treaty on strategic partnership - the
drafting of which was agreed between Afghanistan and
Pakistan in London in February - would facilitate
enhanced security in the region and the achievement of
a political settlement in Afghanistan, however difficult
that may seem today.

However, dialogue with the armed opposition will
be positive only if led by the Afghan Government and if
the armed fighters comply strictly with the principles of
reconciliation by laying down their arms, recognizing
the Constitution and cutting all ties with Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. Those principles
must guide negotiations with the Taliban, inter alia,
through the contact office in Doha. It is unfortunate
that attempts to dilute those three principles continue.
It is important that, in exchange for concluding a
reconciliation agreement, the Taliban not cause the
country to lose all of its gains of the past 11 years.

We believe that the Security Council sanctions
regime must remain the most important counter-
terrorism tool - with respect to individuals, groups,
entities and organizations involved with the Taliban - in
building peace, stability and security in Afghanistan.
We support the measures agreed by the Security
Council to improve the sanctions regime in terms of
the Taliban, stipulating, inter alia, the establishment
of strengthened, flexible and transparent procedures
aimed at improved functioning through closer contact
with the Afghan Government. In the future we will
continue to work to ensure the effectiveness of the
sanctions as well as strict compliance by States with
their relevant international obligations.
The Russian Federation has consistently supported
the Afghan Government's efforts to achieve national
reconciliation, combat violence and terrorism and
establish conditions for the long-term stabilization of
the country and the entire region. We will continue
to assist Afghanistan in strengthening the military
capacities of the Afghan national security forces.
Thus, upon the request of the Government, in 2012,
we voluntarily provided arms and armaments for the
Afghan National Police.

The prospect of a continuous, long-term, foreign
military presence in Afghanistan is not welcomed by
us nor by other States of the region. After completing
the stabilization mission, the foreign contingents will
no longer have a role. Moreover, far from acting to
deter terrorism, their presence has become a factor
in additional regional tensions. It is important that
military bases be truly transferred to the Afghan armed
forces, which means that they must be under Afghan
leadership and staffed by Afghan fighters.

It is also important to resolve the issue of drugs in
Afghanistan in order to ensure long-term stability there,
given that the 2014 factor could undermine advances
achieved in the security sector and risk Afghanistan's
becoming a breeding ground for terrorism and organized
crime. All of the factors of the Afghan drug threat can
be considered to constitute threats to international
peace and security.

It is our shared responsibility to our Afghan
partners to take the necessary measures to stem the
drug threat. We therefore consider it necessary and
unavoidable to eliminate the opium poppy fields and
the drug processing laboratories in Afghanistan, just
as is being done to combat drugs issuing from other
regions, such as Latin America. We remain convinced
that every effort must be aimed at supporting the
efforts not only of the Afghan national forces but also
of the international presence, based on the principle
that whosoever effectively controls the territory bears
responsibility for whatever takes place upon it.

We are disappointed that NATO did not respond to
the Collective Security Treaty Oorganization (CSTO)
proposal to cooperate in that area and that the ISAF
has opposed CSTO participation in counter-narcotics
activities. We also do not understand why there is
opposition to the addition of specific appropriate tasks
to the UNAMA mandate.

In the context of the necessary activation of the
international forces, we attach great priority to carrying
out the tasks set forth during the third ministerial
conference of the Paris Pact initiative on stemming
the Afghan drug threat, which took place in Vienna
on 16 February 2012, as an important step towards an
agreement on including drug traffickers on the United
Nations sanctions list.

We welcome any rational measure to provide active
assistance to Afghanistan and its neighbouring States
aimed at countering the global drug trafficking threat.
The Russian Federation is increasing its contribution
to such assistance through the United Nations. A
great impetus in efforts to counter the Afghan drug
threat could be provided through large joint projects
aimed at Afghanistan involving the United Nations
and development projects in Central Asia. Regional
organizations and neighbouring countries should
contribute to the normalization of Afghanistan and
adjacent areas, in particular through comprehensive
economic cooperation.

We consider it appropriate to improve activities
under existing formats, first and foremost the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO). Afghanistan and
other SCO observer States can actively participate in the
organization's activities to draft preventive measures
to counter regional threats. We welcome UNAMA's
intention to actively cooperation with the SCO.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Denmark.

