Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking Ambassadors Peter Wittig,
Hardeep Singh Puri and Baso Sangqu for their
informative briefings and for the skill and dedication
they have displayed at the helm of the Security Council
subsidiary Committees that they respectively head.

First, with respect to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), I should like to note the
current threat posed by Al-Qaida. We are aware that
sanctions regimes have contributed to undermining
sources of terrorist funding and have succeeded in
suppressing acts of terrorism. However, there is
evidence that the threat posed by Al-Qaida continues to
evolve; thus the Committee, with the first-rate
assistance of the Monitoring Team, must continue to
analyse the threat and adapt its work to the changing
nature of terrorism and its diverse manifestations. This
must obviously be duly reflected on the list.

We welcome the improvements made by the
Committee concerning procedural guarantees and the
consideration of applications for listing and delisting.
Resolution 1989 (2011) represents not only progress in
terms of the rights of the persons and entities that are
included on the list, but it also makes it possible to
strengthen the credibility of the sanctions regime. By
delisting persons and entities who and which should
not be on the list, we have made the list into a living
reflection of the current state of the threat.

We urge the Committee to continue its work,
taking into account the opinions of other Member
States, particularly those of States whose inhabitants or
nationals appear on the list. However, such interaction
must take place in full respect of the independence of
the recommendations of the Ombudsperson, the
confidentiality of the process and established deadlines
and procedures, which provide legal certainty to the
mechanisms for listing and delisting.

That brings me to the work carried out by the
Ombudsperson, whom we congratulate and thank for
her independence, professionalism and courage. We
were pleased by that experience and are interested in
developing the idea put forth by some States to extend
that position to all sanctions committees.

We believe that the terms of reference
establishing that office did not limit it solely to the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, but included all of
the others. The work of the Security Council must be
transparent and respect the rule of law, thus an
ombudsperson for each of the committees would be
eminently justifiable.

Secondly, over the last decade the role of the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism has
grown and evolved very quickly. There have been
many successes since the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001). My delegation is grateful for the outstanding
support provided on that issue by both the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

My country believes that for there to continue to
be progress, first, closer dialogue among United
Nations Member States is crucial; secondly, work must
continue on developing mechanisms to provide
technical assistance to those countries that request it,
and thirdly, a regional approach must be adopted, as
paying special attention to the specificities of each
region enables greater understanding of the challenges
and recommendations applicable to the reality of each
country.

Another important point to add is that greater
emphasis must be put on the conditions that foster
terrorism and allow it to spread. Guatemala believes
that effective efforts to counter terrorism depend on
our ability to address successfully the economic, social
and political conditions that feed the phenomenon.
Thus, the prevention of terrorist acts and the
elimination of incitements to terrorism, including
extremism and intolerance, are vitally important and
should serve as a departure point in seeking a lasting
solution to the threat of terrorism.

In that vein, we support the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) and welcome the global inquiry
into its implementation. We highly value the work to
assess the various levels of experience and problems of
countries and regions in relation to the implementation
of the resolution.

Thirdly, resolution 1540 (2004) has been used as
one of the main international instruments in preventing
weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials from falling into the hands of
non-State actors, in particular, terrorists. Resolution
1977 (2011) determined the principal role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in those matters and
established the conditions needed to encourage
multilateral endeavours.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a fundamental
role in coordinating and enhancing the efficiency of the
work carried out. We believe that the Committee and
its Expert Group have worked in a commendable
fashion during the reporting period in promoting
intensified international activity aimed at combating
the risks and threats of proliferation.

Guatemala welcomes the measures taken to
ensure consistency in the work of the Committee and
believes it is important to continue those efforts. The
1540 Committee has also proved to be a vital
mechanism in supporting and assisting Member States
through continued efforts aimed at promoting and
developing their abilities to counter those threats.
Guatemala acknowledges and pays tribute to the work
carried out in that area.

With respect to the work of the Expert Group of
the 1540 Committee, we believe that their work
pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011) is of the greatest
importance. Without the support provided by the Group
to Member States, in particular the developing
countries, it would prove difficult for many of them to
draw up action plans, submit national reports and make
progress on the measures necessary to comply with the
provisions of the resolution. We wish, therefore, to
underscore that the Committee must refer its
recommendations on the eight experts selected in
accordance with the previously agreed criteria, in
particular a broad geographical representation, to the
Secretary-General as quickly as possible, as they
reflect the legitimate interests of the international
community for a balanced and equitable representation.
Resolution 1977 (2011) is clear in establishing the
criteria for the selection of the experts, compliance
with which is important to ensure that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) maintains its legitimacy.

Guatemala trusts that the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council will continue to promote cooperation
among Member States and help them to overcome
obstacles to implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The Permanent Representatives of Germany,
India and South Africa, as well as deserving of our
gratitude, may also be assured that we will provide our
full support to their work.

