Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
firmly supports the Security Council's efforts to
promote international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. My country has zero tolerance for terrorism.
We forcefully and unequivocally condemn terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by
whomsoever committed. No ideological, political or
religious reason justifies those who commit, contribute
to, finance or defend terrorism.

Peru, which has experience in fighting terrorism
and has overcome that scourge at the national level,
believes that terrorism must be dealt with in a
comprehensive manner, taking to account legislative
aspects, but also the coordination of intelligence
services and programmes to combat poverty and social
exclusion. Firmness in the comprehensive fight against
terrorism also requires firmness in preserving civil
liberties and full respect for human rights. Our
experience has taught us that the basic task in counter-
terrorism is to isolate terrorists from the population.
That is why the State must be democratic and must not
use force outside the law or in an indiscriminate
manner.

Peru thanks Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Loj,
Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Chair of the 1267
Committee, and Ambassador Peter Burian, Chair of the
1540 Committee, for their briefings. I take this
opportunity to congratulate the three Chair on the
important work that they have accomplished.

We welcome in particular the progress outlined
by Ambassador Mayoral in cooperation established
between the 1267 Committee and Interpol. Peru has
repeatedly emphasized the need for action in that area.
My country hopes that the cooperation between the
1267 Committee and Interpol will continue to be
strengthened so that all individuals on the Consolidated
List can also be incorporated into Interpol's database.

In that context, it is essential to improve the
quality of the List. To do that, there should be
sufficient information to identify individuals and
supporting documentation for every case. The
Committee should also review the listing and delisting
of individuals, as well as the application of
humanitarian exceptions in accordance with resolution
1452 (2002).

Peru is concerned about the lack of a consistent
procedure to ensure that the United Nations does not
enter into contractual relationships with individuals or
entities on the consolidated list. We hope that the
Secretariat will quickly complete the work it has begun
and that the outcome will take into account not only
the sanctions within the framework of resolution 1267
(1999) and subsequent related resolutions but all the
sanction regimes administered by the Security Council.
Regarding the work of the Counter- Terrorism
Committee, Peru supports the programme of work
introduced by Ambassador Loj and agrees with the
priorities it sets out. The review of the reporting
regime is a fundamental change, and Peru firmly
supports it. We consider that analysis of what
individual States have achieved in the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) will reveal the specific
situation of each State. Case- by- case examination will
indicate which tools are most effective for each
country and will identify the needs for technical
assistance. All of this will lay the foundation for
improved dialogue between the Committee and States.

Peru supports identifying best practices for the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In our view,
such best practices would not necessarily create
international obligations per se.

My country stresses the importance of the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Preventing non- State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction is a genuine
concern. Peru has submitted its national report on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and urges
States that have not yet done so to make whatever
efforts are necessary to submit their reports promptly.
Review of the reports will enable the Committee to
identify areas in which the States may need technical
assistance.

In the last quarter of 2006, Peru intends to
organize in Lima, with the support of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, a
regional seminar on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The seminar will follow up on a similar
event that took place in Buenos Aires in 2005.
Currently, we are awaiting a positive response from
friendly Governments so that we can get the financing
under way.

My delegation considers the upcoming discussion
on updating the mandate of the Committee to be of the
utmost importance, and we will actively participate in
it.

My delegation would like to highlight the
importance of cooperation and coordination among the
three Committees and their teams of experts. It is
important that the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the 1540 Committee's group
of experts continue to coordinate their work, especially
with regard to the exchange of information, the
organization and programming of visits and the
identification of areas in which technical assistance is
needed.

We would not want to conclude without
expressing our wish that at the next meeting of the Ad
Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210, to be held at Headquarters from
27 February to 3 March, we will be able to conclude -
or make substantial progress in - the negotiations on a
draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. We appeal to all Member States for
flexibility so that the remaining differences can be
resolved.

