Mr. Montafio y Martinez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico welcomes the initiative of the
Republic of Argentina to convene this open debate
on United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security.

Providing peace and security to citizens is a duty
of States. To achieve those objectives in a world as
globalized as ours is today, international dialogue,
cooperation and the exchange of information and best
practices are crucial.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
the trafficking in small arms, transnational organized
crime, climate change and food insecurity, among
others, are challenges that threaten and hinder the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Regional and global organizations have a key
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the development of
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
dialogue and multilateral cooperation. They also
have a role to play in the protection of human rights,
institutional development, the consolidation of the rule
of law and the promotion of respect for international
law.

In these lofty aims, Mexico recognizes the
important role played by the Organization of American
States in our region as a promoter of cooperation in the
Americas, which is becoming a strategic partner of the
United Nations at the regional level. We also believe
that the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States has a major and specific role to play, which is
to strengthen and ensure that dialogue prevails among
all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
and to find areas of convergence so as to maximize
cooperation .

We also acknowledge the special role of bodies,
mechanisms and processes, such as the Association
of Caribbean States, the Central American Integration
System, MERCOSUR and the Union of South American
Nations, in promoting greater integration, and hence
greater development and a higher quality of life for
citizens. All of those institutions seek, from different
angles to build a prosperous, democratic and peaceful
world that fosters the development of their citizens'
potentials.

In October we will celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the Declaration on Security in the Americas, adopted
by the Organization ofAmerican States and which was a
result of a special conference on security, held in Mexico
on 28 October 2003. The Declaration on Security in the
Americas recognized that the threats and challenges to
security in our hemisphere and concerns about security
are diverse in nature and multidimensional in scope.
Similarly, the American nations believe that the basis
and rationale for security is the protection of the human
person in every aspect. To achieve that objective, it is
essential to adopt an approach that includes promoting
economic and social development, social inclusion and
education.

In order to improve security conditions, American
States have committed themselves to addressing
extreme poverty and social exclusion, ensuring
universal access to basic health services, promoting
a democratic culture through education for peace and
strengthening civil society participation in what we
believe to be, fundamentally, the development of a
multidimensional approach to security.

