At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the Republic of Estonia, President of the Security Council for the month of May, and the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, for convening this important meeting. I also extend to the delegation of Estonia my sincerest wishes for success in its presidency of the Council under the current circumstances, against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Lastly, I wish to thank Her Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report. The Security Council has the crucial responsibility to maintain international peace and security, hence the need to develop and improve the Council's working methods. We welcome the regular holding of open debates on the working methods of the Council, as continued discussion of this issue is of interest to all Member States, which wish to see the Council operate in the best possible way and adapt its working methods in response to ongoing changes. These debates also provide an opportunity to review progress made, as well as to identify developments and hear a wide range of insights and opinions on how to address them. In this regard, we must commend the efforts of the previous Chairs of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Thanks to their efforts, many important documents on the Council's working methods have been issued, chief among them the revised note S/2017/507, with the objective of enhancing the Council's efficiency and transparency and finding ways for the Council to address issues of concern. We would also like to express appreciation for the contribution made by the State of Kuwait during its presidency of the Informal Working Group. Despite developments that have helped to increase transparency in the Council, there is room to make further improvements that can strengthen the Council's ability to perform its mandated functions under the Charter of the United Nations. In that context, we wish to underscore the need for consultations to be more objective and interactive; for States that are not members of the Council to be more involved in its work, as appropriate, in line with Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter; for the report of the Security Council to be issued in a timely manner, so as to enable the General Assembly to debate it; for more open debates to be convened; and for Council documents in the six official languages to be made available promptly on the website. We reiterate the substance of document S/2016/619, which covers the work of the chairs of the subsidiary organs and in which it is reiterated that the chairs of the Council's subsidiary organs, including those of sanctions committees, should provide all Member States with informal periodic briefings on their activities, as appropriate, and indicate the time and venue of these meetings in good time, since Member States are the ones responsible for implementing many of those committees' recommendations and must coordinate the implementation of binding Security Council resolutions. The committees should therefore have a high-profile presence in the meetings of the Security Council. The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the need to better enable the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility to maintain international peace and security in the event that its members are unable to meet in person. In that connection, we draw attention to the Council's efforts to ensure that its work continues virtually, in particular the remote voting process, which has made it possible to adopt many important resolutions, and we note that the Council has held regular informal meetings, on the understanding that it will explore, whenever that becomes possible, ways to ensure continuity of formal operation in the future. We welcome the relentless pursuit of greater coordination and cooperation among the main organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other relevant bodies, so as to enable the Organization to work rapidly and effectively and support the Security Council in implementing its mandate. In that connection, we emphasize the role of regional organizations in maintaining international peace and security in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. While we value the readiness of the Security Council to prevent conflicts from erupting and resolve them peacefully through negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and other peaceful means set out in Chapter VI of the Charter, we underscore the need for the Council to support the good offices of the Secretariat, regional organizations and Member States to address conflicts, thereby helping to alleviate human suffering and build thriving societies, and the need to make greater use of the latter approach in view of the unprecedented circumstances facing the international community because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Kingdom of Bahrain has emphatically supported the Secretary-General's call for a worldwide ceasefire. In conclusion, we look forward to holding additional meetings on the development of the Council's working methods, promoting greater harmony among the organs of the Organization and bringing about the changes required to ensure that the Council can fulfil its mandate to the fullest extent possible, in keeping with our belief in the essential role that the Organization plays.
