Mr. Tillander: Let me express my appreciation for
the invitation to give the perspective ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on key peacebuilding challenges
facing Liberia.

The PBC country configuration for Liberia - with
its approximately 40 member States - offers support
based on the statement of mutual commitments, and
in close collaboration with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The Liberian Agenda
for Transformation, together with the Government's
commitment to the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States, and the forthcoming compact, provide
focus on State- and peacebuilding goals with which the
statement of mutual commitments should be aligned.

In line with the Council's request to the PBC in
resolution 2066 (2012), I will first discuss how progress
can be accelerated on national reconciliation, and then
on the security sector and rule of law. After that, I will
make some remarks on other peacebuilding challenges.

National reconciliation is recognized as a core
peacebuilding priority and a critical component of
Liberia's Agenda for Transformation. This includes
mending relations between the State and society and
among communities and individuals. Ten years after
the civil war ended, Liberia needs to deal with those
issues and embark on the reconciliation process without
further delay. The PBC has interacted frequently and
continuously with the responsible Minister and other
actors to support implementation.

Since March, when I touched upon that issue in my
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6941), only limited
progress has been made. As I said then, this is an area
where there is a need for leadership and resolve. The
time has now come for the Government to translate its
political commitment into a priority for implementation
and action. The activities contained in the National
Reconciliation Road Map are ready, the Road Map
has been launched, the roles and responsibilities are
clarified, and the activities should be implemented in
an inclusive and coordinated manner without further
delay.

The Government has the primary responsibility
for financing the reconciliation process. While funds
allocated in last year's budget were widely recognized
as an important commitment, they were for the most
part not released and implementation was delayed.
Translating the commitment into action, including
appropriate levels of funding in the national budget
and releasing the necessary funds, would represent
an important signal to the Liberian people and the
international community.

I welcome the preparedness of United Nations
agencies to support the reconciliation process and
Government efforts. United Nations agencies, such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
UNICEF and UN-Women, have allocated funds to
important aspects, such as the Palava Hut process, and
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is providing flexible
financing. Bilateral partners should do the same, on
the basis of an effectively managed, coordinated and
implemented National Reconciliation Road Map.

On security sector reform and the rule of law, the
challenges are considerable. With a view to ensuring
a seamless UNMIL transition, accelerating progress
is vital. Next week, I will have the opportunity to
take part in the security sector reform retreat in
Monrovia, mentioned by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. As pointed out in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/479), a lack of Liberian
police capacity, mobility, professional management
and limited resources hampers the necessary progress
required to keep step with the UNMIL transition. Also
in terms of numbers, police strength has increased
only marginally, as detailed by Special Representative
Landgren. Progress in reforming and strengthening the
judiciary has also been slow. However, the appointment
of a new Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presents
an opportunity to press ahead and accelerate progress.
We should make sure that this opportunity is fully
supported and utilized.

The responsibility for speeding up progress in
justice and security is shared among all of us. But
first and foremost, the Government's commitment is
key when it comes to reforms, implementation, the
allocation of sufficient resources and ensuring the
timely disbursement of allocated funds. To accelerate
progress, the Government's efforts in those areas need
to be stepped up.

The United Nations system has an important
supportive role to play. The PBC fully supports
the efforts of UNMIL in all aspects. The creative
approaches used by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNMIL to fill specialized police posts
are useful examples of how different United Nations
tools can be used to strengthen the Organization's work
on the ground.

The United Nations system needs to perform
effectively the tasks that it takes upon itself, including
"Delivering as one", providing programme support and
managing funding mechanisms. The independent review
of the justice and security joint programme, including
the trust fund, should offer a basis for strengthening
such mechanisms. UNDP has proposed measures
aimed at improving its contribution, in particular in
the programming support and management of the trust
fund. The security sector reform retreat next week will
offer an opportunity for the United Nations system and
bilateral partners to consult with the Government on
rapid implementation.

The PBC is prepared to do what we can to support
the Government's efforts in the marshalling of
resources for justice and security. But such efforts will
be difficult if the Government's budget commitment
for the sector is perceived as insufficient, if funds are
not being released, if the funding mechanisms are not
working effectively and if the justice and security hubs
are not providing services as expected. Support from
partners is more likely to increase when concrete goals
and benchmarks are in place and clearly communicated,
when funding mechanisms are effectively managed,
when there is an efficiently operating joint programme
for implementation and the setting of priorities and
when progress is accelerating.

The holistic context of a coordinated programme
will also be necessary to facilitate the provision of
justice- and security-related services around the country.
The first hub, in Gbarnga, is providing services and has
an impact in a number of key areas, but it is still not
functioning at the expected level of full operationality.
As I now understand it, the court will be inaugurated
only towards the end of the year. The repeated delays
are troubling and, for the coming hubs, lessons must be
learned and applied. For the second and third hubs, the
intention is still to inaugurate and celebrate the delivery
of services in the second quarter of 2014. For that to
be possible, UNDP and the United Nations Office for
Project Services, as implementing partners, must do
their part, together with the Government, and thus show
how the hub concept can be effectively implemented.
That will also make partners more willing to give the
support needed for the full implementation of the five
planned justice and security hubs throughout Liberia.

Let me now move on to some other peacebuilding
challenges. On gender-related issues, Liberian grass
roots groups and civil society have played a strong and
constructive role, and continue to do so. That role is
even more important in view of the widespread sexual
and gender-based violence, including against children,
and the shortcomings in taking legal action against
perpetrators. In line with resolution 2106 (2013), efforts
need to be stepped up, in terms of both specific gender-
focused activities and actions to reform and strengthen
the criminal justice system..

I am pleased to note that the proposal for PBF
funding in Liberia for the coming years includes an
increased allocation for gender-focused activities,
which would appropriately leave us with a funding
level considerably above the 15 per cent target set by
the Secretary-General. In upcoming PBC visits and in
close cooperation with UNMIL and UN-Women, I will
continue the dialogue with the Minister of Gender on
those issues, as well as with civil society organizations.

Women's organizations and Civil society actively
participated in the high-level meeting initiated by the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) held
in Dakar at the end of June, on a subregional strategy
for the Mano River Union. I salute UNOWA and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit on that
initiative. Strengthening the Mano River Union and the
strategy, taking into account security and development,
is an important contribution to conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. We should all consider ways to lend our
support.

As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General, there are concerns about a lack of oversight,
revenue issues and corruption related to land and
natural resources. During the most recent PBC visit
to Liberia, in May, I had an opportunity to participate
in a conference on the topic, which was arranged by
civil society, with active Government and business
participation. This is an issue where civil society
plays an important role, and the conference offered a
constructive opportunity for a frank and open dialogue.

The Government of Liberia has expressed its
intention to fight corruption. Some actions have been
taken, but progress remains slow. Further actions should
be encouraged, measures should be implemented,
oversight strengthened, perpetrators taken to court and
those guilty held responsible.

The international community needs to strengthen
its coordinated support to Liberia in this area. I am
pleased to note that the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO) is currently considering a PBF contribution
aimed at promoting concerted action by the World
Bank, the African Development Bank, bilateral
partners and the United Nations in support of Liberia
in conflict-sensitive and sustainable land and natural
resources management. Indeed, the PBF could be more
proactively employed to promote such cooperation
among the international financial institutions and the
United Nations system in other areas as well. I will
continue to make that point in my discussions with the
PBSO and with the relevant actors in Liberia.

The PBC welcomes the inclusion of the concepts of
fragility and peacebuilding in the strategies for Liberia
recently adopted by the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. It will be essential to maintain
that fragility perspective in the implementation of the
strategies. During the PBC visit to Liberia next week,
I intend to continue the dialogue with the international
financial institutions on how we can best work together
to ensure synergies and mutual support.

The PBC visit next week will focus on security
sector reform and national reconciliation. I will also
consult with the Government and partners on how
we can best support Government efforts on resource
mobilization. In preparing for the visit, I welcome
input, and I am, as always, available for consultations.
The visit should provide a basis for accelerated progress
on key peacebuilding challenges and guide the support
of the PBC on justice, security, reconciliation, gender
issues, land issues and natural resources.

