Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The stalemate in direct negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides undermines
heartfelt and honest international efforts to achieve
progress in the peace process. Peace and settlement
policy do not go together. Settlement activity must be
stopped in order to enable us to resume direct
negotiations leading to the creation of two States, a
Palestinian State and an Israeli State, based on the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of the Palestinian State - two States living side by
side in accordance with international resolutions and
international terms of reference, especially resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, as well as the
important Arab Peace Initiative.

The Palestinian Authority is deploying every
possible means to fulfil its commitments under the
Oslo Accord and the Road Map. However, we see no
genuine palpable will or commitment on Israel's part to
achieve a political settlement. That stands to
undermine what has been achieved to date by the
Palestinian Authority in its ambitious plans to build the
institutions of a future State. Israel's intransigence in
its wish to prevent Palestine from becoming a full
Member of the United Nations in the coming session
was referred to by President Obama in his address to
the General Assembly (see A/65/PV.11). No one can
accept the Palestinian people remaining without a
State. Peace and security for both peoples, Palestinians
and Israelis, is necessary, but Israel's obstinate policy
hampers peace and leads to further escalation of the
situation in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation calls on the Quartet
and the Security Council to act quickly to persuade
Israel to immediately put an end to its settlement
policy, to resume direct negotiations and to find a
comprehensive, peaceful, just and lasting solution,
because the question of Palestine is an international
question, not a regional one, and resolving it will
benefit all.

