The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as representative
of the Republic of the Congo.

I too thank the Chairs of the three counter-
terrorism committees - Ambassador Cesar Mayoral,
Chair of the 1267 Committee, Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Chair of the 1373 Committee, and
Ambassador Peter Burian, Chair of the 1540
Committee - who have all given us clear and
informative briefings. My thanks go also to the three

Sll'V.5446

 

expert groups that assist the ambassadors in their
difficult tasks.

The three briefings show that each of the three
Committees has reached a significant level of work in
its area of activity. In particular, they show that the
Security Council is maintaining a constant and
legitimate vigilance with respect to an equally constant
threat.

This meeting is being held a few days after the
worldwide commemoration of Anti-Terrorism Day,
which is observed every 21 May in memory of all the
innocent victims of this scourge throughout the world.
The commemoration of that day shows - as if it were
necessary - that the threat of terrorism must always
be taken very seriously and that any solution to that
threat must be transnational.

That is why my delegation notes with interest the
ongoing efforts of our Committees to encourage
Member States to effectively implement the various
counter-terrorism resolutions. It is true that that effort
is long-term and has not yet had all the results we had
expected, but any progress in this regard - modest
though it might be - must be taken fully into account.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our appeal for
even more sustained assistance to States that are late in
submitting their reports and in acceding to or ratifying
the international counter-terrorism instruments.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
strengthening of the dialogue with Member States, as
recommended by the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
through field visits and meetings with regional or
subregional organizations to create active partnerships
in the area of sanctions implementation, with, of
course, all the necessary precautions involving the
issue of list revision and taking into account provisions
concerning the legal and humanitarian aspects.

We are also pleased to learn that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will hold, at a place to be
determined, its fifth special meeting on a very
important subject: preventing terrorism and ensuring
effective border security. We are certain that that
awareness-raising effort will greatly help to improve
the performance of all parties interested in the task of
counter-terrorism.

However, with regard to the 1267 Committee, my
delegation continues to stress the need to update lists,
taking into account all matters of interest to Member

States and others, and, as we have said, to ensure that
human rights and legal protections prevail. The 1267
Committee must be able to provide Member States
with the information to which they are entitled
concerning persons whose names are listed and
anything relevant to their listing or delisting. In that
context, we fully support the Chair of the 1540
Committee in his objective of strengthening
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations with a view to the implementation of that
important resolution.

The work programmes of the three Committees
highlight the need to better coordinate the activities of
their expert groups in order to create genuine synergies
in their efforts vis-a-vis Member States; hence the need
to identify best practices through the expert groups and
to make those practices available to States that need
them most.

In that regard, the websites of the three
Committees, whose services have been improved, are
an effective means for communication and the
exchange of information.

Resolution 1673 (2006), of 27 April 2006, renews
the mandate of the 1540 Committee and opens up new
perspectives for it that require further support from all
Council members. That is why my delegation hopes
that the donor conference soon to be held in Geneva -
on 5 and 6 June 2006 - on the implementation of that
resolution will have all the support expected.

Finally, we reaffirm our support for the Chairs of
the three Committees and wish them every success in
their missions to ensure the success of our common
fight against the scourge of terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Austria.

