Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to Your
Excellency on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. Let
me also welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and to thank him for his briefing and his report (see S/2012/813).

Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (EU), to be delivered shortly. However,
allow me to make a statement in my national capacity
as well.

Bosnia and Herzegovina developing as a fully
functional State and joining NATO and the EU is not
only something that Croatia strongly supports and will
continue to support, but is also crucial to stability in
South-Eastern Europe.

Croatia notes with regret that, 17 years after
the war, there are still doubts about the territorial
integrity and the constitutional framework of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Consequently, instead of discussing
today Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress on the NATO
Membership Action Plan and the opening and closing
of European Union membership negotiation chapters,
we are compelled to struggle with separatist tendencies
and the obstruction of democratic processes.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has a future as a member
of the Euro-Atlantic community, as a modern European
State with a developed democracy and a Viable and
competitive economy, and as a State with a particular
political system. In many aspects, that system, rooted
in the Dayton Peace Accords, is based on ethnic
representation, which is meant to be founded on
genuine equality among the three constitutive peoples.
That equality is the key to successfully achieving an
ethnic balance among its citizens, stability and the
functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is, and will
continue to be for the foreseeable future, a conditio sine
qua non of the political, economic and cultural life of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
However, such equality is not secured through the
current electoral legislation. The Croats of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are the least numerous but are nevertheless
a constitutive people. Breaching their right to have
political representatives whom they themselves elected
is dangerous not only for their political existence but
for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. It would be
equally detrimental if the other two constituent peoples
were unable to elect their genuine representatives.

That said, it should be stressed that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is also a State of all its citizens, regardless
of ethnicity or faith. As such, it must implement the
verdict of the European Court of Human Rights on
the Sejdie-Finci case. That the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina who do not belong to one of the three
constituent peoples are discriminated against by the
election process and that Bosniaks and Croats in the
Republika Srpska and Serbs in the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina suffer the same type of discrimination
is a legacy of the Dayton Peace Accords. Nevertheless,
we urge the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to reach a viable and sustainable solution on that issue.
We believe that the relevant objective, which is a key
element for the entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union, will
be achieved at the earliest possible time.

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards joining NATO, we urge the political leaders in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to further the efforts towards
implementing the six-party political agreement on the
issue of military property and to work constructively
to implement it without delay in order to start the first
cycle of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Membership Action
Plan as soon as possible.

Croatia wants to develop the Euro-Atlantic
partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand
ready to cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on all issues relating to Croatia's future European Union
membership and to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina
with firm political and robust technical support in that
process of European integration.

