Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Mr. President, I wish to welcome you to the Council. I
wish also to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Timor-Leste and the Vice-Minister of Brazil. I
extend my thanks to Special Representative Haq for
her briefing this morning and for her dedicated
leadership and commitment to solidifying peace in
Timor-Leste.

The collaboration among the United Nations,
bilateral partners and multilateral actors has paid
dividends in Timor-Leste. The continued cooperation
among all stakeholders will provide critical support as
this young country develops and prospers. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/201 1/641) provides us with
an important opportunity to discuss the needs of Timor-
Leste, to reflect on the progress of the planned
withdrawal of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), and to begin long-term
planning for future United Nations engagement in the
country.

Allow me to address four issues today.

First, the United States is pleased and encouraged
that the security situation in Timor-Leste continues to
be stable and that security sector reform efforts
continue to bear fruit. The transition of primary
policing responsibilities last March from UNMIT to the
Timorese national police was a critical step in
developing the capacity of national institutions to
promote enduring security in Timor-Leste. We
appreciate UNMIT's essential support to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and recognize the
PNTL's successes in strengthening its own capacity.
We also acknowledge and commend the commitment
of the Timorese defence forces to enhancing their
professionalism and building their readiness, including
their ability to respond to natural disasters and
humanitarian emergencies.

Work remains to be done, however. Continued
efforts to professionalize the national police and the
military are necessary. We encourage the Government
of Timor-Leste to focus on establishing well-defined
roles for the police and the military. This is especially
important as Timor-Leste moves towards elections in
2012. The United States is committed to supporting the
continuing development of the military and police
forces through professional exchanges, training and
exercises.

Secondly, as mentioned, Timor-Leste will hold
presidential and parliamentary elections in the first half
of 2012. The importance of organizing and holding
free, fair, transparent and peaceful elections cannot be
overstated. We urge all political parties to respect the
outcome of the democratic process and to conduct
political activities peacefully.

The United States is pleased to support the
request made by the Government of Timor-Leste for
election monitors and civic and voter education
programmes. We urge the international community to
provide additional support to the election process.
Thirdly, I would like to reiterate the importance
of Government institutions and capacity-building in
Timor-Leste. The strengthening of rule of law and
governance institutions is critical to the future stability
of Timor-Leste. We urge continued international
support for that effort. The increased participation of
women in the national police and politics is laudable
and should be replicated across all institutions. Praise
is also due to the Government of Timor-Leste for its
progress in promoting anti-corruption and transparency
initiatives, including the establishment of the
Anti-Corruption Commission, as well as other
initiatives.

We urge further work on institutionalizing
Government accountability, providing access to justice
and resolving truth and reconciliation issues, including
the establishment of a public memory institute. Strong
institutions devoted to the protection of human rights,
the promotion of national prosperity and the
achievement of accountability across all levels of
society are critical to long-term stability in Timor-
Leste.

Finally, I would like to highlight the impressive
level of collaboration between UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste in developing and
ratifying the joint transition plan. The plan will guide
the complete withdrawal of UNMIT by the end of
2012. We encourage UNMIT and the Government to
continue with its implementation consistently and
systematically.

As the 2012 elections approach, the intensity of
electoral preparations will increase and it may prove
difficult to maintain simultaneous preparations for the
eventual withdrawal of UNMIT. We urge UNMIT and
the Government of Timor-Leste to avoid delaying the
implementation of the transition plan and to continue
engaging international partners to ensure that
capability gaps are quickly identified and filled.

With UNMIT's withdrawal a little over a year
away, we have the opportunity to think collectively
about the future engagement of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, in Timor-Leste. The
United States believes that international support for the
development of Timor-Leste will continue to be critical
to the country's future. We remain committed to a
sustained dialogue with the Government and other
stakeholders with regard to a post-UNMIT United
Nations presence in the country. The good offices of
the United Nations and other international support
systems will be integral to the continued development
of Timor-Leste and will provide opportunities for
Timor-Leste to contribute to those institutions as well.

That mutually beneficial relationship is already
starting to develop. Timor-Leste has progressed from a

country that needed a peacekeeping force to a country
that contributes to peacekeeping forces. Timor-Leste
police officers have served in overseas missions,
including in Kosovo in 2005 and this year in Guinea-
Bissau. In July of this year, 12 Timorese defence force
engineers began a six-month training to prepare for
their eventual integration into a Portuguese contingent
that will serve with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon.

We also commend the role Timor-Leste plays as
an international leader of fragile States, through its
founding and sharing of the group of seven plus (g7+)
post-conflict countries.

In conclusion, allow me yet again to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq
for her leadership and dedication, the peacekeepers of
UNMIT for their work and contributions, Timor-
Leste's other supporters on the ground and abroad and
the Timorese themselves, for their continued dedication
to peace and security in Timor-Leste.

