Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate South Africa on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October. Our delegation wishes to assure you,
Mr. President, of our fullest support and cooperation
during your tenure. Let me once again thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this critically
important debate. We hope that it will rekindle our
aspirations for strong cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council, especially in building
capacity for preventive diplomacy.
We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
Ambassador Mulamula and the two civil society
representatives - Ms. Linda Vilakazi and
Ms. Naledi Maite - for their comprehensive briefings
and reflections.

Ethiopia strongly believes that conflict prevention
and mediation are critical tools for sustaining peace
and development. Preventing the outbreak of conflicts
and their recurrence are also the central pillars of the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture. We
believe that the fundamentals of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union also he in
the need to promote conflict prevention and in the
primacy of political solutions, which centre on properly
implementing the objectives of the Peace and Security
Architecture, including through projects such as the
African Continental Early Warning System, the targeted
activities of the AU Mediation Support Unit and the work
of the AU Panel of the Wise. At this juncture, I wish to
recall that discussions in the Council are not showing
satisfactory progress on the importance ofstrengthening
the AU Peace and Security Architecture, including on
the need for sustainable and predictable funding for AU
peace support operations through mechanisms such as
United Nations-assessed contributions.

On balance, the use of preventive diplomacy by the
United Nations system - particularly the Secretary-
General's good offices - remains indispensable
but underutilized in avoiding and containing crisis
situations. The Security Council must also do more to
support and promote national and regional conflict-
prevention efforts. That is highly important given that
the nature ofmodern conflicts tends to be transnational,
especially where borders are porous, as is the case in
many parts of Africa. It therefore goes without saying
that both the humanitarian and material losses resulting
from conflicts are too great. That is why they should
be stopped or minimized through conflict prevention,
mediation and preventive diplomacy, which are by
far the best tools we have at our disposal to avert the
outbreak of crises.

We recently witnessed the significance ofmediation
in our region. The collective wisdom of the Sudanese
people and the endeavours of the African Union,
Ethiopia and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) resulted in facilitating peace and
stability in the Sudan - blessed be the peacemakers.
We again witnessed that conflict prevention and
resolution are less costly, bringing hope, nurturing
cooperation and giving us the momentum and serenity
to reflect on wars being destructive and peacebuilding
life and harmony.

We believe that inclusivity and building national
consensus are a foundation for successful conflict
prevention in intra-State disputes. Peace endures when
development is inclusive, when citizens' security is
guaranteed, when women and young people are actively
involved in decision-making and when barriers to their
economic advancement are removed. We have seen
the power and potential of young people as agents of
positive change all across our region, most recently in
Ethiopia and the Sudan, as well as across West African
countries. We must listen to young people - their
hopes, aspirations and concerns. The meaningful
participation of youth in peacebuilding activities will
deny armed and terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab
the chance to thrive by exploiting development and
governance gaps. In some of the conflict zones on the
African continent, the total absence of State structures
and functioning institutions, as well as corruption and
maladministration, have pushed a sizeable number of
young people to considerjoining those terrorist groups.
It is therefore critical to continue to invest in youth
empowerment and to bolster State capacity and good
governance initiatives at the local level, including in
ungoverned spaces.

Ethiopia is committed to the implementation of
the African Union's Peace and Security Architecture,
as well as its flagship vision of Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020, both of which emphasize conflict
prevention and the pacific settlement of disputes on the
continent. In our subregion, Ethiopia has championed
the goals of IGAD's Conflict Early Warning and
Response Mechanism, which aims to prevent violent
conflicts through structured and consistent early
warning and early response. At the national level,
over the past year and a half, Ethiopia has prioritized
building peace, including by setting up a Cabinet-level
ministry to ensure the implementation of peacebuilding
measures in order to strengthen the rule of law and
bolster the capacity of our security sectors. In addition
to empowering local communities, we are anchoring
our peacebuilding initiatives on indigenous traditions
such as the use of elders' councils and religious leaders,
with the objective of reaching national consensus. We
recognize that those efforts will not succeed without
the active participation of women and youth.

We would once again like to reiterate that, despite
significant progress in recent years, these regional and
national conflict-prevention objectives cannot be met
by Africans alone, not least because ofa lack ofmaterial
and financial resources. The international community,
particularly the Security Council, whose primary
function is the maintenance of international peace and
security, should actively support national, regional and
subregional efforts, based on the view that prevention is
better than cure. In that regard, we urge members of the
Security Council to further strengthen United Nations-
AU partnership around peace and security as a platform
for conflict prevention and mediation on the continent.

