Mr. Rock (Canada): Let me say at the outset how
much the Government of Canada appreciates the
opportunity to take part in this discussion today. This
initiative on the part of the Government of Argentina
furnishes us with additional evidence of the sincerity of
that Government's commitment to the cause of Haitian
reconstruction. The involvement today of so many
senior Government representatives from this
hemisphere and elsewhere demonstrates the truly
international and interregional nature of this
cooperative work.

Almost one year has passed now since former
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide left Haiti, a country
then in a state of turmoil and on the brink of civil war.
The efforts of the Council - first by authorizing the
deployment of the Multinational Interim Force and,
subsequently, by establishing the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) - have
provided important support to the Transitional
Government of Haiti and to its efforts to re-establish
stability and security, promote reconciliation and
relaunch the democratic process. We believe that,
under United Nations leadership, a coordinated
approach between national actors and regional and
international partners will ensure a better future for all
Haitians.

We wish to say a word in particular about Juan
Gabriel Valdes, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who has worked so effectively and
who has won the confidence and respect of all actors
with his frankness, his skill and his evident
commitment.
Canada would respectfully suggest that Haiti
currently faces three fundamental and pressing
challenges. The first challenge is to establish and
sustain security and implement comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
The second is to ensure economic and social
reconstruction. And the third is to promote national
reconciliation and relaunch the democratic process in
Haiti. While efforts to respond to those three areas
must of course be made in parallel, it seems clear that
without a secure environment economic and social
reconstruction cannot happen, reconciliation will
remain but a hope and the democratic process
eventually leading to fair and free elections cannot
proceed.

Let me first deal briefly with the security
challenge. Canada welcomes the efforts of the
Transitional Government to begin to address the issue
of former members of the Haitian armed forces. That
problem continues to have serious implications for the
security situation, in particular with regard to the
capacity of the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH to operate effectively in Haiti. Canada
welcomes the intent and actions of the Transitional
Government of Haiti in tackling that issue, including
through its plan to establish a national commission on
DDR. But we suggest that it must be addressed as a
matter of utmost urgency. We also suggest that the
reinsertion of any members of the former armed forces
into the Haitian National Police or other security
apparatus should involve strict and comprehensive
screening and training procedures, to ensure a
transparent, accountable and effective process.

Canada will continue to do its part, as evidenced
by our current contribution to MINUSTAH, in
particular to its civilian police component. In that
regard, we particularly welcome the recent joint
operations between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police that have successfully supported the
restoration and maintenance of the rule of law, public
safety and public order in Haiti. Those operations are
excellent examples of the type of close coordination
that is essential to our collective efforts to create a
secure and stable environment. We hope they will
continue. However, we would suggest that true security
cannot be attained without an end to impunity and
without the effective promotion and protection of
human rights.

(spoke in French)

Canada condemns all violations of human rights.
We urge the Transitional Government to ensure that
due process is followed and that individuals subject to
imprisonment are formally charged in accordance with
Haitian law. We welcome the investigation recently
launched by MINUSTAH into alleged extrajudicial
executions committed by the Haitian National Police.
We also urge an immediate end to the unauthorized
exercise of law enforcement functions by armed
groups.

(spoke in English)

Let me turn briefly to the challenge posed by
social and economic reconstruction. At the December
meeting of the Contact Group, donors identified the
slow pace of disbursements as perhaps the most
significant problem. We all agreed to look proactively
at reducing bottlenecks and at strengthening support
for capacity-building in ministries that require
assistance. The need to rapidly identify four or five
priority projects that can deliver much-needed quick
results on the ground is a pressing one. We are working
hard with the Transitional Government and our
partners to identify solutions.

Since December, the Canadian International
Development Agency has provided 16 million
Canadian dollars to the Transitional Government of
Haiti to assist it in the clearance of arrears to the World
Bank. In clearing its arrears, the Transitional
Government becomes eligible for new modes of
financial support provided by the Bank. In addition,
part of the contribution will go towards the
construction of the Route de Rail in Port-au-Prince, a
highly visible project, co-funded with the European
Commission and implemented in collaboration with
MINUSTAH, which will open up a southern exit from
Port-au-Prince and create employment in the
surrounding area, a disadvantaged neighbourhood of
the capital.

Clearly, more must be done quickly to rebuild
Haiti, and Canada remains conscious that our
commitment must also be sustained over the longer
term.

We are pleased to chair the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group of the Economic and Social Council that will
examine Haiti's development challenges. That
committed group, which includes Benin, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Haiti, Spain and Trinidad and Tobago,
is working actively with the Transitional Government,
with MINUSTAH, with international financial
institutions and with the Special Representative to
identify obstacles to development. We have already
identified areas such as capacity-building, sustainable
funding for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the involvement of the Haitian
diaspora as requiring particular attention. The Group
welcomes the opportunity to work with the Security
Council in addressing the situation in Haiti, and to that
end hopes that a joint mission to Haiti can soon be
organized.

Prime Minister Martin, speaking both in Haiti and
at the Montreal Conference on the Haitian Diaspora in
December, encouraged all Haitians to renounce
violence and participate in a genuine and broad-based
national reconciliation process. He also promised
Canadian support for the re-establishment of
democracy through free and fair elections. We are
pleased to note that this week, Canada committed to
providing $17 million in support of Haiti's electoral
processes, to assist the Provisional Electoral Council in
fulfilling its mandate. But successful elections require
not only that technical conditions be met, but also that
an appropriate political context be developed. That
context can be created only through an open and
forthright national dialogue among all sectors of
Haitian society and the main political parties, including
Fanmi Lavalas.

We consider that a national dialogue is of
fundamental importance in mobilizing all Haitians for
the restoration of democratic order and the
reconstruction and sustainable development of the
country. We welcome Prime Minister Latortue's recent
commitments to do what it takes to launch this process.
We urge all political actors to renounce violence and to
take part fully.

Canada has committed more than $180 million
over two years for the reconstruction of Haiti. We
understand that the task is formidable, that it will be
costly. But the international community cannot again
afford to fail the Haitian people. Canada wants to help
build a stable, democratic and prosperous society in
Haiti. We stand ready to continue to work with the
Transitional Government, the United Nations and our
other international partners towards this end.

