Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his briefing and for the important
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Afghanistan.

I would also like to thank Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar
for sharing his valuable insights this afternoon. With
more than 60 per cent of the population in Afghanistan
estimated to be under 25-years old, the future clearly
lies in the hands of the youth. In line with resolution
2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security, young people
should be actively and meaningfully engaged in all
decision-making processes, including in the Council.

The only viable solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan is an Afghan-owned and -led peace process.
In that regard, we commend the unprecedented steps
taken by the Afghan Government this year. It is deeply
regrettable that the Taliban did not accept the offer of
a bilateral ceasefire, and we join others in urging the
Taliban to cease all violence and to immediately engage
in talks with the Government. A peace process must
be inclusive, involving both women and youth, if any
agreement is to be sustainable.

As stated by others, the upcoming elections will be
decisive for the future of Afghanistan. The ability to
ensure credible elections will be a test of the Afghan
reform agenda and is crucial for achieving long-term
stability and for strengthening democracy. It is a shared
responsibility of the Government, the opposition and
the electoral management bodies to create the necessary
conditions. Responsible institutions must address
unresolved preparatory issues without further delay.
Any attempt to obstruct the electoral management
bodies from carrying out their work is unacceptable.
Adequate security measures need to be taken to prevent
attacks on the elections and the electoral preparations.
Women and men must be able to safely run for elected
office, campaign freely and, of course, vote. Special
attention should be given to ensuring that women in
remote and rural areas are also able to vote. UNAMA
has a clear mandate to promote women's participation,
and we encourage close cooperation with relevant
actors, including UN-Women, in this work.

Coherent and coordinated international support for
national peace efforts in Afghanistan is critical. All
stakeholders, especially the neighbours, must now act
on their commitment to supporting a political solution.
The role of UNAMA in backing those efforts remains
important. The Geneva Ministerial Conference
on Afghanistan in November will be an important
opportunity to bring key stakeholders together. The
Conference should focus on evaluating the reform
agenda that has been mutually agreed by Afghanistan
and the international community, including the conduct
of the parliamentary elections, anti-corruption efforts
and the implementation of the National Action Plan for
the implementation of Council resolution 1325 (2000).

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
is worsening. Due to conflict and drought, about
4.2 million people now need humanitarian assistance.
The situation has also led to an increase in internally
displaced people. Safe and unhindered access is critical.
It is also essential to ensure close coordination between
humanitarian and development efforts, including on
climate-change mitigation.

The continuous, horrendous attacks in Kabul and
around the country, including targeted attacks on girls'
schools, religious minorities and journalists, must
be condemned in the strongest terms. All attacks on
civilians, including those against humanitarian and
development workers, are unacceptable. All parties must
comply with their obligations under international law.
In that context, UNAMA's continued documentation of
civilian casualties is important.

With continuous attacks on civilians and a
worsening humanitarian situation, the challenges
in Afghanistan can sometimes seem overwhelming.
But renewed momentum for a peace process and the
upcoming elections offer opportunities to change the
trajectory. We should jointly seize that opportunity.
As a long-standing friend and partner to the people of
Afghanistan, Sweden will continue to do its part.

