Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are marking a sad date today, and we
have just come from memorializing the unfortunate
victims who died in that terrible tragedy. Across the
street from the Russian Mission in New York are a
police station and a fire station whose employees took
part in rescuing people on 11 September 2001. Today I
went up to the fire station chief to offer my sympathy
and appreciation for the heroism of the firefighters and
police who helped in that rescue.

I also want to remind the Council that on that day
of ll September, President Putin was the first of the
foreign leaders who called President George W. Bush
to express his condolences, support and readiness
to help combat the monstrous phenomenon that we
were witnessing. Russia is familiar with international
terrorism, and not merely by reputation, unfortunately.
We continue to reach out to every country and to
believe that it is our duty to fight this evil together, as
our proposal to create a genuinely broad international
coalition to combat international terrorism testifies.

Seeing the interest that has been shown in the
third summit of the Astana format guarantor countries,
held in Tehran on 7 September, we have decided
to speak about its main conclusions in the forum
of the Security Council. The meeting was a major
milestone on the road to the restoration of peace and
the establishment of a durable long-term settlement in
the Syrian Arab Republic. Together with our Iranian
and Turkish counterparts, we have circulated the
concluding joint statement as an official document of
the Security Council. The three Presidents' addresses
to the summit, and their press conference and joint
statement, send a clear message to the international
community that Russia, Iran and Turkey are ready to
do everything in their power to continue to contribute
to the final destruction of terrorism on Syrian soil,
putting an end to civilian suffering and establishing
post-conflict reconstruction and real progress with
the political process, enabling the Syrians themselves
to determine their future. It is also important that the
guarantor countries reaffirmed their commitment to
Syria's sovereignty, unity, political independence and
territorial integrity as the basis for all their actions in
the context of this crisis.
There was a substantive discussion in Tehran ofthe
situation in Idlib, where tens of thousands of militants
from Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and other groups that the Security Council
has declared outlawed as terrorists are concentrated.
It was with that in mind that Russia, Iran and Turkey
expressed their shared determination to completely
eliminate these remnants of terrorism all over Syria that
are threatening the security of the region, while giving
maximum attention to preventing civilian casualties.
We should not pass up the chance of reconciliation for
those who are ready for dialogue, and we hope that
those in Idlib will hear that call. We are demanding
that the armed groups stop shelling peaceful towns and
villages, something that is going on regularly. Just the
other day, nine people, including children, were killed,
and dozens injured in a rocket and mortar attack on the
town of Muhradah in northern Hamah province, and
three people died when several rocket missiles were
fired at the neighbouring town of Al-Suqaylabiyah.

The joint statement noted the urgent need to
dissociate the members of the armed opposition that
have chosen the path of a political settlement from
the terrorists. In the view of the summit participants
that separation will be decisive in ensuring the safety
of the civilian population. That is why those in Tehran
have appealed to all the members of the international
community with the ability to influence the armed
groups in Idlib to cooperate in separating them from
the terrorists. At the same time, we cannot allow the
terrorists to indefinitely hold hundreds of thousands
of civilians in Idlib hostage and use them as human
shields. As every United Nations resolution stipulates,
there can be no coexisting with terrorists, and it is
impermissible to let them off the hook. After all, these
are all offshoots and varieties ofthe same Al-Qaida that
we all launched a joint fight against in the wake of the
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and from which
we can expect the worst possible brutalities anywhere
in the world. We are remembering those tragic events
this very day.

The Tehran summit again affirmed the fact that
there can be no alternative to a political settlement
in Syria. We hope that the three guarantor countries'
message will be heard by all. That position takes on
special significance today against a backdrop of threats
to resort to military intervention in Syria and strike
Government facilities in the guise ofa response to claims
of Damascus's use of toxic substances and allegations
that President Al-Assad has ordered the use of chlorine.
The Syrian authorities are not about to do this. They
have no chemical weapons. We are once again asking
the Council to listen: from a military point of view
there is no justification for the use of chemical weapons
by Damascus, while both militarily and politically it
would be damaging insofar as it would be an invitation
to the Western troika to strike at Syria, which they
are threatening to do on that same pretext of the use
of chemical weapons. Meanwhile, there is a strong
possibility of provocations from those of Damascus's
opponents who are counting on the forceful support
of their foreign patrons, and we have incontrovertible
evidence of preparations for that.

The third Astana summit contrasted such
dangerous and vain military attempts with the work
of activating a political process led and implemented
by the Syrians themselves, without dictation or
pressure from outside. In accordance with instructions
from their three Presidents, high representatives of
Russia, Iran and Turkey were to hold consultations on
10 and 11 September with Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, with the
goal of establishing the most representative possible
constitutional committee in Geneva as soon as possible,
capable of reflecting the interests and aspirations of
every Syrian and of beginning work in accordance with
the decisions of the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue, held in Sochi on 30 January, and with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Much attention in Tehran was focused on the work
of post-conflict reconstruction in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The conditions are ripe. The people's acute
humanitarian needs are enormous, from food problems
and humanitarian mine clearance to the restoration of
basic infrastructure facilities. But none of this should
involve the political blackmail that many Western
capitals openly invoke. Promises of bread and butter in
exchange for political regime change in Damascus do
no honour to those who talk about Syria's humanitarian
problems at donor conferences but obstruct the provision
of genuine assistance to the Syrian people and maintain
unilateral sanctions.

An important item on the summit's agenda was
the three guarantor countries' discussion of the
issues related to facilitating the mass return of Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
original homes. As we know, the Syrian Government
has given the relevant security guarantees, and there is
great interest in this on the part of Syria's neighbours.
We definitely think that at a suitable point a major
international conference, to be developed by Russia,
Iran and Turkey, will be convened for the purpose of
making a significant contribution to that task.

The unanimous acceptance of the effectiveness
of and need for the Astana format was one of the
most results of the Tehran summit. Russia, Iran and
Turkey have shown - not in words but in deed - that
we can compromise on the most difficult situations
when required. Our interaction has enabled us to stop
large-scale violence in Syria, provide for long-term
stabilization, create the conditions necessary for a
genuine start to the settlement process, and achieve a
political transformation that would benefit all Syrians.
In Tehran, it was stated very clearly that work of that
kind will continue and cover the broadest possible
range of issues in Syria. The next summit will be held
in Russia.

