We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/555). I want to make four points today. We share the grave concerns set out in the Secretary-General's report about the Government of Israel's stated intention to annex parts of the occupied West Bank. We also share the Secretary-General's assessment that Israeli annexation of any part of the occupied Palestinian territories would constitute a clear violation of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Council resolutions, irrespective of the size of the territory and the terminology applied to enact a formal annexation. Any such annexation would not only have serious negative repercussions for the viability of a two-State solution and the entire peace process, but also for regional stability and the rules-based international order as a whole. It would severely complicate, if not render impossible, the resumption of direct negotiations between the parties towards the objective of a negotiated two-State solution that is acceptable to both sides. While we wish to intensify and further deepen our cooperation with Israel, we are concerned that annexation would instead harm Israel's standing within the international community, as well as its close bilateral relationship with the European Union and its member States. As a close partner and friend who deeply cares about the security of Israel, Germany has strongly advised the Israeli Government against the implementation of any unilateral measures aimed at the annexation of occupied Palestinian territories. We are concerned that annexation may not yield security gains for Israel, but could rather achieve the opposite. On 10 June, Foreign Minister Heiko Maas openly conveyed the German and European concerns regarding the annexation plans in his meetings in Israel with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Alternate Prime Minister Benny Gantz and Foreign Minister Gabi Ashkenazi. Foreign Minister Maas also met with Jordanian Foreign Minister Ayman Safadi and Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayeh during a joint video- teleconference, in which the participants confirmed the urgency in preventing an annexation. Today we echo the Secretary-General's call for Israel to abandon its annexation plans. Germany's position is clear. We will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to by Israelis and Palestinians, and we will continue to distinguish between the internationally recognized territory of the State of Israel and the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in accordance with our obligations under international law. A possible annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank would raise serious questions about prospects for a two-State solution and implications of a potential one-State alternative, not least of which is how to address the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians to their own State. What would it mean for Palestinians living in annexed areas? Would they enjoy equal rights? Germany remains convinced that a negotiated two-State solution based on international law and on the internationally agreed parameters is the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967, resolves all permanent-status issues and guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants. We must find a way to revive the political process and resume direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties in order to resolve the final-status issues and achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. Any future discussions or negotiations to reach a final-status agreement should be based on the relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and the internationally agreed parameters. The format of such direct and meaningful negotiations must be agreed by both parties. We reiterate our support to reviving the Middle East Quartet and call upon all members of the Quartet to demonstrate flexibility in order to overcome any differences and move forward. In the absence of such negotiations, the parties to the conflict must refrain from taking any measures that could further deteriorate the situation on the ground and undermine the viability of a negotiated two-State solution, especially when such measures would bring closer a de facto one-State reality with unequal rights for Israelis and Palestinians. As stated in the Secretary-General's report, the establishment and expansion of Israeli settlements fuels resentment, hopelessness and disillusionment among Palestinians, and significantly heightens Israeli-Palestinian tensions. We reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law and severely undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated and viable two-State-solution. We call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, the legalization of settlement outposts, the confiscation of Palestinian land and the demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned structures. We reiterate our call on the Israeli Government to halt settlement construction plans for Har Homa and Givat Hamatos, as well as for the so-called E-1 area. Disconnecting East Jerusalem from the West Bank would severely undermine the prospects for a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the framework of a negotiated two-State solution. Finally, resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully implemented - not only with regard to settlement activities but also with regard to acts of terrorism, violence against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome that the Secretary-General's report highlights that continuing violence, terrorist attacks against civilians and incitement to violence also exacerbate mistrust between Israelis and Palestinians. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible terms, including attacks against Israeli security forces and the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Israel has a right to defend itself and respond adequately and proportionally to attacks. Incidents in which unarmed civilians, in particular children and persons with disabilities, are targeted or subjected to violence must be thoroughly and independently investigated, and perpetrators of crimes must be held accountable.
