Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his briefing.

We welcome the participation in today's meeting of
the Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacic', and thank him and Mr. Thaci for their statements.

I would like to reaffirm the position of Azerbaijan,
which is based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence.

Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the binding
international legal framework for a comprehensive
settlement through a political process and negotiations.
Once again, we want to underline the important role
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is noteworthy that the Mission
continues to work closely with the communities on
the ground and to collaborate with all other mandated
international presences to enhance the prospect of
success in the political dialogue. UNMIK should
maintain and further develop its key role in ensuring
the coordination of all international efforts on the
status-neutral framework as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).

Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment of the parties
to the European Union-facilitated dialogue and the
progress achieved so far in the implementation of the
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations of 19 April and the subsequent implementation
plan of 22 May. We take positive note of the fact that
the sides met on a regular basis during the reporting
period and commend both Belgrade and Pristina for
their efforts towards consolidating their important
achievements. Recent agreements in the fields of
telecommunications and energy, as well as the police
and the judiciary, can be seen as a good starting point
that can be replicated for securing agreements in other
relevant areas.

We take note of the efforts towards the seamless
conduct of the Kosovo municipal elections. We
encourage the sides to continue to remain committed to
reaching an agreement on the contentious issues through
mutually acceptable solutions. That is indispensable to
greater stability and well-being in the region.

Except for sporadic violence in northern Kosovo,
it is a positive sign that the overall security situation in
Kosovo remained generally calm during the reporting
period. However, it is clear that much work is yet
anticipated for the maintenance of permanent stability.
The unresolved legacies of the conflict should remain
among key priorities so as to ensure that all those
responsible for war crimes and other criminal acts
are brought to justice. More efforts are also needed to
resolve the fate of persons who are still missing as a
result of the conflict.

The voluntary return of internally displaced
persons to Kosovo, although not significant,
nonetheless improved during the reporting period. In
that connection, we commend the efforts of the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration and
UNMIK in monitoring the process and implementing
the necessary policies towards the facilitation of
returns. The question of security should be of high
priority, among others.

We also commend the efforts of UNMIK and
contributions by other international partners to facilitate
UNESCO's activities in Kosovo for the purposes of the
restoration of the culture and religious heritage.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its sustained efforts towards the maintenance of
peace and stability in Kosovo and overcoming multiple
challenges to make that objective possible.

