Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for holding today's important meeting.
Your Government should be commended highly for
pursuing this important initiative. In this regard, allow me
also to express my own Government's firm support for the
Security Council draft resolution before us this morning.

The United States policy on terrorism is clear and it
is simple. Terrorism is a criminal activity regardless of
the circumstances or reason. There are no mitigating
factors. There are no questions. We do not tolerate it and
we will continue to pursue its perpetrators until they are
brought to justice. This was the case in the Lockerbie
bombing. It is the case with those responsible for the
bombings of our embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam.
We will continue to pursue, arrest and prosecute those
responsible for these crimes.

When President Clinton used his General Assembly
address last year to focus attention on terrorism, he was
underscoring our nation's commitment to addressing fully
and effectively this threat to civilized people everywhere.
When Secretary Albright recently designated 28 groups as
foreign terrorist organizations, she was demonstrating the
United States resolve to confront terrorism wherever and
whenever it rears its head. And when my delegation
introduced a resolution to impose tough sanctions on the
Taliban, in favour of which all 15 members of the
Security Council voted, to our great gratification, we were
demonstrating anew our determination to go after the
supporters of international terrorists as well.
It is incumbent upon all of us in the community of
nations to stand together and to stand strong. We must be
relentless in our pursuit, using all means necessary to
combat terrorists and their supporters, and we must
continue to work together here and elsewhere to this end.

Last week's unanimous Security Council action
against the Taliban was a significant example of what can
be achieved when we work in such a spirit. Next, the
United States believes we should move forward on the
initiative of France regarding a new convention for the
suppression of terrorist financing - a convention we hope
will be adopted by the General Assembly in December.
And we urge all Members that have not already done so
to become party to the existing 11 international
conventions against terrorism.

Despite the progress made to date, international
terrorism has shown no sign of letting up. All of us have
a stake in this fight and all of us have a responsibility to
act accordingly. Despite the risks involved, we must
summon the political courage to address this threat at
home and abroad.

Again, I thank you, Sir, for calling this important
meeting to discuss how we can stop innocent lives from
being lost, innocent families from being torn apart.

 

