Ms. Makotose: I thank the Council for having
recognized the important work of the police in
peacekeeping and would like also to acknowledge
the Council's important role in promoting peace and
our work. Its words of encouragement today and the
understanding and guidance shown are well received,
and we will be using them to inform and guide
our operations.

To the question that was posed by the representative
of Egypt, on the improvement of the security situation
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), I wish to acknowledge that there
has indeed been an improvement, especially in conflict-
related clashes, but my concern as Police Commissioner
is the fact that most internally displaced persons (IDPs)
remain in the camps, and their major concern when
we talk to them is the issue of security. This speaks
to the issue of trust between the IDPs and the security
institutions; they remain in the camps because they feel
a little bit insecure. We feel that we still have a role in
building this trust, and we hope that as we continue to
implement our mandate, this trust will be built.

Nonetheless, we have been undertaking a number
of strategies to ensure that in the event of our exit
there is sustainability and the rule of law. Chief among
this is that we started engaging in train-the-trainer
programmes under the capacity-building mandate.
We also have received a very interesting and exciting
request from the Sudan Police Force to help it develop
its standing operating procedures, its code of conduct
and a number of other institutional frameworks. We
believe that these are important to ensure sustainability
upon the exit of UNAMID.

We are also actively involved in community
policing, and we have a very vibrant community-
policing volunteers programme as well as very vibrant
community-safety committees, which discuss crime
and how to overcome some of the criminal challenges
that the people face.
We are also working with the United Nations
country team and mainly with the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and UN-Women to build capacity for the continued
monitoring of the performance of the Sudan Police
Force once UNAMID has exited from Darfur.

We are also happy to have seen the spread of the
Sudan Police Force into almost all of the team sites
that are operational, and we are pleased that that Force
is now in existence in most of these areas, with the
exception of about three. We are still working to get
them into those areas.

We would like the support of the Council for
the joint programme on the rule of law and human
rights, which is aimed at overseeing the resourcing
and implementation of a sustainable criminal-justice
system. It has been hit by a lack of funding, but we
believe that this is the programme that is going to
drive sustainability and the capacitation of both of the
Sudan Police Force in Darfur and, indeed, all other
criminal-justice institutions.

In response to the question from the representative
of Bolivia, on the greater participation of women, I
highlighted some of the relevant issues, but let me
just touch on a few more. We are advocating for the
recruitment, training and deployment of the Sudan
Police Force in the deep field. It is a bit challenging,
because it is really still at a very low point. We are
hoping that our continuous engagement will certainly
bring us some way towards our goal. We have developed
a concept note to the effect that we are also seeking
funding so as to recruit more women, train them and
then deploy them in the deep field.

We have established a women's network in the
Sudan Police Force as a vehicle for women to participate
in their empowerment. We insist that female members
ofthe Sudan police force participate in all our meetings.
As we continue to enhance the presence of female
peacekeepers deep in the field, we are still remodelling.
I hope that the Sudan police force will also take note
and copy what we are doing. I have also already had a
chance to engage with Walis and governors, and they
are beginning to accept the concept of recruiting more
female police officers.

There was also a question from the representative
of France on the lessons learned from our experiences.
I would say that the situations in the conflict and
post-conflict areas that we operate in are hard and
desperate. The peace process, in my experience, has
been very slow, and sometimes it is very frustrating.
A lot of commitment and consistency is required to
achieve stability and peace; continuous engagement
with hosts, the internally displaced persons population
and community leadership builds the necessary
relationships that then contribute to the success of our
work. We also feel that partnerships and collaboration
among the missions, the United Nations country team
and police-contributing countries are extremely critical
for us to achieve our mandates.

With relation to the question from the representative
of Senegal on the issue of language - yes, it is a
real challenge. However, we have Arabic speakers
and language assistants in the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Therefore, because
we take note on how we carry out deployments to
ensure that there is equal geographical representation,
they have come in very handy in helping us deliver
our messages. Our Integrated Mission Training Centre
also provides courses that help us to learn a bit of
Arabic, and we have taken the initiative to hold English
enhancement lessons with both the Sudan police force
and internally displaced persons. That has also helped
us to build relationships and improve communication
with both communities.

Those are the questions that I am able to answer. I
very much thank the Council for this opportunity.

