The President (spoke in French): At the outset of
this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the Security
Council, to express sorrow at the death of the President
ofthe Syrian Arab Republic, His Excellency Mr. Hafez
Al-Assad. President Assad, a statesman committed to
the greatness of his country and the destiny of the Arab
nation, devoted his life to serving his country with
great dedication. He also worked hard to contribute to
the search for a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution which all the peoples of the Middle East are
waiting for.

On behalf of the Council, I should like to convey
to the Government and the people of the Syrian Arab
Republic and to the bereaved family deep condolences.

I now invite the members of the Security Council
to stand and observe a minute of silence in tribute to
the memory of President Hafez Al-Assad.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2000/529)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, document
S/2000/529.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2000/486, letter dated 23
May 2000 from Portugal.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I am pleased to give him the floor.


