Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My Government is on
record as to the clarity of its position with respect to
international terrorism. We view international terrorism as
a major threat to international peace and security in today's
world. We remain committed to its eradication from the
face of the globe through concerted international action, and
welcome the attention and the seriousness with which the
Security Council is facing up to the issue.

My delegation deeply regrets that the Security Council
has come to where it stands in the implementation of its
resolution 1044 (1996) of 31 January 1996. My
Government is one of those that advocate the utmost
caution and prudence in taking action under Chapter VII of
the Charter. In the case at hand, however, we see no
alternative but to resort to Chapter VII as the ultimate
means of ensuring the implementation of resolution 1044
(1996).

Sudan has been under the legal obligation to
extradite to Ethiopia for prosecution the three suspects
wanted in connection with the assassination attempt on
the life of President Mubarak, as called for in paragraph
4 (a) of resolution 1044 (1996). There has been no lack
of diplomatic efforts to seek Sudan's compliance on the
part of either the United Nations Secretary-General or the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity.
Unfortunately, to date all these efforts have been to no
avail. Nor have we heard of any progress in the
implementation of paragraph 4 (b) of the resolution.

Although the draft resolution before us invokes
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the sanctions
contemplated in operative paragraph 3 are of a symbolic
rather than a substantive nature. It should be noted that
they carefully exclude any measure that could have a
direct impact on the Sudanese population. None the less,
operative paragraph 8 of the draft resolution demonstrates
the Council's determination to consider further measures,
in the event that the Council's demands specified in
operative paragraph 1 are not complied with within 60
days of 10 May. This is a clear message that must be
taken seriously.

Noting that the draft resolution adequately reflects
the views of my Government and the international
community in addressing the issue of the assassination
attempt on the life of President Mubarak and the issue of
international terrorism, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council.

We sincerely hope that the Government of Sudan
will heed the decision of the Security Council by
promptly extraditing the three suspects, in full compliance
with resolution 1044 (1996).

Sudan has been suffering from a longstanding civil
war and already has more than its fair share of economic
difficulties. Any further aggravation of the plight of the
Sudanese people and any further deepening of the
isolation of Sudan are the last things my Government
wishes to see.

Lastly, may I take this occasion to express our
sincere thanks to the Non-Aligned Caucus for submitting
a balanced text.

 

