Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): I would like to thank Special
Representative Coomaraswamy and UNICEF
Executive Director Ms. Veneman for their briefings.
UNICEF rightly has a high reputation among all our
publics, and we thank Ms. Veneman for her leadership.

We also pay tribute to the work of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank,
and thank Mr. Melkert and Mr. Bannon for their
briefings.

I would like to associate the United Kingdom
with the remarks made by the Finnish presidency of the
European Union a short while ago.

Above all, I should like to welcome Radhika
Coomaraswamy to her first meeting with the Security
Council. She has brought much energy to her task, and
it is particularly welcome that she has been able to get
into the field to see the situation at first hand and to
advocate for the rights of children. That is making a
real difference. I particularly want to mention Ms.
Coomaraswamy's visit to Uganda in June this year. The
violations of the rights of children in that situation are
egregious even by the awful standards that we have
been briefed on today. I strongly urge the parties to that
conflict to cooperate with the United Nations and to
fulfil all their obligations to protect the rights of
children.

Since the Council last debated this issue, we have
good reason to be encouraged by the impact the
Security Council is having on the situation of children
in armed conflict. Through our collective efforts,
continued and high-level attention has been focused on
the issue. We have helped shape and agree a framework
for action in resolution 1612 (2005). The two key
elements of that framework - the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the Council's Working
Group - will enable us to increase that impact.

The presentation to the Working Group in June of
the first country report on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was an important step forward. It was very
good to hear from the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo today. I look forward to the
Working Group reaching early agreement on the
recommendations to be passed to the relevant bodies.
That will enable action to be taken, including by the
Council. I offer the United Kingdom's full support to
the efforts of the French mission in advancing the
efforts of the Working Group.

The pilot phase of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism is now under way. It is already providing
valuable information and many people have
contributed to its effectiveness so far. I look forward to
the review of the mechanism and to its expansion to
cover all situations of armed conflict in which the
rights of children are being violated.

The progress with the reporting mechanism and
the Working Group is encouraging. However, as many
other speakers have said today, thousands of children
around the world continue to be affected by conflict.
The current situation in the Middle East demonstrates
just how vulnerable children are to the effects of such
conflict. Ultimately, we must measure our success in
terms of impact on the lives of children. The evidence
suggests that naming perpetrators of grave violations
against children has had an impact. However, as is
clearly illustrated by the reporting the Working Group
receives, that impact is limited. We have been talking
about an era of application for some time now. We
must do more practically to ensure that our words
culminate in action to improve the lives of children.

Having an impact depends ultimately on the will
and actions of the national Governments and armed
groups that are subjecting children to forced
recruitment and abuse. We should strengthen our
resolve to hold accountable those who commit such
intolerable acts.

The United Kingdom is fully committed to
tackling the issue of children and armed conflict and
will play a full role in the Council and its Working
Group.

Finally, I would like to state that we support the
presidential statement in its entirety.

