Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Like my colleagues
who have spoken before me, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
You are aware of the very close relations between our
two countries, which we shall always cherish.
The timing of today's meeting could not have
been more perfect, coming as it does after the Security
Council has been briefed on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my brother and dear friend,
Ambassador Morjane, who has assumed in our eyes in
Africa the role of a spirit medium in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My delegation regards it as a
privilege to participate in this open debate on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Let me take this occasion to congratulate the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) on the
sterling work it has accomplished in the last few
months. Indeed the deployment of MONUC, together
with the cooperation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement signatories, has transformed challenges into
possibilities. For their part, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) allied forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo took heed of the
Security Council's condition that phase II of MONUC
deployment would be contingent on the disengagement
of all foreign troops. In this regard, Ambassador
Morjane can confirm that since the United Nations
situated itself at the head of the table of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo peace process through the
deployment of MONUC, Zimbabwe has been
withdrawing its troops from both the front lines and
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation also wishes to acknowledge the
indomitable will of the Congolese people in their quest
to shape a new political destiny for posterity. Despite
the cataclysmic conflict that has resulted in the death of
more than 2 million people, mostly in the occupied
territories, the inter-Congolese dialogue remains on
schedule. In this regard, the political space of civil
society, especially in occupied eastern Congo, should
be recognized.

The Council will recall that in my previous
pronouncement on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo imbroglio, I noted three intertwined but
different types of conflicts that dominated the Great
Lakes landscape, namely, conventional war, guerrilla
insurgency and ethnic cleansing.

While the first type of conflict, conventional war,
which involved State actors, has ceased, the other two
types are yet to subside. This explains the upsurge of
violence in the two Kivus over the last few weeks. It is
in the occupied territories that MONUC is facing
harassment and obstructions, particularly from the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic (RCD- Goma).

While it is not the object of my delegation to
apportion blame, I call on the Security Council to urge
those Lusaka signatories that support RCD-Goma to
encourage their ally to toe the line. We know that
RCD-Goma is a pawn and can be ordered to comply. It
is time to stop the continuous exploitation, repression
and oppression of the Congolese people by the RCD-
Goma. We agree with my colleague of the Russian
Federation that sanctions and other measures must be
imposed because of RCD recalcitrance. The SADC
allied forces have done their part. If stock of what
hitherto has been achieved were taken, it would show
that the SADC allied forces have fulfilled their part of
the bargain.

When President Joseph Kabila addressed the
Security Council on 2 February 2001, he recognized
that the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement was the route
map for United Nations engagement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo peace process. The Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter, acknowledges the indivisibility of the
Congo. It is disheartening to note that Kisangani
remains militarized despite the adoption of the
resolution by the United Nations calling for its
demilitarization. The demilitarization of Kisangani
merits the attention of this Council, and, in this regard,
my delegation urges those Lusaka signatories
responsible for the destruction of Kisangani to fulfil
their ceasefire obligations.

The joke - for it can only be ajoke of the RCD-
Goma - that they are protecting human rights through
the illegal occupation of parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is not only farcical, but
constitutes blatant disregard for the rights of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It makes a
mockery of the Security Council and the United
Nations. It must be dealt with.

Lastly, let me thank the Security Council for
raising both the visibility and the physical presence of
the United Nations through the deployment of
MONUC. MONUC, with the Joint Military
Commission, has commendably driven the peace
process. But let us not lose sight of the fact that the
sheer size of the Congo makes it impossible for
MONUC to effectively discharge its multifaceted
duties, which at some stage would involve the tracking
down, disarming and rehabilitation of members of the
armed groups that are not signatories to the Lusaka
Agreement. If MONUC is having difficulties with a
non-State actor but a signatory to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, like the RCD-Goma, what others would it
have with those other elements which are not part of
the Lusaka Agreement?

I therefore urge the Security Council to revise
upward MONUC troop levels so as to enable it to
accomplish its monumental task. Indeed, the goodwill
demonstrated to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by the international community, manifested by the
creation of MONUC, should, in our view, be sustained.

In conclusion, may I pay homage to a great son of
Africa, my friend here, Ambassador Morjane. I know
that Ambassador Morjane will consider that we do not
need to pay him compliments for performing his duty
to mother Africa. This may be so, but members know
as well as I that not all sons of Africa have done the
continent proud. We are proud of him. We shall always
cherish his indomitable courage, candour and total
commitment to the cause of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As he goes to a new
assignment, we know that he will continue to serve
humanity and mother Africa.

