Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing and
Ms. Raemer for her remarks.

Three years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), but as the Secretary-General
notes in his latest report (S/2019/938), the situation
on the ground has continuously deteriorated over that
period. We thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
report. We are greatly concerned by his observations
with regard to the implementation of the resolution and
the current status of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Germany remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters. We continue to believe that the two-State
solution is the only viable solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that meets Israeli and Palestinian
security needs, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for
statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that
began in 1967, resolves all permanent-status issues and
guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants.

We support any effort that is aimed at reviving
the political process as long as it is in line with
international law, ensures equal rights and is acceptable
to both parties, Israelis and Palestinians. Unilateral
actions or creating facts on the ground will, however,
neither help to reach a just and lasting solution nor
lead to a sustainable peace. We therefore call on all
the parties to the conflict, but also on all international
stakeholders, to refrain from taking any measures that
risk undermining the viability of a negotiated two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis
of the internationally agreed parameters.

One of the main obstacles to a political settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the ongoing
Israeli occupation and the continued settlement
activities in the territories occupied since 1967. We
reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under
international law and undermine the prospects for
ending the occupation and achieving a negotiated two-
State solution.

The year 2019 marks a record year in the expansion
of Israeli settlement activity and the legalization of
settlement outposts since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016). This is a matter of serious concern to us.
We also remain gravely concerned about an increased
number of demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-
owned structures across the West Bank, including
donor-financed humanitarian projects and evictions
of Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report, these
demolitions also affected 26 structures financed by
international donors. We therefore call upon Israel to
end the expansion of settlements, the legalization of
settlement outposts, the confiscation of Palestinian
land and evictions from and the demolition and seizure
of Palestinian-owned structures.

We remain extremely concerned about repeated
statements alluding to or even announcing an intended
annexation of the Jordan Valley and other parts of the
occupied West Bank. Should such statements turn into
actual Government policy or law, that would constitute
a clear violation of international law. We strongly
advise any Israeli Government against taking any steps
in this direction as they would have serious, negative
repercussions on the viability of the two-State solution
and the entire peace process.
We also reiterate that Germany will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied since 1967 and that we will
not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties.

Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented, not only with regard to settlement
activities but also with regard to acts of terror, violence
against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and
inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome the fact that the
report of the Secretary-General also focuses on these
obstacles to achieving peace and share his grave
concerns about the continuing violence, terrorist
attacks against civilians, incitement and provocative
rhetoric and actions.

Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the repeated firing
of rockets from Gaza into Israel. Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must stop firing rockets into Israel. There
is no justification for the firing of rockets into Israel
or any other form of terrorism. We remain steadfast
in our commitment to Israel's security and stress
Israel's rights to self-defence and to react adequately
and proportionally to attacks against its territory.
Incidents with innocent civilian victims must, however,
be thoroughly investigated and accountability for
violations of international law must be ensured.

I should like to say a word on the situation in Gaza.
The three serious military escalations in 2019 in and
around Gaza are deeply concerning and highlight the
urgent need for a sustainable, long-term solution to the
ongoing humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza.
We call upon both Israel and the Palestinian Authority
to do their respective part in order to improve the
situation in Gaza. In this context, we welcome the
ongoing intra-Palestinian discussions on the holding
of legislative and presidential elections in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem and Gaza, as this could
give renewed democratic legitimacy and strengthen
national unity.

Before I conclude, let me also say a word on the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Germany
welcomes the renewal of the UNRWA mandate for three
years as UNRWA continues to contribute to stability in
the region by providing humanitarian assistance, health
services and education. As the largest bilateral donor,
Germany remains firmly committed to UNRWA and
continues to significantly contribute to the UNRWA
budget. Against the background of the critical financial
situation of UNRWA, we encourage other donors to
similarly continue their financial support to the Agency
by disbursing the funds they have pledged.

