Ms. Landgren: As I speak to developments that
have occurred since the period covered by the report
of the Secretary-General that is before the Council
(S/2015/275), all of Liberia is anticipating this Saturday,
9 May. If no new case has been confirmed by then, the
World Health Organization expects to declare Liberia
Ebola-free. After almost 14 months spent under the
cloud of Ebola, this will be joyful news for the country.
And last week, on 30 April, the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response in Liberia closed its
doors, transferring residual tasks to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and United Nations
agencies. Liberians and their Government, with support
from the United Nations and international partners,
have gotten firmly ahead of the epidemic. Now all
Liberians must remain vigilant.

Even as Liberia launches its post-Ebola recovery,
the Government has taken steps towards full assumption
of its security responsibilities by 30 June 2016, as
mandated by the Council. On 6 March, the Liberian
National Security Council endorsed the Government
of Liberia Plan for UNMIL Transition, in line with
resolution 2190 (2014). This important plan was
developed under the leadership ofthe Minister ofJustice
with UNMIL support, and through consultations with
national security agencies, ministries, the legislature,
the judiciary and civil society. Progress against its
benchmarks and timelines is being monitored by ajoint
implementation group chaired by the Minister ofJustice
and co-chaired by the UNMIL Special Representative,
the Minister of Finance and Development Planning, the
Minister of Defence, the United States Ambassador and
an associate justice of the Supreme Court. While the
security transition plan targets Liberia's assumption
of tasks currently still performed by UNMIL, it also
addresses gaps across the security sector in areas
such as achieving greater operational effectiveness,
improving management skills, reducing corruption
and increasing public confidence through stronger
oversight, accountability and professionalization. The
plan recognizes that a successful security transition
requires a whole-of-Government undertaking, with
sustained political will at the highest levels.
I have urged the Government to include the justice
and security sectors in post-Ebola recovery planning.
Liberia's draft economic stabilization and recovery
plan acknowledges the need for greater resilience in the
security sector, but foresees the financing of security
needs as coming primarily from the national budget.
With the security transition plan currently estimated at
$76 million through June 2016 alone, this may prove
difficult.

The United Nations commends Liberia for meeting
its initial benchmarks under the security transition
plan. Since the report of the Secretary-General went to
print, further benchmarks have been met. On 21 April,
Liberia became the tenth African country to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty. In March, the Liberian National
Commission on Small Arms, together with UNMIL,
delivered a first tranche of training on arms marking
and registration for more than two dozen staff from
a broad cross-section of the security agencies - the
armed forces, the national security agency, the executive
protection service, the Liberia National Police (LNP) and
the immigration service - ahead of the June timeline
envisaged in the security transition plan. I hope to see
the Government's weapons-marking process begin
by the end of this month, and the new draft standard
operating procedure, containing minimum standards
for weapons-marking, to be formalized this week.

On 1 June, UNMIL's Bangladeshi engineers
will start refresher training for the Armed Forces of
Liberia (AFL) on explosive remnants of war (ERW),
following previous training by the United Nations
Mine Action Service. That will equip the AFL to take
over responsibility on 1 July for ERW in 11 of Liberia's
15 counties. UNMIL and the AFL will continue to work
closely on the hand-over in the remaining four counties.

On 16 April, a riot broke out in the Red Light area of
Paynesville, just east of Monrovia, when a motorcyclist
died following a confrontation with the National Police.
In a single 12-hour period, three motorcyclists died in
encounters in Monrovia allegedly involving members
of the security forces. That fresh tension followed
previous complaints of police brutality. The Paynesville
disturbances left civilians and police officers injured
and resulted in significant property damage, including
to five police posts, one of which was destroyed.
UNMIL, which placed a formed police unit on standby
and remained in close touch with the LNP, conducted
its own response review and proposed to the LNP a
joint review of how the situation was managed.

On 1 May, President Johnson-Sirleaf dismissed
three senior LNP officers, including some who had
been the subject of complaints of serious misconduct
and abuse of power. Their replacements, nominated by
the Minister of Justice, came up through the ranks of
the LNP. One benefitted from the management-training
programme at the Ghana Institute of Management and
Public Administration in 2014, facilitated by UNMIL
and funded by Irish Aid. The President also instructed
that the LNP's dormant Change Management Committee
be reconstituted, a benchmark from the transition plan
ambitiously set for this past March. Those are steps
towards professionalizing and depoliticizing the LNP,
as UNMIL has consistently advocated.

On Armed Forces Day in February, keynote
speaker and former Minister Kofi Woods called
on the AFL to return to West Point, Monrovia, to
engage in civic works, as an act of reconciliation. At
the request of elders and other representatives of the
West Point community, unarmed AFL soldiers have
worked alongside community volunteers to rebuild and
transform the public school, which had been used as
an Ebola treatment centre before being badly damaged
during the disturbances last August. The LNP have
also joined the effort, which has been supported by
the United Nations and Liberian and international
non-governmental organizations. The school will
reopen next week.

Ebola highlighted Liberia's underlying fragility.
Beyond the public health crisis, Liberians were angered
by the Government's initial slow response and by
the rising cost of basic commodities, while the use
of the Armed Forces and the introduction of a State
of emergency also fuelled fears, as I described (see S/PV.7260) to the Council on 9 September last year. It is
remarkable that, eight months later, it is Liberia, among
the three affected countries, that appears poised to be
declared Ebola-free.

Liberians came together and showed themselves
resilient. Now is the time to address factors that
contributed to Ebola's spread, in particular weak
social-service delivery, the lack of accountability and
overly centralized Government. Liberia's extractives-
based, enclave economy also proved highly vulnerable
to the shock of Ebola, compounded by the sharp drop in
global prices for iron ore and rubber.

The Government's early steps towards security
transition at the county level, as part of the security
transition plan, are part of a historic reform in
deconcentrating service delivery; and, over the last
two months, more county security councils have been
activated. They are intended as an early warning
mechanism and a forum for local dispute-resolution.
Along with the existing and plannedjustice and security
hubs, the county security councils can strengthen
coordination between security agencies and local
authorities. There will of course be challenges for local
authorities in getting the councils to operate effectively
in the early period, but that will improve as support
grows for deconcentrated services and operations.

There are promising developments in addressing
corruption, with the Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission undertaking major investigations in
respect of State-owned enterprises. Steady political will
is needed to support those processes, particularly as
investigations move into higher levels of Government.
Audits by the General Audit Commission, including of
the National Ebola Task Force, have drawn attention
to financial-management weaknesses. Other efforts
towards transparency include the Open Government
Partnership and the Liberia Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. All can contribute to greater
confidence in the State and improved service-delivery
to its citizens.

Ebola threatened to deepen Liberia's long-standing
societal divisions, still not healed from years of conflict.
Reconciliation remains a work in progress. As the
Secretary-General said recently, "Justice is essential
We have to address past violations to secure a stable
future." The national dialogue about social exclusion
and about the crimes of the past, remains muted at best.

Liberia's stability also depends on that of the
subregion. A recent border shooting incident reminds
us of the potential for tension along the border with
C6te d'Ivoire. In that regard, with the resumption of
the quadripartite and associated bilateral processes,
the cooperation between Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire is
encouraging. With presidential elections anticipated in
both Guinea and C6te d'Ivoire this October, there is a
particular need to maintain strong cooperation across
the subregion.

Domestically and within the diaspora, Liberia's next
presidential election, in 2017 - apolitical milestone - is
already hotly debated. Much will be at stake in 2017, and
the political environment is increasingly intense. For its
part, the international community, including the United
Nations, must consider how to frame its own support,

including its peacekeeping presence, in the post-Ebola
context in order to build on positive developments and
opportunities that arose from the crisis and to prevent a
reversal in Liberia's gains. After 12 years of providing
support to Liberia, UNMIL remains a reassuring
presence to Liberians and investors alike, a deterrent to
potential violence and a mentor and standby support to
the Liberia National Police. As shown in Paynesville,
the country continues to harbour flashpoints of
intercommunal disputes and community dissatisfaction
related to land and concessions. And those are among
potential triggers that can adversely affect the political
climate.

As I prepare to step down as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in July, I would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Council
for the trust shown in asking me to head three peace
operations in succession - in Nepal, Burundi and
Liberia - over some six and a half years. It has been
an extraordinary privilege. Today is six years to the day
since my initial briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6ll9),
whose tremendous engagement has never wavered.
Sadly, Burundi and Nepal are both in the headlines,
each meriting our deep collective reflection on the pace
and impact of post-conflict stabilization.

I want to thank the Government of Liberia, and
Ambassador Marjon Kamara personally, for our
productive relationship. Not only with the Government,
but with Liberians in every walk of life, I have found
a welcome and an openness that has made living and
working in that country a rare privilege. I would like
to thank the Peacebuilding Commission, an invaluable
dialogue partner, and all UNMIL's international
partners. Finally, my heartfelt respect and gratitude
goes to my colleagues across the United Nations, in
particular the national, international and volunteer
personnel in the field, without whose support, day after
day, none of this work would have been possible.

