Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Ms. Bertini for her briefing and
to congratulate her on her praiseworthy work as
Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP) since 1992.

My country recognizes the important work
performed by WFP in more than 80 countries in both
providing emergency food and promoting long-term
development. Mexico is a founding member of WFP
and is currently on its Executive Board. My country
has supported the Board's, including those pertaining
to the Programme's governing system; its association
with other agents of development, particularly civil
society organizations; the improvement of staff security
in all areas; and the mobilization of resources.

Mexico attaches great importance to the
humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations
agencies. We think that this humanitarian assistance
should be provided on the basis of the guiding
principles in the annex to General Assembly resolution
46/182. This important resolution is a standard of basic
conduct in showing solidarity and international
cooperation.

We reiterate that humanitarian assistance should
be provided in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality and impartiality. Similarly, they
should be granted within the context of full respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and the unity of
States in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations and always upon the request or with the
consent of the receiving State. States bear the
paramount responsibility for initiating, organizing,
coordinating and implementing the assistance provided
by the international community.
Mexico reiterates in this respect the importance
of multilateralism and the non-conditionality of
international cooperation as regards emergency food
aid.

In the case of armed conflict, food production is
traditionally one of the most affected economic sectors.
Abandoned fields and migration caused by acts of war
have a general impact on the supply of foodstuffs in
some areas. The case of Afghanistan, given the tragic
nature and complexity of the situation, has become an
example of the destructive capacity of human beings,
combined with adverse climate conditions. But at the
same time, it is an example of the effectiveness of the
work coordinated among United Nations agencies and
the international community in consolidating lasting
peace.

We have all witnessed the efforts of the World
Food Programme to gather the necessary assistance and
prevent millions of displaced persons and refugees
from starving during the past winter, together with the
populations who, despite their isolation, felt the effects
of war and drought. To the difficult task of collecting
foodstuffs is added that of distributing assistance in an
area characterized by insecurity and the lack of
infrastructure.

Mexico would like to pay tribute to all who have
done this altruistic work with dedication to bring relief
to the neediest, not only in Afghanistan but in all
regions where there is a humanitarian crisis. In this
connection, Mexico would like to express its support
for the Afghanistan recovery operation to meet the
nutritional requirements of the people, support farmers,
expand the food programmes in schools and promote
the work of reconstructing infrastructure.

I should not like to conclude my statement
without explicitly expressing our gratitude to
Ms. Bertini for her work, and we wish her good luck in
her future. She is one of the women who has reached
one of the posts with the broadest responsibility in the
United Nations and has demonstrated a thorough sense
of leadership and organizational capabilities. Few
women can claim this in their professional resume; and
for this reason I think that she deserves very special
recognition. We will miss her in the United Nations.

