Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I, too, would like at the
outset to express our condolences to the representative
of China for the earthquake that occurred this morning.
Our hearts go out to the victims. We also wish to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

We are having this debate once again in the
backdrop of escalating tensions between the Israelis
and Palestinians. Recent efforts to bring the two parties
together in proximity talks were rendered futile
because of provocative actions and pronouncements on
both sides. It is a matter of regret that, instead of

showing genuine commitment to the peace process and
providing the requisite confidence-building measures
to promote it, the Israelis and Palestinians have
continued on a path that undermines peace between
them. The situation in Gaza is steadily gathering
momentum for a downward spiral into another cycle of
widespread violence and destruction. We urge the two
parties to sheathe their swords and embrace peace.

As was the case during our last debate, neither
party to the conflict can escape blame for actions and
pronouncements that are harmful to the peace process.
The clashes in Khan Yunis, which resulted in deaths
and reprisal strikes, as well as the new Israeli military
order that gives the power to detain, imprison and
deport Palestinians deemed to be infiltrators in the
occupied territory, are illustrative of these inimical
actions.

We reiterate our call on Israel and the
Palestinians to exercise utmost restraint in their actions
and utterances. The two parties should heed the well-
meaning appeals from different quarters, not least the
Quartet, to resume negotiations without further delay.
Arbitrary actions, such as the construction of new
settlements in East Jerusalem, the launching of rockets
and air strikes and the imposition of blockades, will not
solve the problem. Sustained dialogue, no matter how
tedious, will in the long run prove to be the most potent
weapon for the resolution of intractable conflicts.

The relevance of a two-State solution needs no
reiteration in these debates. There is no alternative to
it. All parties and interlocutors should take bold
measures to create the conditions conducive to the
achievement of a comprehensive and lasting peace in
the Middle East. Progress in that direction will depend
on the resumption of direct negotiations. Demonstrable
political will and commitment to the peace process
would also be helpful. The international community
should continue to support and encourage Israelis and
Palestinians to stay the course of peace.

We hope that the next briefing and debate on this
question will take place in a different atmosphere, and
we look forward to our participation in it.

