Mrs. Burie (Croatia): I would first like to thank
the Peruvian presidency of the Security Council for
holding today's timely debate and all the distinguished
briefers for their statements.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I shall now make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

I am pleased to be participating in today's open
debate on this very important topic, which we see
as complementary to the upcoming discussions in
the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Croatia would
like to see the role of young people addressed more
profoundly in various forums and from various
perspectives, and particularly their role as actors in
efforts aimed at achieving peace and security. For that
reason, we support greater visibility for the youth and
peace and security agenda in the Security Council, both
by continuing with the practice of holding open debates
on the topic and by instituting yearly implementation
reports by the Secretary-General.

I would also like to congratulate all the partners
who contributed to the progress study (see S/2018/86) on
putting together a comprehensive and substantial report
that while it clearly gives reasons to be concerned,
more importantly gives us insights into the untapped
potential of young peacebuilders in our joint quest for
a safer world.

It is clear that too little is being done at the national,
regional and global levels to harness the potential of the
1.8 billion young people worldwide, especially given
the fact that a majority of them live in low-income
countries and often represent a significant part of the
populations in countries affected by armed conflict.
Young people should be recognized as partners and
agents in peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as they
unquestionably have a strong voice when it comes to
addressing their marginalization, violations of their
human rights and lack of perspective. This means that
we must reject the myopic view that sees young people
as a problem to be solved or that focuses only on the
small numbers of those who are involved in violence.

That issue becomes particularly pronounced in
the response to the global threat of terrorism and
violent extremism, which has in turn often produced
limited and counterproductive policy responses. As
the progress study also implies, there is no single
approach or solution that can prevent young people
from participating in violence or being recruited
into violent extremism. We also know that youth
empowerment is undermined when we continue to rely
on generalizations and stereotypes that identify young
men as potential perpetrators and young women as
potential victims. Especially now, when we are dealing
with the challenge of escalating threats of terrorism and
radicalism, we must focus on providing for the needs of
the younger generation and strengthening their sense of
being both safe and included.

Education for all as a human right and a basis for
promoting the realization of other rights is essential to
peace, human fulfilment and sustainable development.
It is a multifaceted effort that has multiplying effects.
It goes way beyond numeracy, literacy, the acquisition
of relevant skills and the provision of opportunities for
decent work. It fosters tolerance, global citizenship and
an appreciation and acceptance of cultural diversity, as
well as interfaith and intercultural understanding.

Youth unemployment is also far more than an
economic category. Lack of perspective is among the
worst kinds of poverty. It erodes a society of peace
and tolerance from within. Today's topic cannot be
addressed thoroughly without taking into account the
development component.

We are encouraged by the fact that the youth yearn
for committed actions against violence, intolerance
and all forms of discrimination, as well as to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Young
people can serve as positive role models and are clearly
willing to embrace that role. They can influence
and inspire their peers, raise public awareness and
encourage a broader discussion within a society.

Last but not least, let us not forget that they are the
leaders of tomorrow. Young people must be provided
with the necessary preconditions to fully realize their
potential. It is only with a holistic, multidisciplinary
approach that we can achieve sustainable results in
empowering the youth, and in turn, promote peace. That
includes the implementation of adequate development
policies and legislative frameworks, education and
inclusive cooperation with a several stakeholders, such
as academia, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, religious authorities and the media.

In conclusion, to borrow the words of the great
Nelson Mandela, whose centenary of birth we celebrate
this year, young people are capable of bringing down
the towers of oppression and raising the banners of
freedom. We hope that by our joint efforts, today and
onward, we will enable them to do so.

