Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank China for convening this debate
on a topic of great relevance to the Organization and
the international community, particularly in a context
marked by enormous challenges to international peace
and security.

During its more than seven decades of existence,
the Organization has played fundamental roles in
the maintenance of peace in conflict zones around
the world. The men and women who have sacrificed
themselves for the cause of peace under the banner of
the United Nations deserve to remain in our memory,
and they have all of our gratitude.

Changes in how the international community
addresses peace, security and stability challenges have
beenconsolidatedintheconceptofsustainablepeace-a
new paradigm in which the pillars ofpeace and security
converge with those of sustainable development. The
centrality of the prevention of conflicts and their
reoccurrence must be promoted and perfected in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and
meeting their targets. In Africa and throughout the
world, the inclusion and development of communities
with a healthy social fabric, in which all people can
develop their potential, are of vital importance to their
prosperity, the prevention of conflict and even the
prevention of violent extremism.

The role of communities, women and youth must
be adequately reflected in the solutions offered by the
United Nations, and this exercise in inclusion is the only
one that can guarantee the transition from a situation
of parties in conflict to societies with a healthy social
fabric that can be fertile soil for sustainable peace, as
already mentioned.
Mexico once again welcomes the approval of the
restructuring of the peace and security pillar, as well
as the reform of the management of the Secretariat. We
call for the Secretariat to fully implement the reforms
and make available to the Member States complete
information on the results achieved, the prevailing
challenges and any additional adjustments that may
be required.

We welcome the fact that one of the objectives of the
reforms is to increase the effectiveness and coherence
ofpeace operations, guaranteeing the primacy ofpolicy
and the flexibility of their approach in order to respond
more quickly and effectively to crisis warning signs
and the outbreak or intensification of conflicts. The
legitimacy and trust placed in those operations demands
the effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it:
saving lives, preventing massive atrocities, and laying
the foundations for sustainable peace and development.
For this reason, we believe that reforms should enhance
their effectiveness, responsiveness and accountability.

Mexico has joined the 150 countries that have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations as a collective
effort to contribute to refocusing peacekeeping efforts
with realistic expectations. This will make these
operations stronger and more secure by endowing them
with well-equipped, well-structured and well-trained
forces, and by mobilizing the broadest support for
political solutions, including United Nations cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations. Today, I
refer in particular to the African Union, promoting the
strategic nature of that alliance in light of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Since rejoining peace operations in 2015 - and
aware that the priority needs of the Organization are
focused on providing peacekeeping operations in
Africa with indispensable and well-trained personnel
so that its mandates can be fulfilled - Mexico has
gradually increased its participation in these operations
by deploying observers to the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara. Moreover,
since 2017 Mexico has participated in the Integrated
Multidimensional Mission of the United Nations in
the Central African Republic, and this year began its
involvement in the Multidimensional Mission of the
United Nations in Mali. Furthermore, I am pleased to
report that, as of this year, my country has its ownjoint
training centre for peace operations, where we also offer
training for personnel from other countries. Mexico
wishes to express its firm commitment to continuing
its participation in operations deployed in Africa.

We emphasize the importance of the Secretariat
privileging the preparation and predeployment training
of personnel participating in peace operations. In this
context, we join the calls of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in its most recent report
(A/72/19) for the Secretariat to formulate practical,
implementable, realistic and effective recommendations
to reduce peacekeeping fatalities and injuries from acts
of violence.

We reiterate that, in order to achieve greater
efficiency, effectiveness and security on the ground,
it is essential that peace operations deployed in Africa
have a clear and express mandate from the Security
Council that ensures the ownership of the operation
by the host State, whose opinions must be heard at
all times. Peacekeeping operations must be evaluated
continuously; they must be properly equipped and
count on clear and viable strategies that enable
solutions to multidimensional security problems; and
they must be endowed with the necessary resources to
reach their maximum potential. All this must follow
on from an essential change in their approach and
raison d'etre - they must ensure that sustainable peace
is achieved.

