Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Israeli regime, in pursuit of its bloody campaign and its
racist and aggressive policy, is employing more vicious
measures against the defenceless Palestinian people. It
has once again reacted excessively and
disproportionately in the occupied territories, killing
and injuring dozens of civilians. The human toll from
Israeli air strikes against a residential area of Gaza,
launched from an F-16 fighter jet, was the most
devastating suffered by Palestinian civilians in a single
attack in almost two years. It is totally unacceptable to
claim that the criminals who planned the attack did not
know about the presence of a large number of civilians
in the neighbourhood, including women and children.
What the Israelis did yesterday was clearly a war
crime. The international community should react
accordingly, and bring the perpetrators of that crime to
justice.

A criminal act was committed in the wake of
some political developments in the occupied territories.
Familiar with the pattern of actions, and aware of the
possible reactions, the Zionist officials authorized this
air strike knowing that it would disrupt any efforts that
might increase pressure on the Israeli regime to end the
occupation of the West Bank. What they did yesterday
fits into the pattern of previous actions by the Israelis
aimed at interrupting any calm in the region by trying
to provoke the Palestinians. We believe that the recent
escalation of violence in the occupied territories should
be seen from this perspective, and the Israeli regime
should be held fully responsible for the start-up of a
possible new cycle of violence.

There should be no doubt that the Israeli
campaign of targeting residential areas and the
extrajudicial killing of Palestinians on the basis of hit
lists are flagrant violations of the key tenets of natural
justice and international humanitarian law. The words
and deeds of the Israeli leadership have made it
obvious that resorting to such acts has become part of
the regime's policy. It amounts to organized acts of
terrorism by a regime, and the international community
should not turn a blind eye to it. It is very unfortunate
that the very few Governments that criticize the
Palestinians and hold them responsible for the ongoing
violence in the area ignore the crimes perpetrated by
the Israelis and do nothing to stop them.

There should be no doubt that occupation lies at
the centre of the Palestinian conflict and the overall
tension and instability in the Middle East. The
shocking developments of the past two years have
brought into closer focus the fact that unless the
principal cause of conflict is effectively addressed, the
crisis will never subside. Therefore the right of the
Palestinian people to resist Israeli aggression and
occupation is a legitimate one and is ensured by
international laws and conventions. We reject the
contention that Israeli aggression is an act of self-
defense.

The international community in general and the
Islamic world in particular are deeply concerned at the
unceasing atrocities committed by Israeli armed forces.
Israel's latest act is undoubtedly likely to further
exacerbate the Middle East crisis, unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene to stop its brutal campaign against the
Palestinian civilians.

There is no doubt that the Security Council in
particular is expected to act appropriately, with a view
to putting an end to these violations by the occupying
Power and for paving the way to bring those
responsible to justice. So many times in the past, the
Council was called upon to shoulder its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security by putting an end to the inhuman
and aggressive acts of the Israeli regime. Regrettably,
the exercise or threat of exercise of the veto has so far
prevented the Council from discharging its
constitutional responsibility in such a crucial issue and
has thus raised profound international disappointment.
Without a doubt, the Council's inaction emboldens
Israel to defy the wishes of the international
community.

Recent events have further demonstrated the need
for the Council to establish an international
intervention, protection and observer force, with a view
to protecting defenceless Palestinian civilians from
ever-increasing atrocities at the hands of Israelis.

