Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, Executive Director
Fedotov and Ambassador Djani for their briefings, as
well as Ambassador Raz for her presentation today.

The United States commends the continued hard
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the people
of Afghanistan.

We reiterate our deep sympathies and condolences
to the loved ones of those killed in the terrorist attack
on a wedding hall in Kabul, committed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province on
17 August. We also convey our sympathies to the
victims of recent Taliban attacks in Kabul, Kunduz
and across Afghanistan, including attacks that claimed
the lives of two United States service members, a
Romanian service member and a Romanian diplomat.
Their sacrifices remind us of the importance of
achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan, for too
many Afghans, members of international security
forces, foreign diplomats and others have lost their lives
to indiscriminate violence.

Regarding the peace process, the remarks made by
President Trump and Secretary of State Pompeo over
the weekend and yesterday speak for themselves; I have
nothing to add to them at this time

The United States continues to support Afghan
political and electoral institutions. We welcome the
findings of the report of the Secretary-General on
UNAMA (S/2019/703) that 9.6 million people have
been registered to vote. We have pledged $29 million
out of the total $59 million in donor funding offered
towards financing the presidential election and
have supported the work of the United Nations
Development Programme building the capacities of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission.

We continue to strongly support the role played by
Afghan women in Afghanistan's economic, political
and social advancement. The United States remains
concerned about the high level of illicit narcotics
cultivation and production in Afghanistan, including
opiates and the growing ephedra problem. We
appreciate the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, including the Research And Trend
Analysis Branch, in continuing to draw the attention
of Member States to this issue. We hope that the
international community can expand efforts to address
the drug problem.

Finally, as Council members are aware, we are in
the midst of a negotiation on a new UNAMA mandate.
We must ensure that the renewal draft resolution
provides UNAMA with clear, specific guidance to do
its critical work, particularly during this pivotal period
in Afghanistan's history. We strongly believe that this
mandate is too important at this moment to have one
Security Council member deny consensus for reasons
having nothing to do with UNAMA. All of us must
display discipline and political will to focus the mandate
on the core issues that will empower UNAMA to
support the Government and the people of Afghanistan.

In conclusion, let me once again express
my appreciation to the United Nations and other
international partners for their support in strengthening
the legitimacy of Afghanistan's electoral process and
for supporting Afghanistan's peace process.

