Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his commendably brief
and focused report (S/2012/746) and recommendations,
and Ambassador Momen, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing.

However, as we read that Secretary-General's
report, we cannot escape the conclusion that the United
Nations discussion of peacebuilding is still beset by its
continued focus mainly on post-conflict environments.
It is, of course, vital that once a conflict is over, the
United Nations play a key role in helping prevent a
relapse, and the Secretary-General has demonstrated
that the United Nations is developing some very useful
methods in that regard. But it is no less vital that there
be effective peacebuilding from the very earliest phases
of peacekeeping operations, which raises issues that
have not yet received sufficient attention from this
Council, and we urge that, in 2013, it should return to
that unfinished business.

There is another point about peacebuilding that
was only implicit in the Secretary-General's report, but
is right at the heart of this Council's responsibilities and
should therefore, we believe, be highlighted, namely,
the vital role of the peacebuilding methodology of
not only preventing relapse into conflict, but also
preventing and containing conflict in the first place.
That is touched on in the report's introduction, and we
urge that, in future reports, such a wider applicability
of the methodology should be expanded.

The report tells us that the accumulated experience
of the United Nations reveals three key elements
of peacebuilding methodology that really do work:
inclusivity in political settlements and processes,
institution-building, and sustained international
support.

We should reflect, I think, on how different
might things have been in the situation in Syria, if
the United Nations, including this Council, had much
earlier applied those three concepts, particularly
inclusivity. When we look at the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and should consider how much
better things might now be in the Kivus if the United
Nations had insisted - much earlier and much more
firmly - on real political inclusivity and on building
effective institutions. In the context of inclusivity,
we join Brazil and Luxembourg in welcoming the
Secretary-General's focus on the role of women in
peace processes.

As for sustained international support, Timor-
Leste comes quickly to mind, particularly following
the smooth transition of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste over the past year. We should
not forget, however, that, in 2006, we all failed Timor-
Leste. We underestimated the importance of sustained
international support, and the Timorese paid an
unacceptable price. Although Timor-Leste will not be
on the active 2013 agenda, its experience teaches us
that this Council should not prematurely wind back
international support for United Nations peacebuilding.
The lesson is clear. Premature cost-cutting is a false
economy; too often it simply transfers costs to
vulnerable civilian populations, and before long, the
United Nations has to return to expensive peacekeeping.

Like Luxembourg, we welcome the Secretary-
General's reference to the initiative of the Group of
Seven Plus countries, including Timor-Leste, which
have emerged from conflict, and they deserve our
respect and admiration for their efforts now to help
others. We particularly support their five peacebuilding
goals, and we urge that this Council take each of those
goals to heart as key benchmarks when constructing or
reviewing mission mandates.

I also join others in stressing the importance of
improving the United Nations capacity to rapidly
identify and deploy relevant civilian capacities. The
United Nations will struggle to be a credible and
effective contributor in early peacebuilding settings,
unless it is substantially better at deploying the right
people with the right experience in a more timely
manner.

I echo and commend the Secretary-General's
recommendations to promote further improvements
in the way the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council work together. Indeed, those
recommendations take us, I think, back to last month's
debate on Council working methods, when we proposed
that the Council focus on practical changes that would
improve its effectiveness. So I welcome the Secretary-
General's identification of the interaction between
the Peacebuilding Commission and Security Council
as another practical area where working methods
improvements would enhance effectiveness, and I urge
that this Council carry forward that idea into its 2013
discussions on reforming working methods.

Finally, as they will be leaving the Council in a
few days, Mr. President, I would like to convey New
Zealand's warm thanks to our friends from Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa for their
tireless work on behalf of us all. They have done us
proud.

