Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me too thank Special
Representative Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for their very
comprehensive and interesting briefings.

As the electoral process remains an important
factor for stability in Central Africa, we commend the
further positive developments towards the consolidation
of democratic governance. Special Representative Fall
described some achievements made in the region during
the reporting period.

Poland praises the crucial work carried out by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) in terms of good offices, mediation and
preventive diplomacy. Bearing in mind the upcoming
elections in several countries of the region, we expect
that the Governments of those States will make every
effort to establish the necessary conditions leading
to timely, inclusive, credible and peaceful electoral
processes and will ensure the meaningful participation
of women and young people. We encourage the
authorities of the countries of the region to continue
building trust among all stakeholders as a precondition
for the establishment of a stable and constructive
political environment.

Poland the welcomes the recent decision of the
Cameroonian authorities to convene a national dialogue
as a significant step towards addressing the difficult
situation in the country. At the same time, we are deeply
worried about the continued reports of serious human
rights Violations and abuses attributed to all sides of
the conflict. Let me stress that all those responsible
for these serious violations and abuses of human rights
should be investigated and held accountable.

Poland appreciates all the efforts the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Cameroon, including its recent technical assessment
mission. In the light of reports from that visit, we call
on all parties on the ground to immediately stop the
violence and work together in good faith, including
for a process of open and inclusive dialogue to reduce
tensions and devise a long-term political agreement.

The security situation in the region remains fragile.
Recent developments in the northern and eastern parts of
Chad are of increasing concern. We are also worried that
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army continue
to provoke serious insecurity across significant parts
of the region. This shows that multilateral initiatives
to combat those organizations require the continued
support of the international community.

While appreciating the United Nations and
European Union efforts made so far, Poland recognizes
the key role of regional partners in bringing about
reconciliation and building dialogue in Central Africa.
We welcome the recent consensus on the plan for the
institutional reform of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and we look forward to its
swift adoption.

Poland recognizes the leading role of UNOCA in
enhancing the coordination and coherence of measures
taken, as well as in fostering synergies among all
United Nations presences in Central Africa. I would
therefore like to express our full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall, and
his entire team.

