Mr. Kolby (Norway): The cycle of violence
continues unabated in the Middle East. The number of
terrorist attacks carried out by Palestinian extremist
groups is again increasing, which is undermining the
peace efforts. The Palestinian Authority and the
Palestinian people must make renewed efforts to halt
the terrorist attacks. Operation Defensive Shield and
tightened Israeli closures have left the Palestinian
public institutions and economy in ruins. Israel
continues to carry out military operations within the A
areas. Furthermore, there is a lack of political
initiatives from the parties aimed at starting a political
dialogue. The outlook is thus bleak, and there is an
obvious potential for further deterioration in the overall
situation.

As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, Norway is particularly concerned by the
impact that closures and ever-tighter restrictions are
having on the Palestinian economy and society. Those
measures are making it nearly impossible to revive the
Palestinian economy, to rebuild Palestinian institutions
and to implement the necessary reforms within the
Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, they are seriously
hampering the effective functioning of the Palestinian
security apparatus, which is instrumental in combating
terrorism.

We are also deeply concerned at the new plans
related to the movement of people and goods in
Palestinian areas, aimed at addressing Israeli security
concerns. While recognizing Israel's security concerns,
we must keep in mind that focusing on security alone
will not solve the conflict and therefore will not lead to
improved security.

The implementation of these tighter measures
will not give the Israeli people the lasting security they
need and deserve. Rather, it will serve to: further
destroy the Palestinian society and economy; further
accelerate the severe downturn of the Palestinian
economy, which already is close to collapse; further
complicate or prevent the prompt delivery of basic and
urgent goods; further hamper the effective delivery of
services by the Palestinian Authority, while putting an
even heavier burden on the shoulders of the donor
community; and finally, but perhaps most important,
contribute to widening the level of distrust between the
Palestinian and the Israeli people and their leaders.

In spite of the bleak situation on the ground, there
is an increasing international consensus on the way
ahead and on the parameters for a final settlement. That
gives us reason for cautious optimism. The main
elements of what we believe will eventually become
the final status must have as a point of departure the
final status negotiations at Taba in January 2001, the
peace plan of the Arab League summit and Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002). Furthermore, the
continued leadership of the United States and of the
other members of the "quartet" is important in
coordinating and furthering international peace efforts.

In that regard, Norway believes that convening an
international peace conference could be one of several
steps in the process ahead. In order to make a
substantial contribution to the peace process, a
conference must be well prepared and must have
realistic goals. We feel that a three-pronged parallel
approach, focusing on political, security and economic
issues, is the right way ahead. A conference will be
only the beginning of a process that should lead to a
resumption of real final-status negotiations. For its
part, Norway, as Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, is ready to support an eventual peace
conference in any way possible.

However, the strong will of the international
community to assist in finding a final settlement cannot
replace the parties' own efforts. We welcome cautious
Palestinian moves to reform and strengthen their
institutions, but there is still a clear need for stronger
leadership to combat terrorist attacks. Last night's
Israeli withdrawal from Ramallah is welcome, but we
urge Israel to implement Council resolutions 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002) immediately and to withdraw
fully from all reoccupied areas. We also call upon the
parties to restart, without preconditions, a political
dialogue to find a final settlement. We fear that,
without the resumption of such a dialogue, there will
be a clear danger of dramatic deterioration.

