Mr. Ayoob (Afghanistan): It is an honour for me
to participate in this debate. On behalf of the Afghan
delegation, I would like to begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of this Council and by thanking you for
holding this meeting today, which is highly important
for my delegation. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his typically
concise and insightful presentation this morning.
Finally, I thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful and comprehensive report and its annex on
constraints on humanitarian access (S/2009/277).

The United Nations has brought serious attention
to the plight of suffering civilians caught in the
crossfire and established a comprehensive framework
in the Security Council to deal with the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. However, with the recent
trend towards asymmetric conflicts and the tendency of
non-State actors to use civilians as human shields or
worse, this work is even more essential.
The Government of Afghanistan, with the
assistance of our friends in the international
community, is making good progress in providing
Afghans with the opportunity for a better life, while the
enemies of Afghanistan continue to bring more
suffering to the civilians of that war-stricken nation, in
particular its women and children.

As numerous United Nations reports have
detailed, the Taliban and their local and international
allies are showing an increasingly blatant disregard for
human rights in Afghanistan. They rely increasingly on
the use of improvised explosive devices detonated in
high-density civilian areas, causing indiscriminate
damage and loss of life and affecting predominantly
women and children. The Taliban have stepped up their
use of assassinations, school attacks, kidnappings and
threats targeted against those accused of cooperation
with the Government of Afghanistan or the
international community. They continue to use
civilians as human shields, milking accidental tragedy
for their own propaganda.

The Taliban have two simple aims. First, they
want to terrify our citizens and convince them that they
are helpless and cannot trust the international
community or their Government to protect them.
Secondly, they seek to divide Afghans and the
international community, weakening us both. We
cannot and shall not let them succeed in either of their
goals.

Unfortunately, in the course of our fight against
terrorism, sometimes civilians have become victims of
our actions as well, however unintentionally. Every
civilian death hurts our cause. Every death undermines
the faith of the people in their Government and
weakens our most valuable asset in the rebuilding of
Afghanistan: the Afghans themselves. The Afghan
people rightly expect that efforts to fight terrorism
would be part of a larger counter-terrorism effort rather
than vice versa. Their security should be central.

The best hope for the Afghan people is the
continuing support of the international community, and
Afghans are more aware of this than anyone. We all
understand the necessity of defeating the brutally
violent and dark-minded elements who wage war on
peace, stability and prosperity in our region and in the
world. Our allies have sent their sons and daughters to
fight on foreign land, and Afghanistan is profoundly
grateful for that. Without the assistance of the
international community and its military presence, our
people would not have escaped the repression and
brutality of the Taliban era and would not now have a
better future in sight.

The safety of each person and the prevention of
the deaths of innocent civilians are critically important
to us, and the Government of Afghanistan has raised
this issue repeatedly with our friends and allies.
Afghans should be made to feel that their security,
safety and dignity are the centrepiece of our fight
against terrorism. We welcomed the recent reviews of
this issue, and applaud the decisions of the United
States and NATO to improve the rules of engagement
in populated areas, minimize the use of air
bombardment and make human security a priority in
our strategy.

In addition, it is fundamentally important that the
international community focus on and do more in terms
of the professional training and better equipping of our
growing Afghan National Army and Police forces, so
that the Government of Afghanistan is able to take
more - and eventually all - responsibility for the
protection of its citizens. The main goal of the Afghan
Government and our allies in fighting terrorism is to
bring about a better future for the Afghan people.
Therefore, while fighting their enemies, we must take
every measure to protect them and ensure that they do
not become victims of that conflict and that they have
the opportunity to build their lives in safety and
dignity.

