Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council. I shall be very brief.

On the anniversary of the terrorist attacks on the
United States, we vividly recalled the sense of
tremendous panic and profound grief caused by such
brutal acts. We could not but have heartfelt sympathy
for the victims and their bereaved families. At the same
time, we all had a sense of our own vulnerability,
knowing that terrorists could strike anywhere, at any
time.

Although much progress has been made in the
fight against terrorism, the struggle must be ongoing.
Only through steadfast vigilance and a comprehensive
approach, with efforts made by each State, as well as
determined cooperation at the regional and
international levels, can we have some assurance that
such acts of terrorism will not be repeated.

First, as part of its own efforts to combat
terrorism, in June Japan deposited its instruments of
acceptance of the Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism. In so doing it became party
to all twelve international anti-terrorism conventions.
Japan hopes that every State will likewise conclude all
of the anti-terrorism conventions. At the same time, we
believe it is also important to further strengthen the
international framework by adopting such conventions
as the Comprehensive Convention on International
Terrorism and the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Japan will
continue to work towards this goal.

Secondly, I wish to refer to cooperation at the
regional level. In Tokyo on I and 2 October, Japan co-
hosted with the Republic of Korea and Singapore the
Second ASEAN Regional Forum Workshop on
counter-terrorism measures. The discussions at the
Workshop focused on how we might make more
concrete international cooperative efforts, based on the
recommendation made at the first Workshop in
Bangkok. As a result of the very fruitful discussions
held there, we completed work on the paper entitled
"Best Practices for Counter-Terrorism Measures in
Major International Events". The Workshop thus
offered a valuable opportunity to strengthen regional
efforts to combat terrorism.

Thirdly, cooperative efforts to combat terrorism at
the international level are especially crucial. Japan
therefore remains committed to fully supporting the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). I
would like in particular to point out the important role
of the CTC in facilitating global implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). As Japan has
repeatedly stressed, developing countries which are
facing difficulties in implementing that resolution must
be provided with international assistance.

The CTC's directory of assistance is an important
mechanism for the coordination of such assistance. For
its part, Japan is now considering extending assistance
to those countries, using as a reference the information
provided by the Committee's distinguished expert,
Ambassador Curtis A. Ward.

In closing, I would like to express my deepest
gratitude to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman
of the CTC, and to the other members of the bureau for
their excellent work, which they have conducted in a
very transparent manner. I would also like to refer to
the efforts of Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso,
Chairman of the Committee established under Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), and his staff. Without
their dedication and extraordinary contributions, the
Security Council, I am afraid, could not have
accomplished its tasks so successfully. I wish to take
this opportunity to express my appreciation to them as
well.

