The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Kaladjerovie (Serbia and Montenegro) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes that the
presentation of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan (KSIP) on 31 March 2004 in
Pristina, Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro), is a
step forward in the standards process. The
Council reiterates that the KSIP should serve as a
basis for the assessment of progress of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
(PISG) in meeting the standards. The Council in
this respect urges strongly the PISG to
demonstrate their full and unconditional
commitment to a multi-ethnic Kosovo, in
particular with respect to the protection and
promotion of rights of members of the minority
communities as well as of human rights, equal
security, freedom of movement and sustainable
returns for all inhabitants of Kosovo. The Council
reiterates further that the progress by the PISG in
meeting the standards, which should be reflected

throughout Kosovo, will be assessed periodically
and that the advancement towards a process to
determine the future status of Kosovo in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) will
depend on the positive outcome of a
comprehensive review.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the 'Standards before Status' policy
that was devised for Kosovo and endorsed by the
Council in application of its resolution 1244
(1999). It recalls in this context the document
'Standards for Kosovo', presented on 10
December 2003 and subsequently supported by
the Council in the statement of its President of 12
December 2003, which outlined the standards
that are to be achieved in order to reach the goal
of establishing in Kosovo a multi-ethnic, stable
and democratic society.

"The Security Council stresses that it is
essential, as indicated in the KSIP, to review and
revise in a timely manner two key sections of the
document, namely on 'sustainable returns and the
rights of communities and their members' and on
'freedom of movement'. The Council calls on the
PISG to take urgent steps on these two standards
in order to rebuild and reach out to the Serb and
other communities that suffered most in the large-
scale inter-ethnic violence of 17-20 March 2004
that resulted in many dead and wounded and the
destruction of personal property and Serbian
Orthodox churches and monasteries in Kosovo.

"The Security Council, strongly
condemning those events, emphasizes that no
party can be allowed to profit or to advance a
political agenda through violent measures. It calls
on the PISG and all political leaders to take
responsibility in the current situation and to
ensure that such acts and threats of violence are
not repeated. The Council underscores that
immediate actions should be taken aimed at the
establishment of and public respect for the rule of
law, including prosecution of perpetrators,
effective collection of illegal weapons and
combating organized crime. The Council urges
the PISG to take concrete steps to fulfil their
commitment to rebuild multi-ethnicity and
reconciliation throughout Kosovo, as promised in
the open letter of institutional and political
leaders of 2 April 2004. The Council asserts

further that, in addition, there must be rapid steps
taken by the PISG to fulfil their commitment to
rebuild or provide appropriate compensation for
damaged or destroyed property, to rebuild holy
sites and to facilitate the return of those displaced
from their homes.

"When assessing the progress made by the
PISG, the Security Council would pay particular
attention to the adoption and the implementation
of laws and regulations, policies and attitudes of
the PISG, among others, in the following areas:
the fight against discrimination, corruption and
economic crimes; propagation of hate by the
media, as well as the support for multi-ethnicity
and reconciliation; genuine devolution; orderly
and sustainable returns; effective functioning of
the Assembly and of the political parties;
disciplinary procedures for the civil service;
building up of a professional, politically neutral
and multi-ethnic administration at central and
local levels with a View to providing public
services to every community on an equal footing;
efficient strategy for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons in safe conditions; a
constructive engagement with UNMIK; and full
participation in the direct dialogue with Belgrade.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, within his authority as set out
in resolution 1244 (1999), inter alia in the context
of the review mechanism, continue to consult
closely with interested parties, in particular the
Contact Group. The Council reaffirms its
intention to continue to consider the regular
reports of the Secretary-General, including an
assessment from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as to the PISG's progress
towards meeting the standards. The Council takes
note that the Contact Group intends to make a
substantive contribution to the regular reviews
and to submit its assessments to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General, in his next report to the
Council, to include a comprehensive assessment
of the violence of 17 to 20 March 2004.

"The Security Council also requests the
Secretary-General to present recommendations on
possible new institutional arrangements
respectful of the objective of building a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo to allow
more effective local government through
devolution of central non-reserved
responsibilities to local authorities and
communities in Kosovo, taking into account
relevant studies and recommendations of
interested parties and international organizations.
How that local Government is organized is a
matter for further discussion between interested
parties in Kosovo.

"The Security Council welcomes the strong
measures by the international presence in Kosovo
aimed at enhancing the security and protection of
all communities, as well as their religious,
historical and cultural sites, with the goal of
ensuring lasting stability in Kosovo. It calls, in
this respect, for the full cooperation of the PISG
and all concerned.

"The Security Council will continue to
follow the matter closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/l3.

Before concluding the meeting, I would like to
welcome the Secretary-General to this meeting.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

