Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank
France and you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
open debate. I also wish to today's participants in the
meeting for their informative, expressive, powerful and
emotional briefings.

While fully supporting the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, I would also like to add
a few observations in my national capacity.

The intentional and systematic targeting of members
of ethnic and religious communities threatens not only
peace and security but the very existence of minorities
in the Middle East. Increased religious violence has
already led to a mass exodus of Christians, Yazidis
and members of other ethnic and religious minorities
from their homelands. The preservation of the region's
multi-religious, multi-ethnic and multi-confessional
character is of the utmost importance to the maintenance
of peace and security. Hungary strongly supports all
initiatives aimed at defeating Daesh and other terrorist
groups. We believe that a comprehensive plan of action
on the part of the international community, ideally
under the auspices of the United Nations, is essential to
preventing attacks on and abuses of ethnic and religious
groups.

Hungary has offered humanitarian aid to the
Christian communities and Kurdistan authorities in
Iraq, contributed financial and material support to ease
the refugee crisis in and around Syria, and provided
immediate financial support to the families of the
Egyptian Coptic Christians beheaded in Libya. We
also support military efforts against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, and are currently examining other
ways to contribute to accomplishing security tasks in
the region. We strongly support the enforcement of
accountability for serious crimes and are convinced
that there should be no impunity for the horrendous acts
committed by Daesh and other terrorist groups in the
Middle East in Syria, Iraq, Libya and elsewhere.

Hungary welcomes and encourages the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to investigate all allegations
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, and strongly recommends making the
investigation findings public and ensuring that they
lead to effective remedies for the victims. We believe
that such investigations should be conducted into all
perpetrators, not only Daesh. Bearing in mind that
primary responsibility lies with the Iraqi State, Hungary
believes that Iraq's acceptance of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) under paragraph
3 of article 12 of the Rome Statute could also be an
option in the fight against impunity. While we note
that Hungary was one of the first countries to raise the
possibility of that option, as long ago as September, we
welcome the fact that in its recently published report
(A/HRC/28/18) the investigative mission to Iraq of the
Office of the United Nations High Commission for
Human Rights arrived at the same conclusion. With
regard to the crimes committed in Libya, the Hungarian
Government has requested that the Prosecutor of the
ICC expand her investigations 4 originally initiated as
a result ofthe Security Council's referral in 2011 - into
the recent execution of 21 Egyptian Coptic Christians.

Finally, as my country's former Permanent
Representative to UNESCO and former President of
its General Conference, I feel compelled to denounce
in the strongest terms the deliberate destruction of
cultural and religious sites and artifacts by Daesh and
associated groups in Iraq. Such attacks on the cultural
heritage of humankind also constitute war crimes.
They should be investigated, provided that a legal
basis for the investigations is established either by a
Security Council referral or by Iraq's acceptance of the
jurisdiction of the Court. That is very important to us.

