Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): May I, in
turn, now thank Mr. Annabi for the very
comprehensive information he has given us and thank
you, Mr. President, at the same time for having held
this open briefing on East Timor, which comes on the
eve of the first anniversary of the popular consultation
organized in that country.

When we considered this issue last month, we
took note of strides made by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
- remarkable strides at all levels indeed - in devising
consultative machinery with the East Timorese,
establishing the structures for a future independent
State, providing safety and security for most people
and, finally, rebuilding the country. My delegation is
following the evolution of the situation in East
Timorese with keen attention and would like, in this
connection, to make the following observations.

In submitting the Secretary-General's second
quarterly report on UNTAET's work, and in
consideration of this issue last month, the Secretariat
pointed out that the major challenge facing the East
Timorese was to rebuild the political system, ensuring
the broadest possible participation in the process. We
do not need to stress the fact that the interim
administration is effectively doing its job by setting up
a local democratic structure. More than ever, UNTAET
must strive to develop a civil society and rules leading
to the rule of law. Political pluralism and the
involvement of all East Timorese in the context of
transparency and on an equal footing as democracy is
set up will create the feeling of belonging to a
community based on law and obligations. The latest
measures taken by the United Nations Transitional
Administrator in East Timor has deepened discussion
as to the political transition. It brings us ever closer to
independence for the country.

Secondly, notwithstanding repeated appeals
addressed to them, extremist and militia elements
continue to sabotage the peace process set in motion by
the international community. It is unacceptable that
these achievements during the transition process be
threatened by a minority. We must exhort Indonesia to
become more closely involved in seeking an end to
trans-border violence and make sure that all steps be
taken to help UNTAET neutralize this threat. We hail
the measures taken by UNTAET itself to re-deploy its
units in sensitive areas and urge it to become more
fully involved in stemming acts of violence perpetrated
against United Nations staff.

Thirdly, the UNHCR's decision to withdraw from
the refugee camps shows the gravity of the situation.
We stress the urgent need to provide adequate safety
and security for the people concerned. The Indonesian
authorities' steps in this connection assume the utmost
importance; not just to the camps themselves but to the
question of refugee repatriation.

Further consolidation of the democratic process
in East Timor will depend on economic success. The
increase in the number of Timorese enterprises is a
positive step along these lines. The international
community must continue to support efforts made to
ensure economic long-term recovery.

The process set in motion in East Timor is
certainly an example of a success story for our
Organization. Nevertheless, it remains necessary to be
vigilant and strongly support it throughout the
international community to ensure that the wishes and
sacrifices made by the East Timorese soon will be
compensated.

