The President (spoke in French): | shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Niger. I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the recent developments in the situation in the Middle East. I join previous speakers in addressing my heartfelt condolences to Kuwait following the passing of His Highness the Amir of the State of Kuwait. On 15 September, we followed with interest the signing in Washington, D.C., of the accords normalizing relations between Israel and some of its regional neighbours, including the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. The Niger supports all initiatives that enable the region to return to peace and stability. While the Abraham accords mark a new dynamic, they should not overshadow the pressing need for a just and lasting resolution of the Palestinian question, the main source of tension in the Middle East for decades, as we all know. Moreover, we welcome the rapprochement between Palestinian factions that has taken place in recent days, as it will enable Palestinians to speak with one voice in the peace process. Faced with this state of affairs, we must redouble our efforts to bring the Israeli and Palestinian parties back to dialogue. The United Nations and the members of the international community that have influence on the parties must spare no effort to seize this opportunity presented by the warming of relations between the Arab countries and Israel, to revitalize the peace talks, in accordance with the internationally recognized parameters and the relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). That is why the Niger calls for a mobilization of all efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians to resume dialogue as soon as possible. In that regard, I would like to recall that the cardinal principles that should pave the way for dialogue towards a lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians have already been clearly defined and are known to all. They are: an end to the illegal occupation and annexation of Palestinian land, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), and the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, on the basis of the 1967 borders, which is the basis for resolving the conflict in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1515 (2003). At the humanitarian level, my delegation is concerned about the spread of the coronavirus disease in the region, in particular with the increase in the number of cases of infection observed on both sides.A few days ago, this situation prompted the Israeli authorities to tighten restrictive measures and impose a new lockdown. It is urgent that the cooperation we just recognized resume between the two parties in the interest of their respective populations. In order to prevent the deterioration of the humanitarian situation, my delegation calls on the international community to show more generosity to ensure the continuity of the programmes of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, on which nearly 5 million Palestinians depend today. It is also a duty of Israel, as the occupying Power, to assume the responsibility imposed upon it under international law in the administration of territories under its control. In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the time has come for us to resolutely seek a true and just peace that takes into account Israel's legitimate security aspirations, as well as the inalienable right to self-determination of the Palestinian people. We must safeguard the two-State solution at all costs. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. There are no further names inscribed on the list of speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last scheduled meeting of the Security Council for the month of September, I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the delegation of the Niger to the members of the Security Council and to the Council's secretariat for all the invaluable support they have given us throughout this month. At the end of a busy month, we can take pride in the fact that we were able to reach consensus on several important issues within our purview. We could not have done it without the hard work, support and cooperation of every delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat, including the technical support personnel, conference service officers, interpreters, translators, verbatim reporters and security personnel. I wish to express to all of them our sincere and profound gratitude. As our presidency comes to an end, I know that I speak on behalf of all the members of the Council in wishing the delegation of the Russian Federation, with Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia at its head, the best of luck in assuming the presidency during the month of October. I now invite Council members to informal consultations to continue our discussion on the subject. The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
