Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I should like to express our appreciation for
your remarkable efforts, Mr. President, in conducting the
Council's business for this month, which has been fraught
with meetings and discussions on many different important
issues relating directly to international peace and security.
I also wish to express our appreciation for the efforts of
Ambassador Mahugu for his successful conduct of the
Council's business and wise guidance of its affairs last
month.

The Council is meeting today to consider a grave and
important issue that is endangering peace and security in
the region of the Middle East: the issue of occupied
Jerusalem, which is at the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The Security Council and the General Assembly have
already adopted many resolutions on this important and
delicate issue. Regrettably, those resolutions have not been
implemented or even respected by Israel, the occupying
Power. Successive Israeli Governments have not only
ignored the international legally binding resolutions,
disregarding them completely, but have challenged the
resolutions and adopted provocative policies aimed at
perpetuating their occupation of the Arab territories in
general and of the city of Jerusalem in particular, in an
attempt to erase its identity and change its demographic
nature and status as a Holy City for the monotheistic
religions.

The most recent decision, taken by the Israeli
Government on 21 June and aimed at expanding the
municipal boundaries of the city of Jerusalem to include the
settlements surrounding the city and vast areas of land in
the West Bank, is yet further testimony of Israel's
persistence in violating and breaching international legally
binding resolutions and of its total disregard for and lack of
commitment to the bilateral agreements signed with the
Palestinian Authority within the framework of the peace
process.

For two years the peace process has been in a state of
paralysis, if not regression. There have been doubts and
fears that it might not be possible to continue the process
and to preserve the few gains that have been made since it
was launched in Madrid in 1991. The current Israeli
Government has left no room for doubt that its practices
and policies will lead to a failure of the peace process and

 

a return to an atmosphere of tension and instability in the
region.

Optimism is gradually fading, replaced by
disappointment at the diminishing possibility of
establishing a just and lasting peace. A lack of confidence
prevails among the parties most concerned with the peace
process. The international community should take a stand
that would deter the Israeli Government and require it to
put an end to these policies and practices, in order to
revitalize the peace process through a reaffirmation of its
commitment to the framework of the Madrid Conference
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.

In this context, and proceeding from our keen
interest in the success of the peace process and the need
to support and maintain it, we would like to reaffirm the
following points.

First, Kuwait strongly condemns the decision by the
Israeli Government to expand the municipal boundaries of
the city of Jerusalem, as this is a clear and explicit
violation of internationally binding resolutions and in
particular resolution 252 (1968), which considers any acts
taken by Israel with regard to Jerusalem as null and void.
We demand that Israel reverse that decision and desist
from its policies aimed at the Judaization of the city.

Secondly, we demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, recomrnit itself to abiding by the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and apply those
provisions to all the territories it has been occupying since
1967, including Jerusalem.

T hirdly, we demand that Israel desist from carrying
out any illegal measures or settlement activities that are
aimed only at imposing a fait accompli, and we demand
also that it abide by the agreements reached with the
Palestinian Authority with regard to these issues, which
should be considered within the framework of the final
status negotiations.

Fourthly, Kuwait fully supports the Palestinian
people and their inalienable and legitimate right to
establish their own independent State on their own land,
with Jerusalem as its capital.

Fifthly, we would like to reaffirm the importance of

giving momentum to the peace process on all tracks, in
particular the Lebanese and Syrian tracks, and to stand

 

firm in the face of Israeli intransigence, which seeks to
achieve security without giving up land.

Israel's unconditional withdrawal from all occupied
Arab territories, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), is the only
guarantee of peace and security for all the countries of the
region.

In conclusion, we would like to call upon the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to uphold its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security and to stand firm in the
face of Israeli policies and practices in order to compel the
Israeli Government to respect internationally binding
resolutions and to abide by the bilateral agreements reached
with the Palestinian Authority within the framework of the
peace process.

We would like also to call upon the sponsors of the
peace process - the Russian Federation and the United
States of America in particular - to redouble their efforts
to revitalize the peace process and avoid the possibility of
its failure in a manner that would achieve a just and lasting
peace in the region, leading to a complete Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, the Syrian Golan, southern Lebanon and its
western areas, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

