Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for holding this open debate on the
rule of law and for circulating a very substantive and
comprehensive concept note (S/2014/75, annex) and for
asking very sharp questions to guide and structure our
debate.

We need the rule of law and justice in non-conflict,
conflict and post-conflict situations. During peace
time, the rule of law acts as a bulwark against strife
within societies. The rule of law within nations,
supplemented by the international rule of law, prevents
inter-State conflicts and wars. Therefore, at all times,
the rule of law is an indispensable enabler and goal of
peace and security.

Pakistan is committed to the rule of law. Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif has said that all roads to
national security, strong and unimpeachable defence
and institutional balance emerge from adherence to the
constitutional order and the rule of law. The rule of law
includes the fundamental principles of equality before
the law, equal treatment before the law and due process.

The normative and empirical value of the rule
of law in preventing conflict as well as in making
and building peace is proven. As pointed out in the
concept note, the existing United Nations rule-of-law
repertoire covers a broad spectrum, including policing,
legislation, transitional justice, security sector reform,
natural resources and laws to combat sexual violence,
corruption and money-laundering.

To attain clarity, credibility and achievability in
the design of mandates, greater resources and expertise
should be harnessed for data collection and conscious
and repeated efforts should be made to build synergy
among senior United Nations leadership in-country.
Moreover, the United Nations should work with host
countries to integrate the rule of law into their core
national priorities. Each conflict situation is unique
and has its own dynamics. Each country requires a
customized solution to meet its requirements. We
agree with you, Madam President, that reform in one
sector should not outpace progress in other sectors in
a manner whereby the overall investment in the rule of
law is undermined.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
measuring the effectiveness of the support provided
by the United Nations system for the promotion of
the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations
(S/2013/341). I shall make a few comments on the report.

The rule of law is a multidimensional social
and political reality that varies by context, and thus
changes in it cannot be taken up easily through a
single time-bound or specific effort to measure it. The
national perspectives of Member States are important
for working on the availability of data, monitoring
mechanisms, analytical frameworks and evaluation
systems. Member States must be consulted at the time
of making changes in activities related to the rule of
law in the United Nations system at the field level and
at Headquarters for our strategic reorganization or
operational support.

In planning for transitions and drawdowns, correct
assessments and precise timing are important, including
with regard to the degree of maturity in the rule-of-law
mandates. Some countries manage to have a semblance
of stability but are actually teetering on the brink of
relapse because the root causes and key drivers of the
conflict continue to influence the underlying dynamics.
In such situations, transitional criminal justice and
national reconciliation process must move in tandem
to enable closure. The rule of law will not take root
in fragile societies if it is not supported by strong
institutions. Extended, results-oriented investment in
civilian capacities is therefore a must.

In post-conflict situations, the Peacebuilding
Commission and its different configurations should
play a major role. The Commission should not be
treated as an accoutrement, but as an integral part of
the overall peacebuilding effort.

The rule of law should not be imposed top-down. It
should be people-driven and supported by grass-roots
communities. National ownership will guarantee the
success of the rule of law, if it is the product of the
national ethos.

Let me list a few additional points that we should
take away from this debate. Strong groundwork and
comprehensive assessment at the field level are crucial
for the better design and implementation of mandates,
including their prioritization and sequencing. The
timely and assured provision of adequate resources
and funding is critical for success, and since resources
are scarce, it is essential to direct them from the very
beginning to the right areas, including the root causes.

There is a need to better utilize the linkage between
rule of law interventions and political processes for
peace dividends. The global focal point, led by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and United
Nations Development Programme, should play its
important role in ensuring system-wide coherence and
synergy of efforts.

The United Nations must build its capacity to
uphold the rule of law, at both the national and the
international levels. International judicial institutions
should be strengthened. Their frequent use and the
resort to other diplomatic means, such as negotiation,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration and the good offices
of the Secretary-General, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, will promote the pacific settlement
of disputes and strengthen the rule of law.

Efforts should be made to implement all resolutions
of the Security Council uniformly and non-selectively.
Selective implementation creates an unjust environment,
deepens conflicts and compounds the suffering of the
affected people. It also erodes confidence in the system
and undermines the credibility of the United Nations
over time. The United Nations should therefore play a
leading role in upholding and promoting the rule of law
by setting examples.

