Ms. Amos: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to provide an overview of the humanitarian
situation in Libya to the Security Council.

The conflict, the breakdown of State
infrastructure and shortages of cash and fuel are
causing serious problems to the population of Libya.
Over 746,000 people, most of them third-country
nationals, have fled the country. Some 5,000 people
remain stranded at border points in Egypt, Tunisia and
Niger. Approximately 58,000 internally displaced
people are living in spontaneous settlements in eastern
areas of Libya. Widespread shortages are paralysing
the country in ways which will impact gravely on the
general population in the months ahead, particularly
the poorest and most vulnerable. We do not have yet an
accurate figure of the total number of casualties since
the start of the crisis.

The longer the current situation continues, the
graver the humanitarian situation will become. With
this in mind, the United Nations has established a
humanitarian presence in both Benghazi and Tripoli.
The agreement I reached with the Libyan authorities in
Tripoli on 17 April included a commitment that the
establishment of a United Nations humanitarian
presence in Tripoli would be fully supported. The
agreement included the facilitation of security and
other arrangements necessary for humanitarian
agencies to assess and assist areas affected by conflict
in the west of Libya.

The Government has sought to facilitate our work
as per that agreement, and it is unfortunate that our
team has had to temporarily relocate from Tripoli for
2

security reasons, following the ransacking of United
Nations offices there on 1 May. The Government of
Libya has apologized for the incident and offered full
compensation for the damage caused. The
Humanitarian Coordinator for Libya has written to the
Libyan Foreign Minister asking for a renewed
commitment to safeguarding United Nations personnel
and property, and he has received a positive reply. It is
our intention to return as soon as possible to Tripoli
and to open land access to Misrata, the Western
Mountains and other affected areas.

In Libya today humanitarian agencies are most
concerned about people living in areas where fighting
is taking place. In Misrata, which is at the forefront of
our concerns, shelling and fighting have been ongoing
in parts of the city for more than two months. Stocks
are available, but some people are running short of
food, water and other basics. Medical facilities need
supplies and more trained personnel.

Humanitarian assistance has entered Misrata on
an ad hoc basis, and humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, especially medical organizations, are
present on the ground. Over 5,000 metric tons of
humanitarian aid has been delivered to Misrata,
including food assistance, medical supplies and water
and sanitation materials. The vast majority has entered
through the port. More than 13,000 people, mainly
third-country nationals, have been evacuated from the
city by boat.

Those operations have been successfully carried
out on the basis of transparent notification of
humanitarian movements to all parties to the conflict.
Continued liaison with all parties is essential to
maintain, and indeed expand, the scope and reach of
humanitarian operations. Between 150 and 300 third-
country nationals still need to be evacuated from the
city. There are an unknown number of seriously ill and
injured people who also require evacuation assistance.

The situation in the Western Mountains region,
where an estimated 750,000 people live, has received
less attention, but is also very concerning. Fighting has
reduced access to food and medical supplies. Fifty
thousand people have fled to Tunisia. Most of them are
now residing with Tunisian host families, who have
generously received them. The World Food Programme
has delivered some assistance, and non-governmental
organizations have taken great risks to reach the main
towns of Nalut and Zintan with medical assistance.
11-3288]

About 2,200 people are in refugee camps in southern
Tunisia. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and its partners are
providing food and non-food items to those refugees,
as well as to host families. The Libyan Ministry of
Social Welfare has informed us that it is assisting
approximately 5,000 families from Misrata, the
Western Mountains region and southern areas - about
33,000 people in total.

In spite of the repeated requests of the Secretary-
General and the international community as a whole,
civilians are still coming under fire in these areas of
conflict. This has to stop. The Security Council must
continue to insist that all parties respect international
humanitarian law and ensure that civilians are spared.
The reported use of cluster bombs and sea and land
mines, as well as deaths and injuries caused by aerial
bombing, show a callous disregard for the physical and
psychological well-being of civilians. There are reports
of sexual violence, including rape. We are also
concerned that children could be recruited as
combatants. Disappearances and abductions are
reported. The shelling of the port in Misrata has
prevented humanitarian ships from accessing the port.

All parties need to agree a temporary pause in the
fighting in Misrata and other areas. That would provide
a respite from violence for the civilian population and
enable those who wish to leave to do so. An
independent assessment of the humanitarian situation
could be conducted. A pause would also enable the
delivery of essential medical supplies and other relief
items, as well as the evacuation of third-country
nationals, the wounded and others who require
emergency medical assistance. My colleagues and I
will continue to press for this.

In Benghazi and other areas there are no
immediate acute emergency needs. But an influx of
approximately 58,000 displaced people has given rise
to some humanitarian requirements. There are also
protection concerns and wider human rights concerns.

Throughout Libya communities have opened their
homes to families who have been displaced. While that
is a testament to the generosity of the Libyan people, it
means that host families themselves are doubly
affected by the crisis. The longer this situation
continues, the greater the likelihood that those families
will need significant support.
11-32881

The manner in which the sanctions are
implemented and monitored is causing serious delays
in the arrival of commercial goods. In addition, the
conflict has caused a serious disruption of supply lines
within the country, which has already led to shortages
of fuel and difficulties in obtaining commodities,
including foodstuffs, medicines and other essential
goods. There have also been severe cash shortages
throughout the country.

The impact of these problems is being felt
nationwide and in all sectors. I am particularly
concerned about the effect on the health sector. In
Tripoli the Libyan Ministry of Health has reported that
only 45 percent of medical staff are working.
Thousands of foreign nurses and doctors left the
country at the start of the crisis. Essential medicines,
supplies and vaccines will not be replenished when
they run out. Even if imported medicines do enter the
country, they cannot be distributed to health facilities
due to fuel shortages and the disruption of supply lines.

Schools are closed. School buildings have been
damaged or are sheltering displaced people. School-
age children are traumatized. Teachers and students are
unable to get to school, including in Tripoli, because of
fuel shortages. Annual examinations have been
postponed. No planning is under way for the next
academic year. Educational materials are increasingly
unavailable, as they also must be imported.

Food stocks are being depleted. Libya is a food
deficit country, heavily reliant on imports. Between 75
and 90 per cent of all consumed cereals are imported.
The country requires between 110,000 and 150,000
metric tons of food monthly to feed its population of
over 6.5 million. A recent inter-agency mission found
two months of food stocks in the eastern region of the
country; Western Libya has three months of food stock.
Also of concern for the country's longer-term food
security is the disruption of the public food distribution
system, the departure of third-country national
agricultural workers and the unavailability of fuel to
transport agricultural produce around the country. The
short supply of cash combined with rising food prices
will make it increasingly difficult for vulnerable people
to get what they need.

The lack of fuel is also impacting on the
functioning of desalination plants and other water
purification mechanisms. Desalination supplies are
running out. The current situation will contribute to the
3
need for continuing humanitarian assistance in Libya in
the months ahead.

Those structural vulnerabilities need to be
addressed to ensure that the adverse effects on the
civilian population are minimized.

The delivery of humanitarian assistance in Libya
must remain distinct from the military activities of all
parties to the conflict. Every possible effort is being
made to deliver assistance and evacuate the injured and
third-country nationals while using only civilian
resources. Only as a last resort will the military assets
that have been generously offered by some Member
States be mobilized. We have not yet reached that
point.

In this complex and charged environment, a loss
of confidence by any of the parties to the current
hostilities in the strictly neutral, impartial and
independent character of humanitarian action would
jeopardize our ability to reach the people who need
help. Humanitarian agencies must have access to all
people, regardless of where they are and under whose
control they happen to find themselves. The work of
humanitarian agencies must not be impaired. Aid
workers must not become targets because of perceived
compromises to their neutrality, impartiality and
independence.

The next two to three months will be a critical
period for Libya. So far, we have received $144 million
for humanitarian work. That is 46 per cent of what is
needed. I would like to thank Member States for their
support. We are now revising our appeal. We will need
additional resources to support increased humanitarian
activities within Libya. I count on members' continued
support for the humanitarian effort in Libya, and for
achieving the desperately needed temporary
humanitarian pause.

