Mr. Manalo (Philippines): It is my pleasure to
see you, Sir, presiding over this emergency meeting of
the Security Council to address urgently the continuing
violence and deteriorating situation in the Middle East.

The gravity of the situation has prompted the
Security Council recently to issue three resolutions:
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), calling for
immediate implementation of 1402 (2002) without
delay. We support those resolutions and urge their
immediate and full implementation.

My delegation participates today not just to
convey our deep concern over the escalating violence
in the region, but also to demonstrate our commitment
to the pursuit of a just and enduring peace. In this
regard, my delegation and Government fully support all
ongoing efforts towards this end, including the direct
engagement of the United States. No military solution
can resolve this crisis. Only a political solution can
have any chance of success in overcoming it. We are
also deeply concerned with the growing humanitarian
emergency in the occupied territories.

The international community has declared and
exhibited its readiness to assist in reaching a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace and security in
the region. Thus, my delegation welcomes the window
of opportunity for sustained and lasting peace offered
by the proposal for a third-party monitoring
mechanism. Yesterday's debate clearly indicated the
international community's support for such a
mechanism. We believe that this proposal should be
vigorously pursued.

The ingredients of peace are in place. The
Mitchell and Tenet plans have been accepted by both
sides, and resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) have set the stage for immediate action.
The Arab League Summit made a significant
contribution in forging a common position to promote
peace in the region. It is an important contribution to
the peace process, which my delegation fully
welcomes.

We also hope that any forthcoming Security
Council resolution on this matter will identify practical
measures to effect the ceasefire and set the stage for a
lasting and durable peace in the area.

