Ms. DiCarlo: There have been several positive
developments related to the nuclear-weapon and
ballistic-missile programmes ofthe Democratic People's
Republic of Korea over recent months. On 20 April, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea announced an
immediate halt to nuclear explosive testing and flight
tests of certain longer-range ballistic missiles.

On 24 May, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea reportedly dismantled its Punggye-ri nuclear
test site. It also reportedly dismantled missile-related
infrastructure at the Iha-Ri missile test stand in May
and the Sohae satellite launching site in July. However,
international experts were not invited to witness any of
these activities.

In the meantime, there continue to be signs that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is maintaining
and developing its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programmes. The International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) remains unable to access the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and verify the correctness
and completeness of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's declarations under its safeguards agreement.
The Agency continues to monitor developments
through commercially available satellite imagery
where possible. In his regular report to the IAEA Board
of Governors and General Conference submitted on
20 August, the IAEA Director General reported that
the Agency had observed signatures consistent with
the continued operation of the plutonium production
reactor, radiochemical laboratory and alleged uranium-
enrichment facility at Yongbyon.

The Secretary-General has welcomed the commitment
made by Chairman Kim Jong Un of the State Affairs
Commission of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea on 5 September to realize the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.

It is hoped that the positive developments that
have been seen, together with the important summits
between the leaders of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea and
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the United States, respectively, will contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to advancing sustainable
peace and complete and verifiable denuclearization on
the Korean peninsula in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Security Council unity helped create the opportunity
to engage diplomatically. A year ago, the Korean
peninsula was the most tense and dangerous peace and
security issue in the world. Today, progress has been
made on building trust, reducing military tensions and
opening or reopening channels of communication. A
foundation has been established for making tangible
progress on the core issues.

We encourage all Member States to support
the parties in their diplomatic efforts and to ensure
the full implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

I have been asked to brief today on the United
Nations Command, which is also referred to as the
Unified Command. Security Council resolution 84
(1950), of 7 July 1950, recommended that all Member
States providing military forces and other assistance to
the Republic of Korea should

"make such forces and other assistance available
to a unified command under the United States
of America"

and requested the United States to designate the
commander of such forces. The same resolution also
authorized the unified command at its discretion
to use the United Nations flag in the course of its
operations concurrently with the flags of the various
nations participating.

In its first report to the Security Council on the
operation of the Command, the United States informed
the Council that on 25 July 1950 the Unified Command
had been established, and the Security Council first used
the name "United Nations Command" in resolution 88
(1950), of8 November 1950. Notwithstanding its name,
the United Nations Command is not a United Nations
operation or body, nor does it come under the command
and control of the United Nations. Furthermore,
it was not established as a subsidiary organ of the
Security Council and is not funded through the United
Nations budget. As such, there are no reporting lines
between the United Nations Command and the United
Nations Secretariat.

The Secretary-General, during the upcoming high-
level week of the General Assembly, will discuss how
he and the United Nations system can further support
the parties and how steps can be advanced towards
sustainable peace, security and the complete and
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. He
hopes that the inter-Korean summit that is starting in
a few hours, as well as the planned summit between
the leaders of the United States and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, will further contribute to
this process.

