Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, it is my pleasure to
welcome you, Sir, and to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. I also take this opportunity to
thank Ambassador De La Sabliere and his team for
their outstanding performance in steering the
proceedings of the Security Council in June.

I am pleased to join other members of the
Council in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Danilo Turk for yet another solid and informative
briefing, this time on the latest developments in
Bougainville and the activities of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville.

Romania welcomes the significant progress in the
implementation of the peace process in Bougainville,
which has now entered a new phase with the successful
holding of elections. We commend the people and the
leaders of Bougainville for so resolutely moving
towards that important achievement. We welcome the
establishment of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government and extend our full support for its
peacebuilding efforts.

We appreciate the outstanding role played by the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville in
supporting the achievement of a lasting settlement of
the conflict and in managing a successful peace
process. The successful elections and the establishment
of the new Autonomous Bougainville Government
bring the United Nations Mission to a natural
conclusion based on the effective discharge of its
mandate.

Romania, too, emphasizes the need for continuing
international assistance at a substantial level, including
by United Nations agencies and programmes. Aid is
still necessary for the rehabilitation and the capacity-
building efforts of the Bougainville authorities with a
view to consolidating the progress achieved so far.

I wish to express our appreciation for all the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Papua New
Guinea, as well as by the Bougainville parties, in the
framework of the peace process. I would also like to
commend the countries of the region, United Nations
specialized agencies and international donors for the
role they have played in supporting the peace process
and making Bougainville a success story.

I would like to point out that Bougainville
provides a positive example of how a United Nations
mission can be successfully completed. We draw
inspiration and confidence from the handling of the
situation, which has been particularly welcome and
helpful at a time when the international community is
debating the United Nations reform process, aimed at
improving the Organization's effectiveness and its
relevance for protecting our freedom and improving
our lives.

Finally, I take this opportunity to wholeheartedly
commend Ambassador Danilo Turk, a distinguished
representative of the finest diplomatic and political
traditions in our region, for his dedicated and
accomplished performance in the service of the United
Nations as a top official in the Department of Political
Affairs. We are grateful for his overall contribution.

