Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting on police issues in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and the Police Commissioners of the United
Nations missions in Mali, Haiti and Darfur, for their
helpful briefings. We take this opportunity to once
again express our gratitude to all United Nations police
peacekeepers for their selfless efforts.

The work of the United Nations police in our current
peacekeeping initiatives is extremely important. They
deal with tremendous challenges and have to work
in increasingly difficult conditions. Besides helping
to ensure public order, they also support national
Governments in their efforts to protect civilians and
play an important auxiliary role in post-conflict reform
of law-enforcement institutions and national capacity-
building for host States. We believe that because they
are providing that assistance on behalf of the entire
international community, the police, like peacekeepers,
are obliged to comply scrupulously with Security
Council mandates, the Charter of the United Nations
and the core principles of peacekeeping.

A key part of effective mandate fulfilment is the
establishment of constructive, trusting relations with
the host State that take its priorities into account. It
is the principle of national ownership that guarantees
success. One can hardly call it effective international
support if a mission's protracted presence ultimately
results merely in substituting the efforts of United
Nations police for those of the local force. In providing
assistance to States it is equally critical to take national
specifics into consideration. Attempts to apply a
universal approach to reforming an area as important
and sensitive as a society's law-enforcement structures
inevitably ends in the proposed solutions being rejected.

In order to help peacekeepers deal effectively with
the challenges they face, especially when additional
factors complicate conflicts further, they must get the
technical and staffing support they need. The Russian
Federation, as a police-contributing country, has
continued to expand its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping activities and to deploy personnel with
relevant skills. Since 1992, more than 500 officers
from branches of Russia's Ministry of the Interior
have become United Nations police officers. Since
the United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June
2016, the number of Russian United Nations police
officers has increased by more than 50 per cent. They
are currently engaged in operations in South Sudan,
Kosovo, Haiti and Cyprus, and 20 per cent of them are
women. Women's participation in policing in Russia
itselfis also growing steadily.

Russia has also been striving to do its bit to
improve the effectiveness of police peacekeepers'
work, including that of non-Russian police. Since 2000,
the United Nations-certified peacekeeping training
centre of the Interior Ministry's All-Russian Institute
for Advanced Training in Domodedovo, near Moscow,
has trained more than 350 foreign police peacekeepers,
including commanders from more than 50 countries.
Russia has unique experience in vocational training for
peacekeepers and we are ready to share it.

Russia supported the Council's adoption today of
resolution 2382 (2017). However, we have to point out
that the work on the draft resolution was extremely
difficult. The Security Council took great pains to
ensure that the document did not politicize the work
of the United Nations police and that it focused on
concrete issues, based on the premise that every
element of the United Nations system is responsible
for a clearly defined area of issues. We believe it is
unacceptable to put a subjective interpretation on the
norms of international humanitarian law, particularly
where the protection of civilians is concerned. Under no
circumstances should peacekeepers, including police,
become a party to a conflict or take any side, and they
should certainly not be put in a position of using force
against a host State.

The police unquestionably play an important
role in United Nations efforts to prevent relapses into
conflict within the framework of their mandates in each
individual mission, but it is difficult to conceive what
their potential contribution could be to the Secretary-
General's prevention and mediation efforts before
conflicts break out and missions are deployed. We
support the importance of ensuring an ongoing dialogue
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries on every aspect of peacekeeping operations,
including mandate planning and formulation.

We believe firmly that discussions on the most
difficult issues, particularly police organizational
issues, should be transparent, and that the most suitable
platforms for them are the existing Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, on
the latter of which all troop-contributing countries
are represented. No external reviews can supplant
intergovernmental discussions of police issues. In
that context, we welcome the forthcoming briefing by
heads of police components to be held in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

