Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Coalition
forces today began operations against military targets in
Iraq. Our ongoing military action is substantial. We are
focusing on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
programmes and its ability to threaten its neighbours.

Coalition forces are acting under the authority
provided by the resolutions of the Security Council. This
action is a necessary and proportionate response to the
continued refusal of the Iraqi Government to comply with
the resolutions of the Security Council and the threat to
international peace and security which Iraq's non-
compliance represents. In carrying out this action, our
forces have taken appropriate measures to defend
themselves from any interference by Iraq and have made
every possible effort to avoid civilian casualties and
collateral damage.

As the Council is well aware, this resort to military
force was undertaken only when it became evident that
diplomacy had been exhausted. The coalition acted out of
necessity, and the Government of Iraq bears full
responsibility for the consequences of this military
operation. We did not act precipitately. On the contrary,
the United States has worked with its partners in the
Security Council over the past months in a sincere and
sustained effort to bring about a peaceful resolution of the
confrontation created by Iraq. For reasons best known to
Saddam Hussein, Iraq chose to reject that effort.

Following the liberation of Kuwait from Iraqi
occupation in 1991, Security Council resolution 687

 

(1991) mandated a ceasefire; but it also imposed a number
of essential conditions on Iraq, including the destruction of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction and acceptance by Iraq
of United Nations inspections.

In its resolutions - including, in addition to resolution
687 (1991), resolutions 707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154
(1998), 1194 (1998), 1205 (1998) and others - the Council
has elaborated and reiterated those conditions, including
"full, final and complete disclosure" (resolution 707 (1991))
of all aspects of its programmes to develop weapons of
mass destruction, and "immediate, unconditional and
unrestricted access" (ibid.) for the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) "to any and all areas, facilities,
equipment, records and means of transportation which they
wish to inspect" (ibid.). Iraqi compliance with all these
requirements is a fundamental element of international
peace and security in the region.

Nevertheless, Iraq has repeatedly taken actions which
constitute flagrant, material breaches of these provisions.
On a number of occasions the Council has affirmed that
similar Iraqi actions constituted such breaches, as well as a
threat to international peace and security.

Just one month ago, on 14 November, the Government
of Iraq committed to provide full and unconditional
cooperation with UNSCOM, as required by the resolutions.
The Iraqi Government described it as a "clear and
unconditional decision by the Iraqi Government to resume
cooperation with UNSCOM. and IAEA". Iraq stated that the
weapons inspectors could "immediately resume all their
activities according to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council". It must be noted that Iraq rescinded its
restrictions on the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and offered those assurances only in the face of a
credible threat of force. Military force was not employed at
that time, however, because the United States, along with
other members of the Security Council, sought a peaceful
resolution to the situation created by Iraq and opted to go
the extra mile to test Iraqi intentions.

In that event, Iraq failed to fulfil its assurances. As the
15 December UNSCOM. report makes clear, Iraq failed to
provide the full cooperation it promised on 14 November
and thus left UNSCOM. unable to conduct the substantive
disarmament work mandated to it by the Council.

By refusing to make available documents and
information requested by UNSCOM. within the scope of its
mandate, by imposing new restrictions on the weapons
inspectors and by repeatedly denying access to facilities
which UNSCOM. wished to inspect, Iraq once again acted
in flagrant and material breach of resolution 687 (1991).

I should like to pause here to praise the outstanding
professional work of the talented and dedicated staff of
the Special Commission and its Executive Chairman,
Richard Butler. Their efforts from 1991 until today have
reflected the seriousness with which they view their
mandate. Subjected repeatedly to a pattern of harassment
from a legion of Iraqi officials, they have always sought
to perform their duties in an accurate and serious manner,
and they have succeeded.

Iraq fully understood that its actions would be
reported accurately to the Security Council by the Special
Commission. Indeed, the Iraqi Government did not even
wait for the Special Commission's report before
presenting its own skewed interpretation of events to the
Security Council yesterday, because the Iraqi leadership
understood that the report of the Special Commission
would be factual.

Following Iraq's repeated, flagrant and material
breaches of its obligations under resolutions 687 (1991),
707 (1991), 715 (1991), 1154 (1998), 1194 (1998), 1205
(1998) and others, in addition to its failure to fulfil its
own commitments, the coalition today exercised the
authority given by Security Council resolution 678 (1990)
for Member States to employ all necessary means to
secure Iraqi compliance with the Council's resolutions
and restore international peace and security in the area.
Any Iraqi attempt to attack coalition forces or to initiate
aggressive action against a neighbouring State will be met
with a swift response by the coalition.
As President Clinton stated this evening, if we had
delayed for even a matter of days from Chairman Butler's
report, we would have given Saddam Hussein more time
to disperse his forces and protect his weapons. Also, the
Muslim holy month of Ramadan begins this weekend. For
us to initiate military action during Ramadan would be
profoundly offensive to the Muslim world and therefore
damage our relations with Arab countries and the progress
we have made in the Middle East peace process.

President Clinton also stressed that the decision to
use force is never cost-free. Whenever American forces
are placed in harm's way, we risk the loss of life. And
while our strikes are focused on Iraq's military
capabilities, there will be unintended Iraqi casualties.

 

Indeed, in the past, Saddam Hussein has intentionally
placed Iraqi civilians in harm's way in a cynical bid to
sway international opinion.

Secretary Albright emphasized this evening that our
quarrel is not with the Iraqi people. On the contrary, we
recognize that Iraqis have been the primary victims of
Saddam Hussein's failure to cooperate internationally and
of his reign of terror domestically. The United States took
the lead in establishing a United Nations programme to
meet the humanitarian needs of Iraqi civilians and
supported the expansion of that programme earlier this year.
Secretary Albright stressed that in carrying out military
action we will do all we can to minimize civilian casualties,
and we will support Iraqis who are working for the day
when the people of their country will be free to choose
their own leaders and shape their own destiny.

Iraq's policy of unremitting defiance and
non-compliance necessitated the resort to military force.
The United States did not seek a confrontation and did not
undertake this decision lightly. The coalition now looks to
the highest level of the Iraqi leadership for an immediate
demonstration of unconditional compliance with the terms
of the Security Council resolutions.

