Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi for presenting the quarterly report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We congratulate the Spanish delegation and the
Panel of Experts on the work done thus far.

We are pleased that no incidents have been
reported over the past three months concerning the
implementation of resolution 1737 (2006), and we
sincerely hope that there will be no setbacks in the
effective implementation of all relevant resolutions.
We welcome the joint statement of the P5+1 foreign
ministers, in which they agreed that substantial
progress had been made with Iran on key areas of the
Joint Plan of Action, and welcome the commitment of
all parties to continuing negotiations towards finding
a comprehensive agreement. We therefore hope that
all parties agree on the remaining outstanding issues
of the broad technical framework for Iran's nuclear
programme by the deadline of the end of March.

It is undeniable that the sanctions are having a
negative effect on Iran's economy and its people, and
we hope that a deal can be reached soon in order to
lift some of those crippling sanctions. Although Iran
has evolved its commitment to reach an agreement on a
comprehensive solution, the sanctions regime is still in
force and must be respected, as must the Committee's
commitment to its implementation. We therefore
encourage the Iranian Government to engage with the
Committee and respond to the Committee's requests,
which have thus far received no answers.

Angola fully supports the non-proliferation nuclear
arms regime, and we condemn any activities aiming at
the development of nuclear weapons. We will continue
to support the ongoing negotiations between the P5+1
and Iran, and we are hopeful that both sides can come
to an agreement by the deadlines that have been set. We
fully recognize Iran's right to develop a nuclear energy
programme strictly for peaceful aims, medical research
and energy production purposes and that there will be
no pursuit of nuclear weapons capabilities, which could
have serious repercussions for the Middle East and pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.

