Mrs. Lima da Veiga (Cape Verde): The recent
findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change could not be more eloquent about the risks and
challenges for the sustainability of development efforts
at the national, regional and international levels and for
the very survival of mankind.

Indeed, if the international community fails to
deal with the issues of energy and climate change
seriously and with a sense of urgency, those challenges
could, in the long term, constitute potential threats to
global economic and social stability and, hence, to
global security.

Although they contribute least to air and
atmospheric pollution and climate change, small island
developing States and least developed countries are the
most vulnerable to climate change and its adverse
impacts. Owing to the rapid pace at which those
phenomena are occurring, the irreversibility of the
process might be unavoidable for some of those
countries. What is more, certain small island
developing States face the serious risk of disappearing
from the map.
Also well known is the impact on the future
development of Africa, a continent that is recognized
as having special needs and that is struggling with
security challenges. Cape Verde is heavily affected by
drought and land degradation, as well as by the climate
change phenomena that generally affect small island
developing States, such as sea-level rise and the
salinization of underground water and soil. Being of
volcanic origin, Cape Verde is also exposed to potential
natural disasters. Its high dependency on fossil fuel
imports for its development needs increases its
exposure to external shocks.

It is against that background that the Cape
Verdean delegation considers that the same grounds
that mobilized nations and other stakeholders in Rio,
Johannesburg, Montreal and Kyoto should spur more
efficient, coherent and ambitious common action to
stop the depletion of natural resources and the
destruction of the equilibrium of ecosystems.

The international community must build on the
momentum created by recent international events on
climate change and must act rapidly. We also believe
that there should be a focus on the implementation of
internationally agreed goals and commitments on
sustainable development.

In preparation of for the fifteenth session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development, the
Secretary-General recently submitted to Member States
comprehensive reports and proposals to accelerate the
implementation of agreed goals and commitments on
the cluster of issues pertaining to energy for
sustainable development, industrial development, air
pollution/atmosphere and climate change. The
outcomes of the Citizens of the Earth Paris meeting
also offer interesting and innovative approaches and
suggestions, which deserve attentive analysis. In our
opinion, the fifteenth session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development should draw on all of those
elements for a forward-looking and action-oriented
session.

Since the current debate is taking place in
advance of that session and of the United Nations
Climate Change Conference, to be held in Bali next
December, we hope that it will contribute to effectively
stimulating strong political will and an enabling
international environment for a genuine partnership in
the implementation process, on the basis of common
but differentiated responsibilities.
Such a partnership must be consistent with the
decision taken by world leaders at the 2005 World
Summit to act with resolve in tackling all challenges

related to sustainable development, including poverty
eradication, climate change, energy and their security
implications. Only such a partnership can ensure
mitigation of the causes and effects of climate change,
enhance adaptation, combat air pollution and improve
access to energy, promote energy efficiency and sound
and cost-effective technologies and, ultimately, reverse
the negative trends that have an impact on development
efforts.

The global partnership should aim at developing
and disseminating technologies for renewable energy
and increasing the share of renewables in the global
energy mix, through a major scaling-up of investments.
It should also focus on broader integration of
mitigation and adaptation measures in national
strategies and in development assistance programmes.

The Cape Verdean delegation also believes that
all Member States should fully comply with
international conventions on sustainable development,
namely, Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Those countries that contribute most to
greenhouse gas emissions should strongly revise their
policies in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol. We
also urge those that have not yet signed the Protocol to
adhere to it. In addition, agreement should be sought
by December 2008 on a broad and ambitious post-2012
commitment period.

In conclusion, I wish to express appreciation to
the Security Council and to you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity given to the Cape Verdean delegation to
participate in this debate.

