Mrs. Sandru (Romania): My delegation appreciates
as very useful the convening of this public debate on the
assessment of the situation in Albania, on the occasion of
the withdrawal of the multinational protection force. Since
my country has subscribed to the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, I will briefly focus on
some specific points of particular importance for my
Government.

Romania wishes to express its satisfaction at the
successful fulfilment of the mandate of the multinational
protection force authorized by the Security Council. Set
up at a moment critical for the destiny of the Albanian
people and, at the same time, of high risk for regional
security, Operation Alba helped block the deterioration of
the situation in the country and provide a secure
environment for the deployment of the international
community's assistance for Albania, including during the
electoral process.

My delegation would like to seize this opportunity
to commend the remarkable role played by Italy in setting
up and steering the multinational protection force. Our
profound appreciation is also extended to all the

 

international organizations that, within the framework
provided by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), contributed to the restoration of stability
and security in Albania and to avoiding the spillover of the
crisis to neighbouring areas.

As a country located in proximity to the Balkans and
as a traditional friend of the Albanian people, Romania was
deeply concerned by the crisis in Albania since its inception
and viewed it as a serious threat to the peace and security
of the region and of the continent at large. Therefore, my
country fully committed itself to contribute, commensurate
with its capacity, to the international effort intended to
settle this crisis by peaceful means.

In this context, as we have previously informed the
Security Council, a special envoy of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania was sent to Tirana in March to
assess the situation on the ground and facilitate the national
dialogue.

Later, Romania joined the multinational protection
force for Albania, together with other European countries.
It participated with a mixed infantry battalion of 400 troops,
which was deployed in the southern area of Albania, an
area considered in the midst of the crisis to have been very
perilous and difficult. The Romanian military carried out a
variety of activities within the mandate assigned by the
Security Council, ranging from providing security for
humanitarian-assistance or electoral-monitoring missions to
ensuring a safe environment for the local population. Its
activities enjoyed the appreciation of both the force
command and the civilian population.

We wish to lay particular emphasis on the excellent
guidance provided by the steering committee of the
multinational protection force and the good cooperation
among all contributing countries, which ensured cohesion
and solidarity in conducting this extremely complex
operation. Likewise, it is worth mentioning the good
collaboration with Albanian representatives and the efficient
collaboration and coordination on the ground with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other international organizations.

Romania welcomes the latest positive developments in
Albania and encourages the Albanian people in its
endeavours to achieve the goal of stabilization and respect
for human rights and democratic standards. Moreover, my
delegation shares the view that the conclusion of the
electoral process in Albania and the withdrawal of the
multinational protection force are ushering in a new stage
which will focus on economic and institutional
reconstruction. While the Albanian authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the democratic normalization of
the country, the support of the international community
will continue to be indispensable to that process.

Romania is following with interest the proposals
pertaining to this issue, and is ready to contribute in an
appropriate manner to future international efforts to
provide institutional and economic assistance to Albania.

