Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation was very pleased to vote in favour of
resolution 1007 (1995) extending the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to February
1996. We note, however, that when things are going well,
the norm entails a renewal of at least six months. But this
is becoming all too rare.

At a time when other peace-keeping operations are
running into serious difficulties, we have every reason to
welcome the success of UNMIH. It is undeniable that,
since the intervention of the multinational force pursuant
to Security Council resolution 940 (1994), followed by
UNMIH's assumption of its tasks, the situation in the
country has changed irreversibly. This may seem banal
today, but the fear and violence that were so recently a
part of everyday life have disappeared. The country is
enjoying an unprecedented level of security. Authentic
political life has resumed, as witnessed in the first round
of municipal and legislative elections. These represent a
crucial stage in the restoration of democracy.

It is because of the symbolic importance of these
elections that France and the European Union made
significant financial and human contributions to them. We
will of course continue to do so in order to ensure the
success of subsequent stages until we reach the high point
of the presidential elections, to be held in a free and fair
manner in accordance with the Haitian Constitution. It is
true that the first round experienced some logistical
difficulties, irregularities or shortcomings, but these in no
way impaired the results. Certain political groupings
which consider themselves losers are contesting the
results, however, and threaten to withdraw from the
process by not participating in the next round.

We believe that this is a mistake. Democracy is
made up precisely of elections lost and elections won, a

 

real change of power based on the free choice of the
electors. That is precisely why the United Nations
intervened in Haiti: to enable the country to enjoy the rights
of democratic nations that had been previously flouted.

My country appeals to all parties concerned -
President Aristide, political parties, the Haitian people and
the Provisional Electoral Council - to participate in the
next round of elections. President Aristide continues to
advocate dialogue; a reorganization has already been
announced by the Provisional Electoral Council to remedy
the shortcomings of the first round, which we welcome.
Moreover, compromise proposals have been made which
the political parties must address. Rejection would be a
very serious decision on their part and would place the onus
for stalling the political process on them.

My delegation wishes to pay a special tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, whose
competence and wisdom have contributed directly to very
positive results. We also wish to thank the entire team of
UNMIH and that of MICIVIH for their important
contributions in the defence of human rights and the civic
education of the population. My delegation also believes
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States is a model that could be
useful to other operations on other continents.

In his report, the Secretary-General stresses the
importance of an effective police force and the reform of
the judicial system to consolidating the democratic process
on a solid footing. My Government fully shares that view,
which is why it has chosen to emphasize its cooperation in
these fields - fields which will make it possible to build
the future.

In conclusion, it is increasingly evident that the
restoration of democracy cannot come about without
economic development. That is why we welcome the wise
decision of the Secretary-General to bring such interaction
into play from the very outset of the operation in order to
prepare harmoniously for the next, crucial phase - the
consolidation of peace.
