Mr. Pascoe: We should thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to introduce the Secretary-
General's latest report on developments in Guinea-
Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country. The
Council has before it the Secretary-General's report in
document S/2008/628, dated 29 September 2008.

Today's meeting is taking place at a time of
continuing political and security tensions in the
country, even as preparations move ahead for crucial
legislative elections scheduled for next month. Our
discussions also come against the backdrop of growing
national and international concern about the impact of
the illicit drug trade on this small and vulnerable
country on the coast of West Africa. Although Guinea-
Bissau has come a long way since the civil war of the
late 1990s, all of the gains achieved at this point in
establishing democratic governance and stability in the
country will be at risk if that menace is not confronted
head on.

However, I must stress that Guinea-Bissau is not
the only West African country affected by the growing
drug-trafficking crisis in the subregion. In fact, to its
credit, Guinea-Bissau has been very open in
acknowledging the dangers it faces and the already
heavy impact of this phenomenon on the country's
political, economic and social structures. Therefore,
even as we focus on Guinea-Bissau on this occasion, it
is clear that a sustainable, longer-term solution can best
be achieved through robust regional approaches.
08-53847

Let me turn briefly to major recent political
developments in Guinea-Bissau. As members of the
Council are aware, Prime Minister Carlos Correia was
appointed on 5 August to head a caretaker Government.
The previous Government had fallen after the decision
of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC) in late July to withdraw from
the political and government stability pact. Since
taking office, Prime Minister Correia has on several
occasions affirmed his commitment to hold the
legislative elections on 16 November 2008, as
scheduled. Only last week, during the general debate,
President Vieira also reiterated his commitment to
holding the elections on schedule.

Preparations for the polls are on track. Twenty-
three parties and two coalitions submitted applications
to the Supreme Court by the 18 September deadline,
which means that 27 of the 34 registered parties will be
participating in the elections. The United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) is coordinating
international resource mobilization efforts, and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) is responsible for the
coordination of international electoral observation. To
date, international electoral observers are expected
from the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
European Union (EU).

The electoral financing gap is also narrowing,
although there is a still a shortfall of over $4 million,
including arrears of about $1 million from previous
elections, which donors expect the Government to
handle as part of its sovereign obligations with respect
to elections.

The Secretary-General welcomes recent
additional pledges of support by the European Union of
about $2.2 million, as well as new pledges by Spain of
about $740,000. He appeals once again to the
international community to provide the necessary
resources to help Guinea-Bissau fill the financial gap
and allow preparations for the elections to proceed
smoothly and on schedule.

As elections approach, there is an uneasy calm in
the country. In early August, the authorities announced
that they had discovered an attempted coup by
elements of the armed forces, allegedly led by the
Chief of Staff of the Navy. He was subsequently put
under house arrest but escaped to the Gambia, where
08-53847
he was detained and has since requested political
asylum. The Guinea-Bissau authorities have requested
that he be tried by a regional tribunal.

Meanwhile, the Chief of Staff of the Guinea-
Bissau armed forces is said to be conducting a full
investigation into the circumstances related to the
attempted coup. Security forces are also increasing
security checks and other operations around the
country in order to ensure a stable climate conducive to
the conduct of peaceful elections.

Guinea-Bissau's difficulty in paying public sector
salaries in a timely manner continues to exacerbate
social, political and security tensions. Those payments
are now reportedly two months in arrears, raising
concerns that, if not addressed, the matter could create
social instability prior to and during the elections. The
situation has been worsened by the sharp rise in food
and fuel prices, especially in a country where salaries
are extremely low and are not paid regularly.

The World Bank has just approved a $5 million
grant to help the country cope with rising food and fuel
prices in the short- and medium-terms. The
Government has also taken measures within its limited
capacity to alleviate the suffering of the population by
reducing taxes on rice imports.

Members of the Council will recall that the
Secretary-General has consistently identified security
sector reform as one of Guinea-Bissau's critical
priority challenges. We are pleased to note that Guinea-
Bissau authorities themselves not only recognize the
urgent need for action in that domain, but have indeed
begun to take concrete measures to that end. In
response, international partners have increased their
support.

The European Union has already deployed 15
security sector reform advisers to Bissau to assist
national authorities as they begin to implement the
country's agreed security sector reform programme. A
United Nations led inter-agency security sector reform
assessment mission will visit Guinea-Bissau from 14 to
24 October at the request of the Government. The
mission, to be facilitated by UNOGBIS, in
collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and with the participation of INTERPOL,
the European Union and ECOWAS, is designed
specifically to take stock of security sector reform
requirements in the areas of defense, justice, the rule of
law and law enforcement capacity. The mission will
make recommendations on ways and means of
supporting Guinea-Bissau's security sector reform
programme in an integrated manner.

I would like to recognize the steady progress
being made in the ongoing peacebuilding process in
Guinea-Bissau. The engagement between the country
and the international community in that exercise
remains firm and productive. On 18 September, the
National Steering Committee endorsed the strategic
framework for peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. In turn,
the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau formally adopted the
strategy on I October. That development has now laid
a solid foundation for concrete implementation to
proceed. The Secretary-General, following the
adoption of the strategy, will be examining the possible
disbursement of the second financial grant to Guinea-
Bissau from the Peacebuilding Fund.

Let me return to the issue of drug trafficking,
which I mentioned at the outset of my statement. As
various sources, including the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), have reported, Guinea-
Bissau is fast becoming a strategic link in the transport
of illegal narcotics from South America to Europe. The
potentially damaging impact of the illegal trade,
including its corrupting influence on the country's
fragile institutions, should not be underestimated. The
authorities themselves recognize the lack of national
capacity to tackle the problem effectively on their own.
Current international efforts to help strengthen national
capacity, especially support for the judicial sector, are
welcome and important but not sufficient. The
authorities of Guinea-Bissau, including President
Vieira, have said that more needs to be done to help
them, in particular since they consider the drug
trafficking crisis to be tarnishing the country's image
and undermining its moral and social order.

The recommendation of the Secretary-General in
the report now before the Council

"consider establishing a panel of experts to
investigate the identity and activities of those
involved in drug trafficking and organized crime
in Guinea-Bissau" (5/2008/628, para. 45)

is intended to send a strong message of continued
international support in the face of the growing
concern. With the Council's endorsement, the proposed
course of action would add to the momentum for action
in advance of the ECOWAS high-level conference

called to address the drug trafficking threat in West
Africa. The President of the ECOWAS Commission has
confirmed that the conference will take place in Cape
Verde on 28 and 29 October. The Secretary-General
has instructed UNODC, UNOGBIS and the United
Nations Office for West Africa to assist ECOWAS in
its preparations for the conference.

Without prejudging the actions that the Council
might decide to take in response to the findings that the
proposed panel of experts might put forward, the
reference in the report of the Secretary-General to
punitive targeted sanctions is intended to be directed
not at Guinea-Bissau or any other country, but rather at
individuals who would be seen as involved in the cycle
of drug trafficking from the source to the transit point
to the final destination.

The drug trafficking threat is a major challenge to
Guinea-Bissau and to its neighbours, many of which
are recovering from long periods of civil conflicts. As
the United Nations continues to contribute to the
consolidation of the fragile peace processes in those
countries in order to prevent a relapse into new cycles
of instability, we believe that tackling the emerging
new danger of drug trafficking vigorously and
resolutely is essential to the success of ongoing
peacebuilding initiatives.

