Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes in its turn to thank Mr. Lubbers for
his very detailed and useful briefing. My delegation
welcomes his presentation and thanks Mr. Lubbers for
the regularity with which he remains in touch with our
Council and of his briefings since his assumption of the
leadership of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). He has done
well, given that issues involving refugees arise in all
phases of a crisis, including in the settlement of
conflicts and even in post-conflict periods.

It is encouraging to note his ongoing interest in
the fate of the many refugees in Africa. Regardless of
the current increased focus on Afghanistan, as the
representative of France pointed out earlier, we still
feel that Africa remains a special case that must
continue to enjoy focused attention. We can see that
Mr. Lubbers is providing that attention and encourage
him to continue to do so.

While there may be real hope today for Sierra
Leone, we must nevertheless continue to stress the
problems of Sierra Leonean refugees, notably the
resumption of their repatriation with a view to enabling
them to participate in the elections scheduled for May
and thus to ensuring the broadest possible participation
of the Sierra Leonean people in those consultations,
which are of great importance to this Council. In that
connection, I wonder what specific measures
Mr. Lubbers is considering to encourage the remaining
Sierra Leoneans living as refugees, inter alia, in Guinea
to go home. What measures have been taken for their
repatriation and reintegration within Sierra Leone?

I should like to stress that Guinea, a country that
hosts refugees, welcomes Mr. Lubbers" initiative of
Global Consultations on an agenda for protecting
refugees. In our opinion, that initiative is now
necessary in order to revitalize international legal
instruments aimed at protecting refugees, notably the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
its 1967 Protocol, the better to adjust them to the
current international environment and thus to ensure
protection for refugees and, as Mr. Lubbers quite
rightly stressed, that refugees do not become a source
of tension between States, particularly those of origin
and those that receive them.

The 1951 Convention essentially rests on shared
responsibilities. Regrettably, the host countries
continue to bear the heaviest burden, a fact which
continues to be a source of concern. Ambassador
Franco addressed this issue at some length earlier, and
we fully share his views in that respect.

Likewise, the situation of displaced persons
remains a continuing source of concern. Every possible
measure should be taken by the international
community to restore and consolidate peace and
security in countries that have just emerged from
conflict and to adopt effective additional measures
likely to promote national reconciliation and
development.

Allow me to thank Mr. Lubbers once again. I
wish to pay tribute to the humanitarian staff he heads
for the dedicated and courageous work they are doing
under what are often very dangerous and trying
circumstances.

