Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Germany and the High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union,
Mr. Javier Solana, for their briefings. I also thank Mr.
J ean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Ibrahim Gambari.

We join others in expressing our satisfaction at
the successful conclusion of a crucial phase in the post-
conflict transition process to democracy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In their
organization, management and outcome, the elections,
which we have repeatedly referred to here and which
are the topic of this meeting, represent an important
achievement for the authorities and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that context, it is
apt to recognize the decisive contribution of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the significant security,
political, diplomatic, military and economic presence
of the European Union.

Given the historical background of the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that
country's strategic importance in Africa, it is also
important that its democratic transition be carefully
planned and to continue to provide support to its
authorities in the upcoming phase of elections for the
Senate and for provincial governors and deputy
governors. We feel it necessary to note that it is now up
to the international community, development agencies
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo's partners
to plan the future of international cooperation so as to
help the new democratic Government in the
peacebuilding process and to continue the transition
towards an integrated society at peace and moving
towards development.

We are pleased to recognize the progress that has
been made in institutional reform and the interest in
strengthening the capacities and legitimacy of the
authorities. We are also pleased to note the support role
being played by South Africa, a current member of the
Security Council.

We are optimistic that internal security, the full
rule of law and human rights will be the focus of
ongoing attention from the Government and society of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that context,
we will closely follow the dialogue and peacebuilding
process in that country.

