The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of China.

I have noticed that, in their statements, some
representatives expressed regret at the fact that certain
countries concerned cannot speak in our debate. I share that
regret. Among those countries that cannot speak here is the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As the country with
sovereignty over Kosovo, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is a party concerned in the question under our
consideration today. The fact that some countries,
including the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, cannot
speak in our debate represents an abnormal situation that
I hope can be rectified in the future.

The Chinese delegation thanks the Security Council
mission to Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, for
its report. Under the outstanding leadership of
Ambassador Chowdhury, the mission has carried out
intense, diligent and effective work. It has, among other
things, obtained firsthand information through on-site
investigations and submitted the report in a most
expeditious manner. We would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Chowdhury and other members of the
Council mission for their efforts in this regard.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have
been deployed in Kosovo for almost a year. It is highly
necessary that the situation in Kosovo be reviewed
comprehensively. As the report points out, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, UNMIK and KFOR have made great efforts
under difficult circumstances to implement their
mandates. We appreciate their dedication and hard work.

According to the report, and according to resolution
1244 (1999), "The full and effective implementation of
the Security Council's mandate requires the sustained
effort by UNMIK and KFOR". Here, the Chinese
delegation wishes to comment on a number of questions
relevant to the report and the situation in Kosovo.
First, the security situation in Kosovo is still very
worrying, especially the physical security situation of
Serbs and other minorities. According to some reports,
since last June more than 200,000 Serbs and people of
other minorities have fled the area and more than 4,000
incidents of violence have taken place. While some of
these incidents were anti-Albanian, most were against
Serbs and other minorities. Due to the absence of the
sense of safety, and given the situation of the Serbs and
other minorities, there still exist enormous difficulties in
the way of the return of internally displaced persons and
refugees from third countries, although UNMIK has
emphasized it as a priority. In Pristina, where 40,000
Serbs and Montenegrins once lived, there are now fewer
than 100 Serbs. This is indeed a very grave situation.

Secondly, since Serbs and people of other minority
groups are not able to return normally to their homes in
Kosovo, it is impossible for them to integrate into the

 

society. Without this integration, the strengthening of the
multi-ethnic interim administration is out of the question.
As the report rightly points out:

"Efforts to promote cooperation and interface between
ethnic communities at the local level, including the
establishment of multi-ethnic municipal councils,
administrative boards and rapid-impact employment
projects, could foster peaceful coexistence."

The realization of this objective depends on the normal
return of people of all ethnic groups which, as I have said,
is closely linked to the security situation.

Thirdly, as to the upcoming municipal elections, the
civil and voter registration has already begun in Kosovo.
The report observes:

"It is unfortunate, however, that all factions of the
Kosovo Serb community have chosen not to
participate in this process, due to the current lack of
physical security and freedom of movement."

The Chinese delegation believes that this is a reality of the
political life in Kosovo deserving of the full attention of the
Security Council and UNMIK. In our View, careful
planning and preparation must be made for the local
elections in Kosovo. The security situation must be
improved to ensure physical security and freedom of
movement, so that the elections can be conducted in a free
and peaceful atmosphere. The voter registration process
must ensure broad representation, especially that of the
minorities. To make this happen, necessary conditions still
need to be created; otherwise, there is no way to guarantee
the fairness of the elections. Elections in the absence of
broad-based participation will only result in the
intensification of ethnic conflicts.

Finally, the Chinese delegation would like to stress
that Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) must be fully
implemented. UNMIK should respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as well as the laws, of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and seek its cooperation and
participation. Some administrative measures adopted in
Kosovo, however, have undermined the sovereignty of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. For example, identification
documents have been issued in Kosovo without
authorization by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Stamps have been issued, too. The Albanian flag has been
flying beside the United Nations flag at the UNMIK
compound in Kosovo. Some foreign guests have visited
Kosovo without notice to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and some countries, without prior
consultation with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
have sent diplomatic representatives to Kosovo, and so
on. All this has given the local people the wrong
impression that Kosovo is on its way to independence.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) reaffirms
the commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The presence of the United Nations in
Kosovo is by no means for the purpose of helping the
locals gain independence. UNMIK should get this
message across unequivocally to the local people. No
error is admissible on this crucial policy. We support
UNMIK's proposal to establish a Joint Committee so as
to enhance the substantive cooperation between UNMIK
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The report
indicates that ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo "is a long
and protracted process, and the international community
must be patient and persistent". However, the
international community must not sit on its hands
regarding any act detrimental to ethnic reconciliation. Any
attempt to discriminate against other ethnic groups in
Kosovo's public life or to push Kosovo towards
independence is dangerous. It will give rise to new
disturbances in the Balkans at large, which will ultimately
victimize the peoples of all countries in this region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its
 

consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.
