Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Allow me to also join
those who have paid tribute to Ambassador Khalilzad.
One may wonder if somebody who has just joined the
Council has the qualifications to pay such tribute. But I
can assure my colleagues that, although I am new to
the Council, I have been around the United Nations for
a while, and during my work I have come across the
Ambassador. We have interacted insofar as some of the
work of the Security Council touches on our interests.
So when I pay tribute, I mean it. I know him. Lastly on
this point, I would like to place on the record his active
encouragement and support for our bid for Security
Council membership. As he can see, it was successful,
and I would like to thank him on that score.

On the resolution just adopted, Uganda welcomes
its adoption and would like to thank the United States
and all of those who have put in a lot of work to see to
it that this resolution was before us today. For a while
now, whenever the occasion arose for us to take part as
outsiders in the open debates in this Council on matters
concerning peacekeeping, Uganda and the African
Union have almost invariably urged the United Nations
to shoulder its responsibility and establish a United
Nations peacekeeping force in Somalia. We are thus
very happy that we have reached this stage. I would
like therefore to thank the Council for this unanimous
decision.

The resolution envisages two stages; one is
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). As Council members know, Uganda is
playing a leading part in AMISOM, along with
Burundi. Without shirking our responsibilities on the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
have stayed the course in Somalia despite the
difficulties and the lack of reinforcement from other
countries. We did so because we believe that the cause
of Somali peace is just and very crucial. Therefore, we
stayed in the hope that the international community
would come in and reinforce us. That is why we
welcome this resolution: it envisages not only
strengthening AMISOM. as it is, but also, at the
appropriate stage, within six months, considering the
establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping force
in Somalia.
Since there are some misgivings about when that
stage will arise, I would like to emphasize that the
situation in Somalia is so unique and challenging that
if we have to wait for a complete restoration of peace
as the sine qua non for deployment of a United Nations

peacekeeping force, we may never achieve that goal.
What I am saying is that the United Nations and the
Security Council should sometimes engage in
peacemaking as well. The presence of United Nations
peacekeepers can be a catalyst for peace. We should
therefore not be timid and wait for when the situation
is completely peaceful. In fact, when it is peaceful,
why would the United Nations be required there? I
would like therefore to flag that issue, so that when the
time comes, we will also bear it in mind.

Lastly, Uganda welcomes the guiding principles
agreed by the parties in the Djibouti peace agreement
on 26 November 2008, in particular the importance of
broad-based and representative institutions reached
through a political process that is ultimately inclusive.
The responsibility for peace in Somalia is ultimately
that of the Somali people. Therefore this is a challenge
to them. The Council has given encouragement and has
spoken, but the challenge is for the Somali people to
move fast and unify themselves, putting such
institutions in place. Then the international community
can come to their support.

