Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/1175), which underlines
the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the progress of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and provides an update on the situation on the ground.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas for his
insightful briefing to the Council.

Indonesia supports and commends the work
of UNOWAS in its good offices and preventive
diplomacy in West Africa and the Sahel. We are of the
view that, albeit relatively underpublicized, conflict
prevention remains a central responsibility for the
whole Organization, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

We believe that engagement by UNOWAS
with Governments, civil societies and regional and
subregional organizations is crucial to addressing both
the immediate and the deeper causes of conflicts in the
region. Having said that, allow me to highlight three
pertinent points with regard to ensuring stability and
sustained peace in West Africa and the Sahel.
First, Indonesia welcomes the positive developments
in West Africa and the Sahel, including elections,
progress on national reconciliation and political dialogue
in many parts of the region. We cannot overemphasize
the importance of peaceful and transparent elections in
laying the ground for the consolidation of democracy,
good governance and Government effectiveness in
delivering public services.

Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
continued threat posed by terrorist groups and criminal
networks to security in West Africa and the Sahel,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. As
the report suggests, the organizational capacities and
reach of Violent extremist groups are increasingly
sophisticated. There has also been an increase in the
casualties inflicted on civilians and the military. It
is therefore important that we further strengthen the
collective response to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The threat posed by Boko Haram is still
evident, as Mr. Chambas reports. Terrorism and violent
extremism have affected the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to people in dire need of help. We also note
the increase in maritime threats and piracy off the
coast of West Africa, which continue to pose a threat to
peace, security and development in the region.

Indonesia welcomes the leadership of the countries
of West Africa and the Sahel in spearheading initiatives
to address security challenges through the Multinational
Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Indonesia sees the
need for continued support, particularly in capacity-
building and predictable financing for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force. Yet as we have so often heard, a military-
focused solution alone is not sufficient to address
the deeper drivers of insecurity across the region.
Security initiatives must be complemented by efforts
to address the root causes of instability. State presence
and governance, development and social inclusion,
employment and livelihoods, as well as environmental
pressures, desertification and climate change, are areas
that should be focused on.

We are of the view that a holistic approach that
encompasses the dimensions of peace and security,
development and human rights is essential. In that
regard, we underline the importance of economic
development and call on the international community
to support efforts in that area aimed at helping to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. We also
acknowledge the role of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in sustaining peace and peacebuilding efforts. Its
focus on reconstruction and institution-building is very
important for laying the foundations for sustainable
development in the region. We also look forward to
greater cooperation between the PBC and the Security
Council in that regard.

This brings me to my third and last point. Many
of the security challenges in West Africa and the
Sahel are cross-border and intertwined in nature.
There is a pressing need for enhanced cooperation
in the regional context. We should also work to forge
greater cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We View the
role of UNOWAS in partnership with Governments,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as other
international organizations, as crucial in supporting
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. I was also glad to hear in the
Special Representative's briefing just now that his
Office is working closely with regional actors to
strengthen the role of women in the region. We look
forward to that. We also look forward the strategic
review of UNOWAS in 2019 and hope that it will result
in enhancing the Office's capacity to carry out its
important mandate.

In conclusion, I would also like to pay tribute to the
many United Nations peacekeepers, Blue Helmets and
personnel on the ground who have done a remarkable
job and played an important role in fostering peace
and stability in the region. We are also honoured that
Indonesian peacekeepers are involved in that regard.

