Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank the Prosecutor for
her briefing.

Poland remains supportive of the efforts of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to fight impunity
and ensure accountability for those responsible for the
most serious crimes ofinternational concern committed
in Libya. We are grateful for the commitment of the
Prosecutor and her team in that regard, despite the
difficult situation on the ground and the limited
resources available.

Poland welcomes the cooperation of States and
other stakeholders, including civil society, with the
Office of the Prosecutor regarding its investigations
of the situation in Libya and encourages its
further development. At the same time, we echo the
Prosecutor's request for cooperation from the relevant
authorities in executing the outstanding arrest warrants
issued by the Court in connection with the situation
in Libya. We also endorse Ms. Bensouda's call on the
relevant States to take all steps within their power to
ensure the arrest and surrender of the suspects to the
ICC without further delay. We recognize the latter as a
crucial step not only in fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, but also in strengthening the rule of
law and deterring further crimes, which is crucial
for achieving peace, security, stability and prosperity
in Libya.

Cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor is
most important, given the multiple serious violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law that have reportedly been committed
since the previous report of the Prosecutor was issued.
Poland condemns such acts and calls on all parties and
armed groups involved in the fighting to fully respect
the relevant laws. We remain deeply concerned about the
situation of both the people of Libya and the migrants
and refugees living there. At the same time, we are
grateful for the Office's monitoring, investigative and
analytical activities related to such crimes and its focus
on the strategy of cooperation and coordination with
Libya and other relevant States in support of nationally
led investigations and prosecutions.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the call for
an end to all violations, for respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law, for support for the ICC's ever more
Vital work and for the political process in Libya, and for
sparing no effort to achieve peace and justice there. The
people of Libya deserve no less.

