Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation and for
his work.

France aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

France welcomes the fact that the European
perspective today serves as the main engine for
the development and consolidation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Its recent application to join the European
Union reflects the overwhelming support of that
perspective within the Bosnian population, as well as
the unanimity that exists around this topic within the
collegial Presidency of the country. The Council noted
these developments that in resolution 2247 (2015),
the most recent resolution on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which was adopted unanimously on
10 November.
In that context, the European Union will continue
now more than ever to support the Bosnian and
Herzegovina authorities in the implementation of
reforms that meet the economic and social aspirations
of the population. The reform agenda adopted last year
is crucial to that end. We welcome the fact that it has
already produced initial concrete results, such as the
adoption of new labour legislation at the entity level.

Nonetheless, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities must bear in mind that their candidacy is
only the beginning of a long and demanding process
that will require efforts at the central State and entity
levels. It is especially important that a fully operational
European coordination mechanism be set up as soon
as possible, that significant progress be achieved
in the implementation of the reform agenda and the
Stabilization and Association Agreement, and that the
country advance towards a judicial system that is fully
independent, impartial and effective.

More than 20 years after their signing, the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords remain the cornerstone
of stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will be up
to the Bosnians themselves to ensure that, when the
time is right, their institutions evolve. At a time when
the country is facing elections, we call on all political
forces to set aside divisive rhetoric that is as outdated
as it is dangerous in favour of the construction of the
future. Local campaigns should not pit one side against
the other on the basis of hatred and rancour, but should
lead to constructive discussion of political projects.
Faced with mass unemployment, Bosnians deserve
that priority be given to the economic development of
the territories.

All Bosnians deserve the right to express
themselves democratically in free and fair elections.
As such, we remain concerned about the situation of
the city of Mostar. Indeed, due to the lack of consensus
between political forces, its inhabitants have been
deprived of their most basic civil rights at the local
level for nearly eight years. To accept such a status
quo would be irresponsible. However, the only viable
solution will be one that creates a consensus among
local players. France therefore calls upon those local
players to do their all to ensure that elections can be
held this year, in respect for the principles reaffirmed
by the Peace Implementation Council's communique of
2 December 2015.

We note with satisfaction the statements issued
by the Republika Srpska authorities on the indefinite
postponement of the referendum project, which could
have challenged the competence of the central State in
the judicial field. Whether it refers to the functioning
of judicial institutions or public holidays, compromise
solutions must be found. That is in the interest
of everyone.

Today, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
despite its weaknesses, seems to be moving in the
right direction of normalization. While there is no
imminent risk of destabilization, the presence of the
international community remains necessary at this
stage. Its framework ofreference remains, of course, the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords. We therefore call on all
parties to cooperate with the institutions mentioned in
the Peace Accords, notably the High Representative and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
The absence of manipulation and respect for the rulings
of the Tribunal are crucial in order to prevent the
revival of dangerous intercommunal tensions. We call
on everyone to bear their responsibilities.

Our goal for the coming years remains, without
undermining the fundamental principles of the
Dayton-Paris Peace Accords, the fully adapt the
international presence to current realities on the ground.
The consideration of the reconfiguration of the Office
of the High Representative should therefore continue.

In the 20 years after experiencing the horror of
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina is today advancing in
the right direction, with the support of the European
Union and its other partners. The responsibility of the
international community, including the Council, is to
encourage it to continue along that path.

