Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
condemning the Al-Shabaab attack this weekend in
Mogadishu. Our colleague, Ambassador Yusuf Bari-
Bari, Somalia's Permanent Representative to the
United Nations in Geneva, was among those killed.
Ambassador Yusuf will be remembered as someone
who worked tirelessly at the Human Rights Council
to improve the lives of others. I offer our heartfelt
condolences to the people and Government of Somalia.
These senseless attacks will not dent this Council's
resolve to support the people of Somalia.

We thank you and your Mission, Sir, for the energy
and leadership shown during this month's presidency.
We welcome the fact that this meeting is again being
held in public. We covered a huge amount in March,
and others during this debate have enumerated the
numerous aspects on the agenda, so I would like to
focus on our preventative work.

We welcome the concrete actions on children
and armed conflict proposed in the open debate last
week and we support the continued strengthening
of our relationships with regional and subregional
organizations, as seen in our visit to Addis Ababa
and by the first visit to the United Nations by the new
European Union High Representative. I want to focus
in particular on the visit of the Security Council to the
Central African Republic, Burundi and the African
Union. It is good for the Council to travel, and making it
happen takes a huge amount of work on the part of both
the presidency and the Secretariat. I will touch on three
areas in particular: first, the importance of effective
and efficient peacekeeping; secondly, the significance
of up-coming elections; and, thirdly, the value of strong
and flexible models for regional cooperation.
First, with regard to peacekeeping, during our visit
to the Central African Republic the potential of that
country was clear for everybody to see: hardworking
people and significant natural resources. The problem is
how to ensure the security necessary for development to
take hold. We welcome the role that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) has played in
delivering such security, in conjunction with Sangaris
and the European Union-led force (EUFOR). The
increase ofthe MINUSCA troop ceiling this month was
another welcome step forward to meet the substantial
protection-of-Civilians challenge in the Central African
Republic, in particular as EUFOR draws down. But as
we look ahead to the peace operations review later this
year, we must also think about how we can empower
and incentivize host Governments to embed security
so that missions can responsibly draw down when the
time is right. As our debate on Haiti (see S/PV.7408)
this month showed, clear planning for the transition
away from peacekeeping is Vital for security gains to
become sustainable.

Part of that transition process brings me to my
second point - holding free and fair elections. That
is particularly relevant this year. In Africa alone, there
will be 11 presidential and parliamentary elections in
2015. And as we saw on our visit, Burundi's election
in June will be an important opportunity to showcase
how far that country has progressed under Arusha in
the past 20 years. There is much to celebrate in that
progress, including the increased contribution made
by Burundian peacekeepers. Over 1,200 are deployed,
including in the Central African Republic. But we are
concerned by plans for a presidential third term. That
would risk undermining the stability that President
Nkurunziza has done so much to bring about. I am
pleased that so many members ofthe Council made that
clear in our meeting with him.

Finally, on regional cooperation, let me turn to our
consultations with the African Union in Addis Ababa.
We welcome such regular consultations and we are keen
to make future discussions as focused and interactive
as possible. As the Permanent Representative of
Chad has said, limiting the agenda to fewer items and
concentrating on the urgent issues would provide greater
value to our meetings. As we heard from the European
Union High Representative, regional and subregional
group, such as the European and African Unions, will
play a vital role working with the United Nations in the
future. We therefore support more focused contact to
help us achieve that goal.
Let me close on a sombre note. This month marked
the fourth anniversary of the start of the crisis in Syria.
The continued suffering of those in Syria and the region
is a direct consequence of Al-Assad's refusal to give all
Syrian people a voice, his failure to preserve security
and his unwillingness to cooperate with the region.
We must be mindful of the lessons learnt from Syria,
in particular that those who cling to power without
thinking of their people undermine stability rather than
strengthen it.

