Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Netherlands presidency for organizing today's open
debate on an issue of such importance for many of our
delegations. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for sharing their insights.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the various Groups of Friends to which we belong.

Peacekeeping is the flagship contribution of the
United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Bangladesh feels proud to have
been associated with it over the last three decades.
Peacekeeping is no longer a uniform, monolithic
enterprise. There have been major shifts in peacekeeping
mandates, theatres and operational modalities over
the years. All concerned stakeholders, including the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat, have shown varying
degrees of adaptability in response to those shifts.
Increased partnership with regional and subregional
organizations and the growing participation of women
in peacekeeping have become regular features.

Notions of review and reform are now embedded
in peacekeeping. However, there is no specific
institutional mechanism within the Secretariat to steer
the reform initiatives in a coherent and sustainable
manner. In the context of the Secretary-General's broad
vision for reform, this issue in particular deserves to
be addressed.

The focus on collective action at today's open
debate is indeed pertinent. We all agree on the need for
reform, but we diverge on ways to make that happen.
In today's complex and precarious peacekeeping
environment, there are certain critical issues where
we need to strive for a common understanding. The
fatalities among peacekeepers were at a record high
last year. We must get our acts together to reverse
that trend. We can start with renewed commitment
to a set of issues that would be mutually reinforced
through differentiated responsibilities assumed by the
concerned stakeholders. Our delegation would support
any constructive suggestion to that effect, including
the possibility of a General Assembly resolution on the
safety and security of peacekeepers.

The political primacy of peacekeeping operations
is a sine qua non. Where the political process stagnates
or falters, civilians become more vulnerable to
indiscriminate attacks and peacekeepers get further
exposed to asymmetric threats. It is crucial that an
objective assessment of the political process guide the
design and review of peacekeeping mandates. A long-
term prognosis about sustaining peace on the ground
should determine sequenced and prioritized mandates
tailored to the specific context.

The questions of the mindset and performance of
peacekeepers have recently gained a lot of attention.
In our view, the military and policy components
of peacekeeping missions generally demonstrate a
readiness to adapt their mindsets towards facilitating
effective mandate delivery. It is expected that the
Security Council and other stakeholders will also show
sufficient responsiveness to the messages coming from
the field and therefore adjust their own mindsets and
usual frames of reference.

Our peacekeepers remain open to receiving
objective assessment and appraisal oftheir performance.
We recognize the rather belated yet positive initiative to
develop a coordinated performance-evaluation policy
framework, which we stress should be informed by
regular, triangular consultations. However, performance
cannot be seen in isolation from the fundamental
questions of predictable needs-based resources and
critical enablers specific to each peacekeeping mission.

Member States in a position to provide resources
and specialized equipment and training must come
forward with an unequivocal commitment to helping
to enhance the situational awareness, access, agility
and performance of peacekeepers. The decisive factor
of mission leadership and the enabling role of host
States need not be overemphasized. There needs to be
improvement on a range of issues from rapid deployment
to unimpeded access, from physical security to human
intelligence gathering, from expectation management
to reducing environmental footprints.

The current trends do not augur well. We
can certainly do better by mobilizing our shared
commitments and collective actions. Let today's open
debate help chart a course in that direction.

