Ms. Bavdaz Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to begin
by thanking the Peruvian presidency of the Security
Council for putting the issue of linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime on the
agenda of the Council. It has been over four years since
the Council discussed this topic (see S/PV.7351) and
adopted resolution 2195 (2014). Let me also thank all
three briefers from this morning.

The timing for this debate could therefore hardly
be more appropriate given that the means and threats
of terrorism are becoming increasingly complex, and
the same holds true for organized crime. With greater
involvement of new technologies, the interlinkages are
more difficult to uncover and fight.

I also wish to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Head of Delegation of the
European Union (EU) and would like to make some
observations and comments in my national capacity.

Terrorism and crime have often been treated as
differentphenomenabecause ofthe differentmotivations
behind them. However, the growing convergence of
organized crime and terror groups over the past several
decades is a global trend threatening the security
interests ofmany States worldwide. This phenomenon is
not new. Indeed, it is an established fact that organized
crime groups and terrorist groups often operate in
similar ways, carrying out the same types of criminal
activities and sharing organizational characteristics.

Commonalties include the transnational character,
the financing through the commission of criminal/
illegal activities, and the ability to instil fear. This
blurring of the traditional lines of distinction between
terrorism and other forms of serious organized crime
calls for a fine-tuning by States of policies designed
to prevent and combat the activities of terrorist and
organized-crime groups so as to optimize their impact
and provide maximum security to citizens, while
respecting the rule of law, human rights and democracy.

We believe that regional cooperation is one of the
most effective ways of coping with this pressing and
demanding issue. Pursuant to a proposal by Slovenia,
the EU supported the development of the Western
Balkan Counter-Terrorism initiative into the Integrative
Internal Security Governance concept, which includes
other prominent areas of internal security cooperation,
namely, prevention of violent extremism and the
fight against terrorism, the fight against serious and
organized crime, and border security. Its policy goals
aim to strengthen intelligence-led policing, improving
regional instruments and bolstering operational
cooperation between the EU and the Western Balkans.

In 2017, Interior Ministers of the region, together
with international and EU partners, launched the
implementation process, appointing a support group
to implement the new policy. The structure brought
together existing capacities and expertise of regional
cooperation mechanisms and is hosted by the regional
office of the Geneva Centre for Security Sector
Governance, in Ljubljana, my capital.

Today's debate has clearly shown once again the
serious threat that interconnections between organized
crime and terrorism pose to international peace and
security. Legislation and law enforcement almost
always seem to be a step behind, which should be
reason enough for all States to stay vigilant, update
their legislation accordingly and in a timely manner,
and most of all invest in international cooperation.

We have implemented a variety of these policy
choices in recent decades at the subregional, regional
and international levels and working with the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. If we
truly want to fight both of these threats, we simply have
to comply with the rules we have already established
and cooperate. No State or Government can fight these
threats alone. Terrorism and organized crime know no
boundaries. Neither should we in fighting them. The
draft resolution that the Security Council will adopt
later this month should therefore necessarily focus on
all these different aspects of threats as well as on our
joint response to them.

Let me once again thank you, Mr. President, for
this initiative.

