Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): I would also like to begin
by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide, for his
comprehensive briefing and for presenting the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Afghanistan. We thank Mr. Eide for the exemplary
leadership he has provided under extremely harsh
circumstances. At the same time, we extend our thanks
to the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication and
courage.

We also wish like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Spanta, to this
table and thank him for his valuable contribution today.

Croatia welcomes the holding last month of the
first presidential and provincial council elections run
entirely by the Afghan Government, with the support
of UNDP/ELECT. In the same breath, we would like to
praise the people of Afghanistan for their participation
in determining the future course of their country
11
despite the many serious difficulties they face and the
self-evident risks involved.

As we have been informed, there have been grave
allegations that the recent elections were marred by
serious irregularities and fraud. It is thanks to existing
electoral safeguards - including national and
international observers, as well as a large number of
candidate agents - that much of the fraud that did
occur was discovered and referred to the relevant
institutions. We hope that the process currently
underway within the Electoral Complaints Commission
will soon be completed and enable the Independent
Election Commission to certify the election results.

Croatia deplores not only the loss of life and the
barbaric destruction that occurred during preparations
for the elections as well as on election day itself, but
also a new height in the numbers of those maimed and
killed as a result of the ever-increasing violence in the
country. We strongly condemn the deliberate targeting
of civilians and the reliance on asymmetric tactics in
total disregard of human life and basic human values.

Croatia welcomes the new approach adopted by
the new Commander of the International Security
Assistance Force, with the protection of civilians as its
centre and the further Afghanization of security
operations. We note with satisfaction that there is
further progress in coordinating key Afghan security
institutions, including the acceleration of recruitment
and training of the Afghan National Army.

It is important to stress that, although we see the
military effort as an important and integral part of the
overall solution in Afghanistan, we agree with the
overall assessment that military means alone will not
bring final success in the country. Carefully planned
and attentively implemented national reconciliation
programmes, carried out under well-known conditions,
should, in our opinion, greatly contribute to this aim.

The new Government to be formed on the basis
of generally accepted electoral results is expected to
reaffirm its relationship with the international
community and its own people. We share the
assessment of the Secretary-General that the level of
trust that the future Afghan Government can build with
its people will impact the level of support that the
Governments of donor and troop-contributing countries
receive from their constituencies for continuing
support to the efforts of the Afghan Government.
It is important that the new Government agenda
address the main concerns of the Afghan population,
especially security, the rule of law, the fight against
corruption and the culture of impunity, as well as
capacity-building. Similarly, in the economic sector the
Government must develop a clear set of priorities with
particular emphasis on Afghanistan's main potentials:
agriculture, mineral resources and human development.

It is encouraging to learn that the process of
priority-setting and donor alignments within the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board has significantly
improved. Furthermore, Croatia is encouraged by
reports of enhanced donor coordination and the
increased readiness of donors to adjust resources in
order to support well-formulated high-impact projects
and policies that can bring considerable improvements,
not only in post-combat areas but also in stable areas
open to insurgents. Keeping in mind the importance
and magnitude of the task assigned to UNAMA,
Croatia strongly supports the further strengthening of
the Mission and calls for additional resources.

Finally, Croatia finds the development
benchmarks drawn from the UNAMA mandate a useful
tool which the Council can use to follow the progress
towards the objectives it set for Afghanistan. Croatia
hopes they will further contribute to fulfilment of
UNAMA's tasks and responsibilities.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to Norma
Chan for her tireless work, to thank her for all of the
assistance we received throughout the years and to
wish her all the best in her future.

