Mr. Yamamoto (Japan): First of all, I wish to
welcome the decision of the Security Council to
convene this open meeting on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as this is an
issue of great concern to all Member States. I would
also like to commend the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in preparing the
third report of the Secretary-General on this issue.

This report provides us with insightful analyses
and practical observations on the subjects of access to
vulnerable populations, separation of civilians and
armed elements, as well as rule of law, justice and
reconciliation, based on the actual experience of the
various departments and organs of the United Nations
that have been engaged in protecting civilians in armed
conflict. It also identifies new challenges, such as
sexual exploitation, commercial exploitation and
terrorism, as well as their impact on the protection of
civilians.

I would now like to make three brief comments
on this important issue.

First, in our View, information on the activities at
Headquarters should be widely disseminated to all
regions of the world, while at the same time the views
of partners from various regions should be duly
reflected in the activities at Headquarters. Through
such interaction, we would be in a better position to
develop more practical and effective ways of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. In this regard, my
Government welcomes the workshops that have been
held in South Africa and in Japan and looks forward to
additional workshops that, we understand, will be
convened in other regions of the world next year.

Also, we are of the View that all Member States
need to be fully briefed on what the Security Council
has produced on this issue, including the aide-memoire,
and in the future it is hoped that interested Member
States will have an opportunity to express their views
before the deliberations of the Security Council lead to
some new outcome. In this connection, the Government
of Japan welcomes the initiative that the mission of
Norway and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs have taken to set up a support
group on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which would serve as a forum for an
exchange of information and views among interested
parties.

Secondly, it is important that the outcome of the
deliberations on this issue be mainstreamed in other
work of the Security Council, in particular when
dealing with peace and the security of specific
countries and regions. In this regard, it is highly
desirable that actual peacekeeping operations be
conducted along the lines suggested by the aide-
memoire. Again, the efforts to promote dialogue among
all parties concerned are very important.

In this connection, we need to have a credible
roadmap that can translate the recommendations of the
Secretary-General into practical measures applicable
on the ground. We therefore welcome the provisional
version of the roadmap contained in the report of the
Secretary-General as an initial step in the right
direction and we are ready to participate in the work of
further elaborating it.

Thirdly, we welcome the progress that has been
made so far in the area of coordination among the
relevant departments of the Secretariat, as well as other
organs of the United Nations system, which makes it
possible to address this important issue more
effectively. The Government of Japan believes that
such coordination should be further strengthened and
continuously reviewed. For example, in our view the
application of various points in the aide-memoire to
each peacekeeping mandate requires closer, more
detailed and constant coordination between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Also, with regard to the issues of women, peace
and security; children and armed conflict; and the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which are
separate but closely interrelated, we believe the
Council should address them in a coherent, more
integrated manner so as to avoid any inconsistencies,
confusion or duplication among the different organs
that are assigned separately to carry out their duties
under their respective mandates.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
task that should be addressed in all its complexity by
the full array of partners, including warring parties,
when necessary. Recognizing the gravity of the issue,
we must continue to make every effort towards this
end, even when a particular situation may seem
desperate. I would like to conclude my statement by
assuring the Security Council of the firm intention of
the Government of Japan to continue to fully
participate in these joint efforts.

