Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): We thank Mr. David Shearer for his hard work and that of all personnel of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We assure him of our full support. I also thank Ms. Sunday for her briefing. I would like to welcome our good friend Ambassador Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan, to today's briefing. Viet Nam is closely following recent developments in South Sudan. We highly welcome the decision taken by all stakeholders to establish the transitional Government, including President Salva Kiir and First Vice-President Riek Machar. We commend the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union (AU), South Africa and other relevant parties. It is an extremely important achievement, which we believe will lay the foundation for long-term peace and prosperity in South Sudan. In the light of the recent developments, allow me to make the following observations. First, we reiterate the importance of the full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan by the parties in South Sudan. The establishment of a transitional Government marks the beginning of a new period, but much work remains to be done. Viet Nam calls on the parties to resolve the pending issues in a steady manner, in the spirit of mutual trust and understanding. We are strongly convinced that, if the parties show similar will and commitment as when they formed the Transitional Government, they will be able to resolve all pending matters. We look forward to the national dialogue conference, which will take place on 16 March. We also welcome the recent peace talks in Rome between the Government and the non-signatories to the peace agreement. Within our capacity, including as the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, we will continue to support all efforts in the process. Secondly, we are encouraged to see that the ceasefire has been maintained in most parts of the country and the security situation has mostly remained stable, as stated in the most recent report of the Secretary- General on UNMISS (S/2020/145). We also note that the issue of intercommunal violence remains a challenge. Along with the efforts to establish the Transitional Government, Viet Nam calls on all relevant parties in South Sudan to continue to respect the ceasefire and refrain from any actions that might undermine efforts towards sustainable peace. Further effective measures are also needed to address the issue of intercommunal violence and its root causes. We commend the work and efforts of UNMISS, especially that of female peacekeepers, in the area of the protection of civilians. The increased participation of women peacekeepers, as well as their safety and security, should be further promoted. Vietnamese women represent 16 per cent of our peacekeepers in UNMISS, and they do an excellent job. The full potential of women remains to be unlocked. Thirdly, we welcome the efforts of the regional and subregional organizations, namely, IGAD and the AU, in facilitating the implementation of the peace agreement. The role of IGAD, as guarantor of the peace agreement, will continue to be critical in the transitional period. We welcome the efforts of UNMISS and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in providing good offices for the parties in South Sudan and IGAD. We hope that the United Nations, AU and IGAD can support more confidence-building measures to facilitate the work of the transitional Government. Fourthly, Viet Nam warmly welcomes the recent positive economic development in South Sudan. The forecast of 8.2 per cent gross domestic product growth in 2020 is very encouraging. At the same time, we acknowledge the critical humanitarian challenges that the people in South Sudan still face. We call on the Government of South Sudan and other parties in South Sudan to put forth their best efforts in promoting sustainable livelihoods for the people. Fifthly, we reiterate our view that sanctions measures should be used as a tool to promote sustainable peace and security in the country and be rightly targeted. They should not serve to negatively affect the livelihoods of the people, the development of the country or the effective functioning and capacity of the Government, which is responsible for ensuring security and stability in the country. Those measures are subjected to adjustments in the light of the progress achieved in the peace and reconciliation process and the implementation of the commitments of the parties. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position in supporting the unity, peace, stability and sovereignty of South Sudan.
