Mr. Takasu (Japan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. We are grateful
to Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his team for their
excellent presidency in November.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Moreno-
Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his detailed report on recent activities
and for his good presentation this morning. As an
active member of the Court, Japan highly values the
Prosecutor's efforts to implement resolution 1593
(2005), which Japan was honoured to vote in favour of
at the time of its adoption.

It is a fundamental principle that impunity must
not be condoned in respect of any crime, and
particularly the most serious crimes of international
concern, such as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. That principle must be applied. The pursuit
of justice is closely interlinked with durable peace, and
both must be pursued in parallel.

Japan respects the independence and decisions of
the ICC on the Darfur cases emanating from resolution
1593 (2005). Japan believes that the international
community should be united in continuing to resolutely
seek a solution that reconciles peace and justice. In that
regard, we are closely following the development of
the political and humanitarian situation in order to
bring justice and peace to Darfur.

With regard to the three cases at the prosecutorial
stage, the first set of arrest warrants, which were issued
more than two years ago, and the second issue of an
arrest warrant in March are still outstanding. In the
third case, the voluntary appearance of Mr. Abu Garda
for the confirmation of charges hearing in October is
among the notable developments of the past six
months. However, those developments are neither
substantial nor expeditious enough. We urge the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur to take the necessary actions
expeditiously with regard to those cases and to address
the issues of justice and peace in a manner consistent
with resolution 1593 (2005) and the presidential
statement of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/2l).

Resolution 1593 (2005) emphasizes the
promotion of the rule of law, the protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity, as well as the
need to promote healing and reconciliation. In that
respect, the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
carried out a comprehensive analysis of the issues of
peace, justice, accountability, impunity and
reconciliation in Darfur. We acknowledge the
cooperation of the African Union and the tireless
efforts of former President Mbeki as Chairman of the
Panel. We hope that such efforts serve to facilitate the
ongoing peace process in Doha.

With regard to the specific recommendations of
the report, in-depth consideration and review will be
necessary. We look forward to the constructive
discussion of the report with the members of the Panel
later this month. Since the issue of Darfur relates to
complex historical, sociocultural, economic and
political concerns, the international community should
take a comprehensive approach to seeking an inclusive
and multilateral solution.

The Security Council needs to address
comprehensively the issue of impunity and justice, the
humanitarian and security situation, the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the peace process, including general
elections. At the same time, justice cannot be

09-6333]
compromised. To promote durable peace, it is essential
to strengthen the justice system in the Sudan. We
would like to encourage the Government of the Sudan
to take steps to that end.

The Rome Statute represents a milestone in the
development of international criminal justice. The ICC
was established based on the strong will and firm belief
of the international community that the most serious
crimes of international concern should not go
unpunished. The ICC functions most effectively when
it is universally respected and when all States extend
their full cooperation to the Court. Japan urges all
States to cooperate with the ICC and to join hands in
the effort to universalize the Rome Statute.

The Security Council has the responsibility to
monitor the situation closely and to continue to make
efforts to ensure that the Government of the Sudan and
all other concerned parties fully cooperate with and
provide assistance to the ICC, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). Japan is committed to seeking
a way forward in close consultation with the concerned
States and international and regional partners.

