Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I
commend your vision, Mr. President, in having this
important meeting today. As we discussed this morning
regarding East Timor, when other crises divert our
attention we tend to let fall by the wayside some of the
urgent crises before us, and I commend your vision in
scheduling this meeting today despite the other
pressing business that is occurring around the world.

I would also like to pay a special tribute to
Carolyn McAskie for her leadership on this issue, as
well as for her briefing on the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - as depressing
as that situation is. As the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for the United Nations she has a somewhat
Sisyphean task in trying to address all these issues. We
admire her tenacity in continuing to address what is by
all accounts a very depressing and discouraging
situation.

After looking at the situation and listening to Ms.
McAskie's briefing and reviewing the notes that she
passed out, I think that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo demands the continued attention
of the international community and continued pressing
by the international community on all sides to do more.
The people about whose suffering we have just heard
certainly deserve no less. I think one has to admit that
the Governments of the region - of the Congo, and
particularly of Rwanda, Uganda and, obviously, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the various armed Congolese and other
foreign rebel factions - all share responsibility for this
humanitarian crisis that we have just heard described
here today. I hope that if there is one unequivocal and
clear message to both the Governments involved and
the rebel sides involved it is that they should all hear
today's programme of the international community and
recommit themselves to the search for peace. To do
otherwise is simply unconscionable.

It is important to remember that this crisis, this
disaster - and I think that by all accounts it has to be
termed a disaster on every human level - is entirely
man-made, and that means it can be entirely solved by
men, and of course by women as well. As Ambassador
Levitte pointed out earlier, we do not have the choice
of giving up. We must continue to address this issue. If
one looks at this man-made disaster, the only
conclusion one can draw is a broad indictment of those
who seek to win or retain power by the force of arms.

The withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000) and, let us not
forget, the Lusaka Agreement, which all these parties
signed, would greatly benefit the human rights and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Governments have to be held accountable
to their people and responsive to their needs. It is our
view that responsive Governments resting on broad
bases of support are necessary for the resolution of
humanitarian crises.

The solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo involves political will,
resources and time. Thus far the Governments involved
have failed to demonstrate the political will, the
international community has failed to marshal the
necessary resources, and the lack of a functioning
peace agreement has meant that the time for recovery
continues to be delayed.

A solution will also require combating the deadly
combination of three factors that have brought the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to its present state.
These three factors are foreign aggression, internal
armed rebellion and unaccountable Government. We
must work together to address all three.

During our January 2000 Security Council
presidency, Ambassador Holbrooke, working with our
Ambassadors in the region, asked Presidents Museveni
and Kabila to cooperate in the reopening of the Congo
River to civilian traffic. At the time, that proposal was
not accepted, but after 11 months it deserves to be
reconsidered. We call on Presidents Kabila and
Museveni, as well as Movement for the Liberation of
the Congo (MLC) leader Jean-Pierre Bemba, to work
together to implement a viable ceasefire that should
include the reopening of the Congo River to civilian
traffic.

The well-being of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as their neighbours in
the Republic of the Congo and the Central African
Republic, is at stake. We make this appeal as part of a
wider call on all parties to facilitate the operations of
the humanitarian community, bearing in mind the fact
that the Congo River and its tributaries are an essential
lifeline for most of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

This Council is united in its support and
admiration for the work of the humanitarian agencies
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Under
difficult conditions, at great expense and often at
considerable risk, the men and women of the United
Nations and of the non-governmental organization and
private voluntary organization communities have tried
to alleviate the suffering caused by callous political
leaders. We know that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is working here in
New York and in Geneva to improve the humanitarian
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We support those efforts, under the overall authority of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Kamel Morjane, and we will continue our own
engagement on behalf of the innocent victims in this
conflict.

Neither the United Nations nor any of its Member
States can impose a solution to the crisis. A solution
must come from the political leadership and be
respected by all of the combatants, foreign and
Congolese. The point of humanitarian assistance is to
sustain vulnerable civilian life until such time as the
political leadership can reach agreement. Until the
parties can do so, we must continue to support the
humanitarian community in its efforts. Those who
facilitate and protect the entry of humanitarian
assistance are to be commended; those who impede or
divert such aid must be condemned for their actions.

The courageous work of Carolyn McAskie and
OCHA and the other humanitarian organizations does
not detract from the urgency of our own tasks. Rather,
it reminds us that the sooner we see the withdrawal of
foreign forces, the transformation of armed
insurgencies into armed political parties and the
creation of accountable government institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the sooner the
Congolese people will be able to take care of
themselves.

In closing, we believe that achieving the political
objectives of a viable framework for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its region
remains the key to resolving the humanitarian crisis.
Until we achieve a peaceful settlement, we must all
work together to support the life-saving work of OCHA
and other organizations that are trying to protect the
innocent victims of this conflict.

