Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to convey the best wishes of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Chile, Soledad Alvear Valenzuela,
who for reasons beyond her control was unable to
participate in this meeting.

I thank the French presidency for convening this
important ministerial-level meeting. I thank the
Secretary-General for his wise words and Sir Jeremy
Greenstock for the report he presented to the Council.

The convening of this meeting is testimony to the
commitment and political will of the international
community to combat one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security.

Condemning terrorism in all of its manifestations
is an ethical and political duty. Terrorism threatens not
only innocent lives but also the moral and civilizational
bases of our societies. We therefore condemn all acts of
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, whatever their
motivation, form or manifestation.

However, that is not enough. What is needed is
effective commitment and a global approach to the
problem on the part of the international community to
confront it, thus contributing to making a safer world,
free from terror. There is no place for neutrality
vis-a-vis those who have placed themselves beyond the
pale of humanity - and even less for tolerance
towards those who harbour or encourage terrorism.

We must proceed on the premise that, in a
globalized world, the fate of each of our countries is
that of all peoples. We share a common space in which
no one can live unmindful of the fears and problems of
others. We have seen with horror the attacks on Bali,
Mombassa and Moscow. No society is safe from this
threat. The fight against terrorism is not only an issue
for Governments; it must include our civil societies and
it is therefore essential to understand that it must
unfold within a framework of legitimacy and of respect
for human rights. It is not possible to fight those who
hate our values by forgetting those very values. No
consideration of effectiveness is so imperative that it
should make us forget those principles.

It was in this spirit of full awareness of the
highest values of humankind that the United Nations
and this Council responded unequivocally to the tragic
events that shook the world on 11 September 2001.
Resolution 1373 (2001) marked the beginning of
unprecedented cooperation to establish the conditions
for combating terrorism effectively in its many
manifestations. It is a resolution of enduring value that
places the Counter-Terrorism Committee at the centre
of a process of cooperation from which no country
should remain aloof.

The work of the Committee offers a unique
opportunity for States, through their political,
legislative, financial and administrative decisions, to
create the conditions for confidence-building in order
to contribute to collective security. The relationship
that unites the Committee and the membership of the
United Nations is a legal one. It is built on clear
international obligations, compliance with which has
an impact on the values and principles that underlie the
Organization's actions.

Following the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
Chile has fulfilled all the obligations established
therein. My country has prioritized efforts to combat
terrorism at the hemispheric level, within the
framework of the Organization of American States,
while at the same time promoting the coordination of
efforts in other forums of subregional cooperation,
such as the Rio Group and the Common Market of the
South.

The draft resolution that we shall adopt today
marks a turning point in the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, so ably led by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, whom we thank for his efforts. Thus far,
the Committee has functioned on the basis of a vertical
relationship with the States Members of the
Organization. We feel it extremely important that, from
today forward, horizontal relationships be established
between countries and relevant international and
regional organizations. The aim of this is not only to
permit States to develop their own capacities for
combating terrorism, but also to help others to develop
them. My country fully supports this new approach,
which emphasizes the elements of cooperation and
envisages support for this effort from relevant
international and regional organizations. A joint
approach is critical to the global anti-terrorism strategy.

Cooperation among States is an essential
component of that new approach, which must go
beyond the exchange of information. Through it,
cooperation will have a long-term impact on efforts to
combat terrorism.

In this regard, it would seem appropriate for the
Committee to work in three directions. First, the
Committee's group of experts should elaborate a
programme of work that includes operational measures
that take into account the differing realities of regions
and countries with a view to channelling technical
assistance so as to ensure the effective implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).

Secondly, we recognize that the participation of
international organizations, particularly those with
special capacities and competence in areas of relevance
to the fight against terrorism, is a key aspect of the
design of objectives and priorities for global action. We
propose the establishment of an inter-agency
coordination segment that covers specific sectoral
actions and programmes. Coordination should also be
enhanced among the various committees of the
Security Council entrusted with the fight against
terrorism.

Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations
must be part of an integrated focus on combating
terrorism. The Committee has launched programmes in
this respect that should be expanded. The Organization
of American States has developed a hemispheric anti-
terrorism policy through the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism.

One contribution of our region in this field has
been the accession of 30 countries to the Inter-
American Convention against Terrorism. The
Convention could serve as a reference in the
negotiation of the draft texts of a comprehensive
convention on terrorism and a convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism that are
currently being developed at the United Nations. Chile
supports the efforts being made to conclude these
negotiations and thus to fill current gaps in
international law in this field. We further propose that
this hemispheric political effort be used in other anti-
terrorism standard-setting and regional coordination
processes. The meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to be held on 7 March will provide a good
opportunity for the further structuring of inter-regional
cooperation.

The United Nations today faces one of the
greatest challenges it has faced since its creation: to
provide an effective response in order to prevent and
eradicate this terrible new threat. We are convinced that
the Organization has the capacity and legitimacy to do
so.

As a member of this Council, Chile wishes to
reiterate its commitment to the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. In assuming the chairmanship of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on sanctions against Al Qaeda, we wish to
promote its work with the help of all the members of
the Council and of the Organization. We do so in our
conviction that the potential of terrorism remains vast
and that the effort to conquer it will be a lengthy one.
Its defeat, however, is inevitable if all members of the
international community fully shoulder their
responsibilities.

