Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): My delegation
wholeheartedly welcomes the final agreement signed on 29
December 1996 between the Government of Guatemala and
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG)
and the fact that the two parties are united at long last in
their willingness to secure peaceful and stable life for their
country.

We congratulate yesterday's adversaries on their
courage and farsightedness, but it is the people of
Guatemala who should be congratulated in the first place.
The end of the war and the commitment of the parties to
implement their agreements will undoubtedly create an
environment favourable to further democratization,
economic recovery and the promotion of the rule of law.

I believe it would not be unfair to say that the
international community in general and the United Nations
in particular deserve to be commended for assisting the
parties in their attempts to peacefully resolve the conflict
and in setting up the framework within which the parties
have agreed to cooperate. In this context my delegation
highly appreciates the contribution made by the United
Nations Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and
of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA).

In the opinion of the Polish delegation, continued
United Nations assistance is indispensable for the successful
implementation of the peace agreements in Guatemala. It
also, and perhaps above all, applies to the agreement on the
definitive ceasefire signed at Oslo on 4 December 1996 and
to the related verification measures. We believe that in light
of previous international investments in the peace process
in Guatemala, we cannot afford to fail to respond
positively to the parties' request to entrust the United
Nations team of military observers with the task of
verification of the above-mentioned agreement.

Consequently, my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution authorizing the attachment of the
group of observers to MINUGUA, as recommended by
the Secretary-General.

Finally, let me pay tribute to the members of the
Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process for
the role they have played in preparing the draft resolution
before us.

