First of all, I would like to thank and congratulate Indonesia for its presidency of the Security Council in August, to wish the Niger good luck for the month of September and to assure the President of the Council of my full support. I thank Stephanie Williams and the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their work, of course, and also for their briefings. We continue to reiterate that there is no military solution in Libya. Once again, France calls for a ceasefire and the resumption of the political process, under the auspices of the United Nations and on the basis of the parameters agreed upon by the Libyans. That must pave the way for elections, the reunification of Libyan institutions and economic and security reforms, which are absolutely essential. In this spirit, the statements of 21 August by the President of the Presidential Council, Faiez Serraj, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Aguila Saleh, represent a positive step. Those statements must now be followed by action on the ground and lead to an immediate and lasting ceasefire, the cessation of military operations in Libya, the dismantling of militias and the resumption of oil production. This momentum, which must be based on reciprocal, credible and verifiable gestures, will lead to the resumption of the political process. We call on Libyan and international actors to make every effort to that end by ceasing hostilities and committing themselves in good faith to supporting these developments. Foreign forces must withdraw from Libya. Such interference is not acceptable. In that regard, we condemn the interference and violations of the arms embargo, the number of which has unfortunately increased since the Berlin Conference of 19 January. France also calls on the parties to continue their efforts to enable the resumption of oil production as soon as possible and the transparent allocation of the resulting revenues. In this perspective, the Council must fully play its role and, in particular, strengthen the mediation of the United Nations and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The Council must be united on the appointment of a new mediator by the Secretary-General without further delay. Almost six months have passed since the resignation of Ghassan Salame. The vacancy in the United Nations mediation must be filled. To enable the United Nations to fully play its role in Libya, we support the United Kingdom as it negotiates an ambitious renewal of UNSMIL's mandate for one year. In particular, we are open close discussion with all our partners within the Council on ways to enhance the effectiveness of the Mission. We propose strengthening UNSMIL's role in supporting a possible ceasefire in Libya and in enforcing the arms embargo. France will remain fully committed to a political solution in Libya in order to put an end to this conflict, which has gone on for too long. To that end, France will continue to support the efforts of the United Nations and their strengthening.
