Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union.

The peace process in the Middle East is at present
encountering serious difficulties. The European Union
attaches the greatest importance to the idea that these
should be overcome by the parties concerned, because the
effort made at the peace Conference inaugurated in Madrid
almost three years ago has produced noteworthy results that
have made it possible to resolve a major portion of the
problems that were impeding reconciliation between Israel
and the Arab world.

The European Union notes that today the most
disturbing problems are those in the negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Nevertheless, the
Government of Israel has just categorically reiterated that
it is resolved to continue its discussions within the agreed
framework. The leaders of the PLO, for their part, have
decided to continue to pursue the peace process. None the
less, they have seen fit to draw the attention of the
international community to the current situation. These
attitudes are encouraging. On the other hand, the
disappointing results of the recent Summit meetings at
ministerial level between the Palestinians and the Israelis,
despite the intervention of mediators, shows the seriousness
of the obstacles that the negotiators have encountered.

The Israeli population is disturbed at the increase in
terrorism. The enemies of the peace process are trying to
destroy it and to impose their own logic - that of war -
by trying to convince public opinion in Israel that the path
of dialogue will lead to deadlock. The European Union
most vigorously condemns recourse to blind violence,
which creates innocent victims. The concern expressed by
the Government of Israel over security matters is therefore
quite legitimate.

The Palestinian Authority must provide itself with the
necessary means and take every possible step, while
respecting human rights, to monitor the activities of
extremists in the regions that it administers. The recently
announced decisions regarding the handing over of the lists
of Palestinian police officers to the Israeli authorities and
the creation of a new security court indicate that the
Palestinian leaders have become aware of the crucial
importance of this matter.

 

But the question of security must not become an
obstacle to progress in the negotiations. The Palestinian
people, which placed great hope in the autonomy
agreements, has the impression that its living conditions
have not substantially changed since. The sealing off of
territories is clearly the most disturbing decision in this
connection, because it deprives numerous Palestinian
families of their income. The delay, in relation to the
initial timetable, in the negotiations on the elections and
in the redeployment of the Israeli army has also
contributed to a feeling of disillusionment noticeable
among the inhabitants of the occupied territories.

The Permanent Observer of Palestine particularly
wished to draw the attention of the international
community to the settlements question. I hardly need go
into any lengthy detail about the position of the European
Union on this topic, as it is based on a number of
Security Council resolutions. These settlements are in
contravention of the provisions of The Hague and Geneva
Conventions governing the occupation regime of occupied
territories. The Israeli Government had taken the
courageous decision to put a freeze on these settlements.
This new departure was in accordance with the
agreements between the Palestinians and the Israelis,
which, inter alia, stipulate that this is a matter that will be
taken up during the final-status negotiations.

The authorization given at the beginning of this year
for new construction on the West Bank and around
Jerusalem is, unfortunately, at variance with the
Declaration of Principles. This is why the European
Union expressed its concern by issuing a declaration in
Brussels on 5 January. Furthermore, it approached the
Israeli Government to alert it to the negative
consequences of this matter. The European Union
reiterates in this meeting of the Security Council its
appeal to the Government of Israel to find ways to settle
this matter, with respect for international law and
commitments solemnly undertaken.

The European Union would like, in conclusion, to
address an appeal to both parties and to all those who
assist them. Courage and political vision have always led
to the most significant results in the region. The European
Union would therefore issue a plea for the prompt
conclusion of the main discussions currently under way
between the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, whether on security, the redeployment of the
army, settlements, continuing the transfer of authority or
the elections, so important to strengthening the legitimacy

 

of the peace process by establishing normal democratic
procedures.

The European Union has already given its financial
and political support to the peace process. I would recall
that it has promised 500 million ECU over five years and,
more importantly, it alone has already expended some $100
million to help to finance the administration of Jericho and
the Gaza Strip and to pay the salaries of the Palestinian
police. The European Union will continue to give its
support. It is at the disposal of the parties whenever needed,
as it has always been, to help them overcome any problems
they may encounter in implementing their decisions.

