Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his update
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Office of the High
Representative has played a critical role for more
than 22 years in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina
move towards peace and prosperity and promoting
the security and stability of the region. I would like to
thank the High Representative sincerely for his great
service and excellent and impartial reporting, and to
convey our continuing support for his Office's mandate,
as the final authority for interpreting the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the language in resolution 2384 (2017), adopted today,
reaffirming his mandate. His role continues to be
pivotal, especially as Bosnia and Herzegovina looks
towards general elections in 2018 and contends with
political divisiveness that threatens to undermine the
gains made under the Agreement.

The continuing challenges highlighted in the
most recent report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see S/2017/922, annex) underscore
that the Council must remain vigilant in the face of
those who seek to weaken the constitutional order of
the single State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United
States remains dedicated to upholding the Dayton Peace
Accords, respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and promoting its
continued European and Euro-Atlantic integration.

We commend the continued work of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Althea and NATO in
promoting security and capacity-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully support the renewal of Althea's
mandate and the important mentorship role that NATO
headquarters in Sarajevo plays in helping to implement
the defence review and modernization plans.

The United States urges for continued progress
towards integration with both NATO and the European
Union (EU). It will require vision and political will. It
will also require real follow-through on commitments,
such as defence property registrations and full and
timely completion of the EU questionnaire. We urge all
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to stay focused on
the much-needed reforms, including on the political,
socioeconomic and electoral fronts. The Government
must work to enhance the rule of law, tackle corruption
and improve the overall political climate in the country
for the benefit of all citizens ofBosnia and Herzegovina.
Tackling such reforms now, before the 2018 election
cycle, is critical. Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders must
do everything possible to ensure that the electoral code
complies with the relevant rulings of both the European
Court of Human Rights and the Constitutional Court.

In advance of next year's election, we also
urge all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to avoid
divisive rhetoric that hardens political differences
and exacerbates ethnic divisions. We share many of
the concerns raised by the High Representative about
the actions of anyone who seeks to erode State-level
institutions, whether by ignoring the decisions of
the Constitutional Court or by acting outside the
established decision-making process. United States
sanctions against Republika Srpska President Milorad
Dodik should serve as a warning to those who seek to
undermine the stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Council should remain united behind the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
its two entities and three constituent peoples. Likewise,
it should support those who seek to protect the State
Constitution and the tenets of the Dayton Peace Accords.

Once again, we look forward to the day when Bosnia
and Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
We look forward to a time when we can say with
absolute confidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
fully implemented the Peace Agreement and is now
a "peaceful, viable State, irreversibly on course for
European integration". But that day has not yet arrived.
We encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders and
all members of the international community to support
the actions and reforms needed to reach that milestone.
Until that time, the international community must
deliver on its commitments to the Office of the High
Representative to help ensure that it fulfils its mandate.

