Mr. Gertze: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I wish to thank the United States for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on the issue
of the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
has, at its heart, the need to address the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
self-determination.

It is clear that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
remains among the primary threats to international
peace and security. It presents a litmus test for the
credibility of the United Nations, including the Council.
Indeed, while the decade-long blockade in Gaza shows
no sign of ending, this year marks 70 years since General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) partitioned the Mandate
for Palestine into two States. It also marks 50 years of
the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. But the passage of time has not diminished
either the gravity or the urgency of resolving the issue.
How many more generations of Palestinians and Israelis
must pay the price of the occupation, and at what point
will we say "enough"?

The status quo is unsustainable and urgent steps
are needed to reverse negative trends on the ground,
which are eroding the two-State solution based on the
1967 lines that this Council has endorsed and which
constitutes the only viable path for Palestinians and
Israelis to realize their national aspirations in line
with international law. The Committee notes the
ongoing efforts by Egypt, France, Jordan, the Russian
Federation, the United States and other Member States,
as well as the reiteration by the League of Arab States,
most recently at the Arab Summit in Amman, of its
Peace Initiative to resolve the question of Palestine. It
emphasizes that any new efforts should maintain the
two-State solution.

In order to stand the test of time, any viable
solution will require a just peace: a set of conditions
under which Palestinians and Israelis can live side by
side, in peaceful coexistence, inside secure borders and
in charge oftheir own destiny. Those conditions require
respect for basic human rights - the right to live in
dignity with the freedoms of movement and expression.
The use of force or violence of any type, by anyone, or
its incitement, has no role in the search for peace and
must be rejected. The Committee also believes in the
utmost imperative of achieving intra-Palestinian unity.

The Committee reiterates the international
consensus that the illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are a major
obstacle to the attainment ofajust peace on the basis of
the two-State solution. The announcement on 31 March
by the Government of Israel of the construction of the
Emek Shilo settlement deep inside the West Bank, the
first new settlement in the West Bank in two decades,
can only be seen as blatant defiance of United Nations
resolutions and disregard for international law. The
Committee notes with regret the spike in illegal
settlements and other activities cited in the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (see S/PV.7908) and expresses
its expectation that future reports will be in a written
format and include recommendations that will, inter
alia, hold to account those who violate the resolution
and compel compliance with its provisions.

The Committee would also like to draw the
Council's attention to the shrinking space for human
rights defenders in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including access restrictions imposed on Israeli
citizens who speak in favour of peace, as reported
by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967
(see A/71/554). Given the continuing forced transfers,
including of Bedouins, evictions, demolitions and the
obstruction of humanitarian assistance in the occupied
territory, the Committee calls upon Israel to meet
its obligations as an occupying Power and to desist
from imposing demographic changes on the occupied
Palestinian territory.

Other current issues requiring the Council's
imminent attention should not eclipse the urgency to
resolve the question of Palestine and its occupation.
General Assembly resolution 71/23 states that:

"achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive

settlement of the question of Palestine is

imperative for the attainment of comprehensive
and lasting peace and stability in the Middle East"

(resolution 71/23, ninth preambularpara.)

The overwhelming support demonstrated by the
United Nations membership for efforts to realize the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people has been
echoed during the course of all Committee activities,
most recently during the round table on the question of
Palestine, in February in Managua, with members of
the Palestinian diaspora in Central and South America.

In this fiftieth year of the illegal occupation, we
owe ajust peace in Palestine not only to the Palestinian
people, but to our own citizens and to future generations.

