Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The Jamaican delegation
joins others in thanking you, Sir, for convening this
meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone. We all agree
that such a meeting is not only timely, but an imperative,
given the urgency of the situation. We therefore commend
the African Group for taking the initiative in calling for
this meeting.

The statements of the Secretary-General and of the
Permanent Representative of Algeria, acting as Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity, only served to
underline the gravity of the threat that the crisis in Sierra
Leone now poses to the people of that country, to the
neighbouring countries and to the resolve of the
international community.

After several years of civil strife, which wreaked
untold havoc on the people of Sierra Leone, the Lome
accords held out the hope of peace and stability in which
the country could at long last address its serious economic
and social needs. It was only in February of this year that
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
was mandated by the Security Council to undertake the
tasks of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; to
coordinate and assist in the provision of security in and at
all sites in common areas of deployment with the Sierra
Leone security forces; and, above all, to monitor the
implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement, which had
been subscribed to by all parties concerned.

We commend those troops which went to Sierra
Leone to serve the cause of peace and we wish to take
this opportunity to express our condolences to the families
of those who have given their lives. We join in
condemning Mr. Foday Sankoh and the forces of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), which have not only
tried to scuttle the Lome Peace Agreement, but have
attacked and taken hostage those who sought to bring
peace to the people of Sierra Leone. We join the call for
the unconditional release of those detained and taken

 

hostage and hold Mr. Sankoh fully accountable for the
actions of the members of the RUF.

The Security Council and the international community
have few options. Our priority must be to obtain the release
of those detained and held hostage and to stabilize the
situation so that order can be re-established throughout
Sierra Leone. The present outbreak of hostilities has again
put the lives of civilians at risk and threatens the stability
of the neighbouring States.

It is against this background that my delegation
strongly supports the call of the heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for UNAMSIL's mandate to be revised
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and for
the troops to be equipped to carry out such a mandate. We
wish to take this opportunity to express appreciation to the
troop-contributing countries, including Bangladesh, India
and Jordan, which have pledged to rapidly increase the
troop strength of UNAMSIL to its authorized level, and
also to thank those countries which are providing strategic
airlifts. We also commend the action of the British
Government in stabilizing the situation in the Lungi airport
area, as this has provided a valuable complement to the
work of UNAMSIL.

While we are fully aware that there is no clear-cut
solution, my delegation fully endorses the options put forth
by ECOWAS, which call, inter alia, for the integration of
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) troops into
UNAMSIL, and call upon the international community to
commit the necessary funding and logistical expertise as
required. We also look forward to the outcome of the
meeting of the Ministers of Defence and Chiefs of Staff of
ECOWAS, to be held in Abuja on 17 May, to consider
practical modalities. We cannot forget that it was the troops
of ECOMOG who acted to stabilize the situation and to
bring peace to the people of Sierra Leone, which allowed
for the signing of the Lome Peace Agreement. The Council
will also benefit from the report of the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Bernard Miyet,
who was just in Sierra Leone to assess the political and
military realities.

There is one option that we do not have, and that is to
abandon the people of Sierra Leone, who are looking to this
Organization in their hour of need. As I said earlier,
civilians are again on the move in Sierra Leone, becoming
refugees in their own country, and have moved into
neighbouring countries. International humanitarian agencies
have had to scale down their activities and normal life has
been disrupted across the land.

In the next few days and weeks, this Council and the
international community must display its resolve, stated
in this very Chamber just three months ago, to support
the people of that war-tom country who yearn for peace.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, to the
Force Commander and to the men and women of
UNAMSIL and to those humanitarian workers who serve
in Sierra Leone for their dedication to the cause of peace.

