Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity today to brief the Council once again on
the situation in Yemen.

Today I will argue, based on the facts in front ofus,
that we have no time to waste before moving forward
with purpose and resolve towards a political solution to
end the conflict in Yemen. In my most recent briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8598), I made just such a call.
If anything, the facts before us now make that even
more compelling.

What are the reasons behind this appeal? The
first reason is the worrying military escalation. The
attack on ARAMCO facilities in Saudi Arabia on the
morning of Saturday, 14 September, which has caused
significant disruption to the Kingdom's crude oil
production, has consequences well beyond the region.
I echo the Secretary-General's statement condemning
this attack. At a minimum, this kind of action carries
the risk ofdragging Yemen into a regional conflagration
because of one thing we can be certain - that is, that
this extremely serious incident makes the chances
of a regional conflict that much higher and of a
rapprochement that much lower. With Yemen in some
way or other linked to that possibility, none of it is good
for Yemen.

That is, frankly, terrifying and an eventuality
that runs completely counter to the many detailed
conversations I have had in recent weeks with people in
Yemen, the region and elsewhere in favour ofa series of
steps to be taken by the parties towards de-escalation. It
is not entirely clear who was behind the attack, but the
fact that Ansar Allah has claimed responsibility is bad
enough. Whatever we may discover of the attack, it is a
sure sign that for Yemen the direction of travel seems to
be away from the peace we all seek. Every day the war
goes on, the greater is the threat to regional stability, as
we have seen. We need to make a bold move.

It is always and inevitably invidious to choose for
attention one event in a war as broad, complex and
violent as the one we face in Yemen. But we do so,
as I do on this occasion, to illustrate the horror of the
war and thus appeal to the collective conscience, with
an emphasis on the terror faced by ordinary people in
Yemen on a daily basis.

The attack on Dhamar on 1 September led to the
deaths of approximately 110 people and the wounding
of 43 more. Only a handful escaped unhurt from that
building. I am well aware of the reasons put forward
for this attack. My purpose here is not to adjudicate,
of course, on that decision, but the attack itself
nevertheless reminds us so vividly of all that we want
to bring to an end. The actions I have described make
peace more difficult and, indeed, even more necessary.

The second reason for my appeal is the situation in
the south. Events there present to us an eerie calm. The
city of Aden remains broadly under the control of the
Southern Transitional Council. In neighbouring Abyan,
its forces face those of the Government of Yemen. In
Shabwa, further east and north, a shaky standoff has
been achieved. Forces from other fronts have moved to
support their respective sides in this new and dangerous
crisis. Those moves, in turn, destabilize those other
fronts, encouraging new military adventurism.

There is really nothing good to be said about
this besides the calm I mentioned. I am of course,
encouraged by the calls for peace from other groups
in the southern governorates that do not want events in
Aden to be repeated or to spread. Nevertheless, the risk
of further fragmentation, violence and displacement is
real. The status of forces and their rearmament make
even the most optimistic of us cautious in judgment.
I condemn, as I did last month before the Council,
the unacceptable efforts of the Southern Transitional
Council to take control of State institutions by force.
The functioning of State institutions is a necessity and
must prevail.
In Jeddah, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is intensely
focused on mediating a solution. We discussed this at the
last meeting of the Council on this issue, on 20 August.
I wish the Kingdom every success. As I said then, it is
indeed the indispensable mediator and frankly it brings
real meaning to the phrase that its success will be our
success. I welcome the presence of delegations from
the Government of Yemen, under the leadership of
President Hadi Mansour, and the Southern Transitional
Council in Jeddah. I can imagine and know that the
Counciljoins me in wishing the Saudis, their leadership
and the two delegations every success in their crucial
effort to reduce this threat to Yemen's very existence.

As many have said before, the lasting and
resounding message from developments in the south
is a clarion call for an urgent need to end the conflict
in Yemen as a whole. As President Hadi told me last
month, we need to make progress urgently if the war
is not to expand further. There is simply no argument,
no choice and no better use of our energy now than to
engage in that endeavour. We see the war therefore not
merely continuing to wreck the lives and livelihoods
of men and women in Yemen, but also threatening to
metastasize into something that threatens the existence
of Yemen itself. We must therefore move to end it and
end it soon.

Despite this admittedly very grim picture, we
had some limited progress this month. Since my last
briefing, the parties have taken further steps towards
implementing the Stockholm Agreement. On 8 and
9 September, the parties held the sixthjoint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee in the Red
Sea to discuss ceasefire enhancement, disengagement
from the front lines and the implementation of plan for
the redeployment of forces. The meeting was held in a
very positive and a very pragmatic atmosphere, and I
am grateful to the leadership of the parties who made
this so and their representatives present on that vessel.

I am very pleased to say that the tripartite ceasefire
and the de-escalation mechanism are now alive and well
and that a joint operations centre has already been set up
and running for a full week. That mechanism, perhaps
overdue, allows for greater communication between
the parties with liaison officers physically present on
a 24/7 basis and with contact with commanders on the
ground to prevent military escalation. The tripartite
mechanism is, in fact - again, way overdue - the first

joint practical initiative since the Stockholm Agreement
was made. It is practical in the sense of an immediate,
visible impact on the way that the parties operate in
Al-Hudaydah.

Both parties asked for that mechanism, as part of
their efforts to shore up the ceasefire. I am sure that it
will help to save lives. We have already seen a decrease
in the number of incidents in Al-Hudaydah over the
past week. I am therefore encouraged by the parties'
willingness to implement further measures, including
the regular meetings of the liaison offices I mentioned
and their meetings in specific locations along the front
lines in Al-Hudaydah, as well as the opening of key
humanitarian corridors. The sustained reduction in
violence, still somewhat controversial in some minds,
but not in ours, has been one of the major achievements
of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement so far. I welcome those
concrete steps to reinforce it and improve access for the
delivery of humanitarian aid. We must be reminded that
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement remains a humanitarian
agreement. Those shall continue to be the primary goals
of the Agreement reached in Stockholm last December.

On the basis also of detailed analysis in that last
Redeployment Coordination Committee meeting of
the issues surrounding the phase one redeployments
we have all been waiting to see happen for so many
months and on the basis of a proposal I presented to
the Committee, the parties now have a revised proposal
before them based on the discussions for their urgent
consideration to allow those redeployments to take
place. We expect their response by 20 September. I
appeal to the parties to respond positively.

The Al-Hudaydah Agreement is moving
forward - slowly perhaps, late certainly, but with
purpose. My own hope is that we will continue to
manage improvements in the ceasefire and prevent any
major attacks in the governorate. That is the bottom
line of that Agreement. Meanwhile, the parties now
have in their hands the decisions about redeployments.

As we have heard 4 as the Council has certainly
been involved - I would like to congratulate the new
Head of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the new Chair of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, my good
friend and colleague Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha.
I can think of no one better qualified for that difficult,
demanding and important role. I wish him every success
in his position. Of course, he has my full support. I
would also like to express and reiterate my gratitude
to UNMHA colleagues who continue to work under
extremely difficult conditions and have maintained the
level of attention and engagement and pace during the
period between the departure of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard and the imminent arrival of Lieutenant
General Guha.

I do not have much to say today about other elements
of the Agreement reached in Sweden. I have seen no
breakthroughs on prisoner release - a matter made
all the more tragic given the deaths in Dhamar. My
proposal for the release of the first batch of prisoners
was welcomed by one party but not by the other, which
insisted, instead, that all prisoners everywhere must be
released in one go - an interpretation of the all-for-all
principle. I am afraid that is not a practical suggestion.
If it were, we would have certainly followed it some
time before now. As both sides are reluctant, at different
times, to avow the identity, existence and location of
prisoners, identifying prisoners and their location in
the fog of war, not exclusively in Yemen, is desperately
difficult task. That is why I have concluded, perhaps
rightfully or wrongfully, that we should identify and
release and then continue to identify and release and
that the first batch of prisoners be followed by other
batches, until we exhaust the list of all prisoners agreed
between the parties. For now, that is not to be.

The complex military situation in Taiz, the third
element agreed in Sweden in December last year, has
posed serious challenges to all our frequent efforts to
implement the statement of understanding, which is the
title of the Agreement reached in Stockholm. However,
I was encouraged by a recent statement by the Minister
of Planning of Yemen to engage and be ready to help
the people of Taiz, as was originally agreed. We were
together in a meeting in Berlin, just a few days ago. We
have not given up. I would like to do that, primarily
now, through support for the local community and for
women's groups and local groups that have always been
so active on the same issues in Taiz, I was privileged to
meet them at a seminar hosted by the European Union
in Amman a few weeks ago.

The energy, creative will and desire to improve the
conditions of families and civilians, as represented and
exemplified by those groups, are remarkable. I would
like to voice my support for that. I think that they will
light the way for the rest of us. I hope that at a future
meeting of the Council, you, Mr. President, will allow
them to brief us all on the ways and means of how
Yemeni civilians see resolving the conflicts that oppress
them in the war. Our main goal, and their main goal,
in Taiz continues to be the opening of humanitarian
corridors to alleviate human suffering and allow access
to humanitarian assistance.

I began by saying that the case for an urgent
move towards peace has never been stronger. I hope
that remarks on the various aspects of the situation in
Yemen - the war itself, the threat from the south, the
unforeseen direction in which the ARAMCO attack
will take us - have made that plain.

I know from the daily and detailed discussions
that I have with Yemenis, officials, young people,
women and, indeed, the diplomats of those States
anxious to see an end to the conflict - and they tell
me clearly - that they want me to get on with my job,
just as the members ofthe Council do and have made so
clear in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2019/9), for
which I am indeed very grateful. In parallel, therefore,
to the continued efforts to implement the Stockholm
Agreement and not forsaking it for a minute, the Yemeni
parties must move forward to resume an inclusive
political process to reach a comprehensive solution to
end the conflict, and that must be done without delay.
We must maintain the momentum, if we are to preserve
the unity and future of Yemen for its people.

I will continue to intensify the engagement I have
already begun with a wide range of Yemeni stakeholders
in the coming weeks. As part of those efforts, I aim to
start informal discussions with different stakeholders,
including the representatives ofpolitical parties, but also
public figures, women, youth and civil society. Those
discussions, of course, will include what they consider
to be the key elements that need to be included in the
final agreement to be decided, debated and, hopefully,
agreed between the parties in the near future.

Finally, I would like to make a personal statement.
I was present in Sweden when agreements were made,
as we are all aware. I have a personal reason to hold
those agreements very dear. Nobody needs have the
slightest doubt about my desire, and our desire at the
United Nations, to pursue those promises to their
conclusion. I am frequently reminded, for example,
that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement must be implemented
before we do other things. To those people I say that the
United Nations will continue, under the leadership of
Abhijit Guha, to devote unparalleled time, effort and
energy to achieve that objective. Let us have no doubt
about that. Let us have no doubt either that that will not
detract from our essential focus on efforts to reach a
political settlement to resolve the conflict in Yemen. I
am sorry my statement was so long.

