The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Egypt, Germany, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Malaysia, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia),
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Schumacher (Germany), Mr. Sharma (India),
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr, Vento (Italy),
Mr. Motomura (Japan), Ms. Jarbussynova
(Kazakhstan), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Navarrete (Mexico), Mr. van den Berg
(Netherlands), Mr. Gofl (New Zealand),
Mr. Sattar Pakistan), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provision rules of procedure to
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Brahimi to take a seat at the Council
table.
I shall now give the floor to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan.


