We thank Germany and the co-sponsors of this timely and extremely important open debate. The enormous security challenges posed by climate change are a concern to all, hence the importance of this debate. The ministerial format of this meeting testifies to the urgency of this topic, and we express our appreciation to His Excellency Heiko Maas for presiding over this open debate. Climate change is a threat multiplier for the current global challenges, whether geopolitical, economic or social. In order to effectively tackle the climate crisis, the response should be integrated with sustainable development and safeguarding livelihoods, economies and ecosystems. Merging climate change and security solutions into a coordinated, whole-of-Government approach is a substantial step towards real resilience. The human consequences of climate change are enormous and of historic proportions, especially on migration. According to recent studies cited in the New York Times Magazine this week, hundreds of millions of people are forced by extreme heat and drought to choose between flight or death, thus resulting in the "greatest wave of global migration the world has seen". According to the World Bank, more than 8 million people have moved towards the Middle East, Europe and North America as a result of monsoon rainfall and drought, which are a consequence of climate change. The same New York Times Magazine issue warns that "Tijn the African Sahel, millions of rural people have been streaming toward the coasts and the cities amid drought and widespread crop failures. Should the flight away from hot climates reach the scale that current research suggests is likely, it will amount to a vast remapping of the world's populations". This is very alarming for all of us, but particularly for developing countries. It is alarming for it has human, economic and security dimensions with which our countries are not equipped to deal. For instance, forced migration due to lack of resources or extreme weather events might top up the current displacement crisis already ongoing in Lebanon. This will only exacerbate food security and basic services infrastructure. This multiplier effect puts Lebanon on a risky path and makes it less likely to secure peace. Implementation and compliance remain fundamental. The implementation of the nationally determined contributions to satisfy the Paris Agreement temperature goal will result in fewer climatic disasters, inherently reducing the need for adaptation and therefore safeguarding peace. Greater enhanced cooperation is essential. We believe that formal and solid cooperation between the Security Council and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) could be established to share findings and streamline the response to climate risks. Greater preparedness is needed. In this regard, the IPCC's work cannot be overlooked. It includes the mapping of climate risks and vulnerabilities per region. It would be worthwhile to mainstream these scientific findings in the Security Council's work on conflict risk. Conflict hotspots could be identified or reprioritized depending on climate vulnerability areas identified by the IPCC. The road map of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and its local implementation in vulnerable countries could also be an entry point for enhanced preparedness in potential conflicts caused by extreme weather events. We need to increase awareness on the probability and geography of climate events. Climate impacts are not the same across countries, and some are more at risk than others. Increased climate-risk information, coupled with a thorough understanding of local readiness, would be a first step towards mobilizing resources and increasing the Council's preparedness. According to the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, the planet could see a greater temperature increase in the next 50 years than it had in the last 6,000 years combined. This would be the greatest threat to life on Earth, human and natural alike. Today, the emblem of our country, Lebanon's iconic cedar trees - the Cedrus libani - are under threat of disappearing because of climate change. If nothing is done to reverse the adverse impact of climate change, they could disappear by the end of this century. This is a reminder, if one were ever needed, that climate change can also be a threat to millenary symbols, a culture, and the history of a country or a region.
