Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Steady hands and a cool head;
these are two requirements of a captain navigating
a ship in turbulent waters. During the past month,
you, Sir, have exhibited in both characteristics of a
competent, experienced and knowledgeable captain.
You have steered the ship of the Council over the past
month with steady hands and a very cool head. My
delegation therefore wishes to thank you enormously
for your efforts and your leadership. We also thank you
for having organized today's wrap-up session, which
provides us with an opportunity to assess the work of
the Council in the month of March.

There can be no doubt that it has been a very busy
month, during which the Council addressed a wide
range of issues. Before going into those, I would like
to commend your delegation, Sir, for inviting your
Foreign Minister all the way from Paris, disengaging
him from his very busy schedule, to attend the crucial
meeting on the situation of minorities in the Middle
East (see S/PV.7419). We also think other members
whose ministers attended that meeting.

First, the briefing on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
(see S/PV.7402) underscored the important role of the
European Union as a key partner of the United Nations
and various regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. We see that
partnership is exemplary and encourage both sides to
continue to strengthen it.

The Security Council mission to Central African
Republic, Ethiopia and Burundi was very significant. In
Addis Ababa, the Council held its annual consultative
meeting with the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council. The consultations covered a wide range of
issues, including the enhancement of the collaboration
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council on conflict prevention in
Africa. We are pleased that the AU Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council partnership has
facilitated effective exchange of information and
analysis on conflict prevention. This has allowed for
improved coordination and better understanding of
their respective roles in managing peace processes. We
commend you, Sir, for your joint leadership of the AU
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
meeting at the AU headquarters.

The debates on Afghanistan and Haiti allowed
the Council to assess the situation in those countries.
Nigeria is pleased to note the progress they have made
politically, economically and socially. It is important
that efforts be made to consolidate the gains recorded
to date in those two countries. We are aware that
challenges remain, and that international support will
be vital in meeting them. We therefore urge donors and
development partners to continue to support those two
countries.

During the past month, the Council adopted
resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and Libya. Resolution
2211 (2015), on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, extended the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), including its
Force Intervention Brigade, for an additional year,
while resolution 2212 (2015) authorized an increase in
military, police and corrections personnel for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
Both resolutions demonstrated the Council's firm
commitment to stabilizing the two countries. We have
acknowledged the critical role of MONUSCO in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of MINUSCA
in the Central African Republic, and we pay tribute to
the leadership and staff of both missions for the effort
they are putting into the achievement of their mandates.

Resolution 2213 (2015) underlines the importance
of the principle of national ownership in seeking a
solution to the conflict in Libya. It rightly identifies
a national unity Government and an agreement on
interim security arrangements as necessary for the
stabilization of the country. Resolution 2214 (2015) is
an indication of the Security Council's determination
to address the issue of terrorism in Libya, which has
become more urgent with the expansion of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to Libya. The presence
and activities of terrorists in Libya represent a grave
threat to international peace and security, particularly
in the Sahel region, where Al-Qaida and other terrorist
groups are already active. There is clearly an urgent
need to address that situation in a holistic manner.

To conclude, we would like to conclude by thanking
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for the astute
manner in which you have presided over the Council
this month. We extend our best wishes to the delegation
of Jordan, the incoming presidency, and assure it of
our support and cooperation during that country's
presidency of the Council in the month of April.

