Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): As requested by the Security Council in
resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005) and 1723 (2006),
I am pleased to report to the Security Council, on
behalf of the 25 countries making up the Multinational
Force in Iraq (MNF-I), on the Force's progress towards
fulfilling its mandate.

There have been a number of important
developments in this reporting period. We welcome the
Security Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
1723 (2006) to extend the Multinational Force mandate
and the arrangements for the Development Fund for
Iraq and the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board. The MNF-I continues to play a vital role in the
security and stability of Iraq and to work in partnership
with Iraqi authorities to support the transition of
security responsibility to Iraqi security forces. As noted
in the 17 November letter from the Secretary of State
to the Council President in support of the Multinational
Force mandate (S/2006/899, annex), the Government
of Iraq and the MNF have three common goals: Iraqi
assumption of recruiting, training, equipping and
arming of the Iraqi security forces; Iraqi assumption of
command and control over Iraqi forces; and
transferring responsibility for security to the
Government of Iraq.

The Iraqi Government has made progress on its
ambitious reform agenda. On 10 October, the Iraqi
Council of Representatives adopted a new foreign
investment law. The Council also passed a federal
regions law on ll October that will allow Iraq's
provinces to hold referendums to merge themselves
into larger federal regions. That law is to come into
effect in 2008. In addition, a constitutional review
committee was established on 25 September to explore
options for amending the Iraqi Constitution.

Progress continues as well on the International
Compact with Iraq, an Iraqi initiative to create a new
partnership with the international community and build
a strong framework for Iraq's continued political,
security and economic transformation and integration
into the regional and global economy. The final
preparatory meeting took place in Kuwait on
3] October, and the Compact was endorsed
unanimously by the Iraqi Council of Ministers on
26 November. The Compact is expected to be finalized
by early next year, we hope, with broad and active
international support.

Despite progress on those fronts, security remains
a grave concern. Sunni insurgent attacks against the
Iraqi security forces and the MNF-I remain at high
levels, and the forces continue to experience attacks
06-65176
from armed Shia groups, especially in the Baghdad
region. At the same time, sectarian violence, much of it
directed toward civilians, has increased.

Insurgents, extremists and terrorists continue
their attacks. The ongoing violence continues to take a
toll on the country and its people. The number of
attacks increased 22 per cent over this reporting period,
attributed in part to a spike in violence during
Ramadan. Fifty-four per cent of all attacks occurred in
two of Iraq's 18 provinces, Baghdad and Anbar,
although violence was significant in Diyala province
and in the cities of Kirkuk, Mosul, Basra, Al Amarah
and Balad. The Multinational Force in Iraq and Iraqi
security forces continued joint efforts to address
security in Baghdad and Basra.

More Iraqi units are taking the lead in combat
operations against the insurgency. In October, the
Fourth Iraqi Army division planned, coordinated and
executed an Iraqi-controlled division-level operation in
Kirkuk in response to the spike of vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devise attacks just prior to and
during Ramadan. The operation was the first division-
level plan executed under control of the Iraqi ground
forces command headquarters.

The rise of sectarian violence has become the
greatest threat to security and stability in Iraq.
Approximately 80 per cent of the sectarian violence in
Iraq happens within a 35-mile radius of Baghdad. In
response to the worsening situation, Iraqi Prime
Minister Al-Maliki announced a four-point plan on
2 October to unite Shia and Sunni parties in his
Government behind the drive to stop sectarian killings
that have plagued the country. The Iraqi Government
has also sponsored a series of four reconciliation
conferences across Iraq aimed at promoting a national
dialogue and soliciting recommendations for action.
Two meetings of tribal leaders and civil society have
already taken place. In October, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference hosted a gathering of Sunni and
Shiite religious leaders in Mecca, which called for an
end to sectarian bloodshed in Iraq.

While infrastructure attacks have decreased, they
average one per week and hamper the provision of
essential services, such as electrical power, water and
fuel. The ongoing attacks and the difficult security
environment are impediments to improving the supply
of those essential services. The Iraqi infrastructure will
06-65176
continue to be a high-value target for disruptive
elements.

The Multinational Force in Iraq continues to
train, develop and contribute to the capabilities and
readiness of Iraqi security forces. Iraq is making
progress in building security forces that are capable of
independently combating insurgents and fighting
terrorists. The Ministry of Defence and Interior
security forces continue to increase in size and
capability, and are increasingly taking over leadership
roles in fighting insurgents and terrorists. On
21 September, MNF-I transferred Dhi Qar Province to
provincial Iraqi control, putting security responsibility
in the hands of the provincial Governor and his local
police force of 10,000. The Multinational Force
continues to support and assist the Iraqi security forces
as they move towards conducting fully independent
operations and achieving security self-reliance.

The number of counter-insurgency operations
conducted independently by Iraqi forces as a
percentage of total combat operations continues to
increase steadily. One hundred and six Iraqi army and
special operations battalions and 11 strategic
infrastructure battalions are now conducting counter-
insurgency operations, with 98 battalions assessed as
capable of taking the lead in operations or of operating
independently.

The Iraqi Government, alongside MNF-I, has
identified a force structure to maintain a security
environment that will provide a basis for transitioning
Iraq to security self-reliance. The authorized end-
strength force structure of Iraqi armed forces is
137,500 personnel, including one Iraqi ground forces
command, 10 divisions and 36 brigade headquarters,
114 army and special operations battalions, l7 strategic
infrastructure battalions, six air force squadrons, three
navy squadrons, and 19 combat support battalions.

The Iraq Ministry of the Interior, with the
assistance of MNF-I, has begun a multi-phased
national transformation plan to assess National Police
battalions' current capabilities, reinforce police
training, and establish practices for continuing
education of the police forces. The end-strength force
structure for all Ministry of the Interior forces is
188,200 trained and equipped personnel manning two
division headquarters, nine brigade headquarters, and
27 combat battalions. The force structure plan is
designed to enable a stable civil security environment
that leads to a democratic and representative
Government and a prosperous economy.

As of 13 November, six Iraqi army division
headquarters, 30 brigade headquarters and 91
battalions have the security lead in their areas of
operation. Those numbers reflect approximately 70 per
cent of the Iraqi army. The Multinational Force has
transferred 55 of the 110 forward operating bases to
Iraqi control.

The United Nations continues to play a crucial
role in Iraq's stability and development. The United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is
providing important expertise under its mandate, which
was extended in August 2006 for another year under
resolution 1700 (2006).

Due to security concerns, the United Nations
recently decided temporarily to reduce staff positions
in Baghdad. A robust UNAMI presence remains
essential to supporting Iraqi efforts, including on
national reconciliation, constitutional review and future
provincial elections. The UNAMI presence will also be
crucial in taking forward work on the International
Compact jointly with the Government of Iraq. In
addition to Baghdad, the United Nations has limited
representation in Irbil and Basra. MNF-I continues to
assist UNAMI and to help it achieve its goal for a full,
robust and secure presence in Iraq.

Multinational forces, notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents, continue to
provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Irbil, respectively. Those troops provide
static site security, reconnaissance, security patrols,
convoy escorts, checkpoints and, when necessary,
medical and emergency evacuation. Contributions to
the Trust Fund to Support the Distinct Entity Created to
Provide Security for the United Nations Presence in
Iraq will ensure continued support for that critical
security function. Under a separate United Nations
agreement, Fijian troops also provide static and close-
in protection for United Nations personnel and
facilities in Baghdad.

The implementation of Iraq's national
reconciliation plan will be an important component in
the Government's efforts to build a united country.
Concerted efforts to control sectarian violence and
confront the insurgency remain critically important to
Iraq's future. Training and equipping of the Iraqi
security forces continues, and we anticipate a

continued process of transferring security
responsibility for specific areas from MNF-I to the
Iraqi authorities. MNF-I continues to support the Iraqi
Government as it prepares to assume full responsibility
for the country's security.

Iraq's stability and security is a regional issue as
well as an international issue, and Iraq's neighbours
have an important role to play. We call on the entire
international community to support Iraq's sovereign
Government and assist efforts for a democratic, united
and prosperous Iraq.

