Mrs. Yalcln (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004) and on behalf of the European
Union. I will make the following statement in my
national capacity.

Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, for organizing
today's open debate as President of the Council and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Last year, the
Committee completed the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/2016/1038). During that process, Turkey worked
closely with the Committee and its Group of Experts.
Turkey's updated national matrix, which is on the
Committee's website, clearly shows our meticulous
implementation of the resolution.

The report on the comprehensive review
and the subsequent adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) - co-sponsored by Turkey - in December
2016, has given impetus to the implementation of
that instrument, which plays an important role in the
efforts against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. In that regard, we wish to thank Spain for
its leadership as the previous Chair of the Committee,
as well as the founder of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Resolution 1540 (2004) established a central
non-proliferation mechanism at the nexus of the
risks posed by weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. The global threat of terrorism and
transnational organized crime and our nations' growing
reliance on international free trade represent some of the
conflicting dynamics in that equation. In that regard,
I would like to reiterate Turkey's strong commitment
to the full implementation of the resolution and its
readiness to continue to cooperate with the Committee.

Turkey has the relevant toolbox needed to fully
implement its obligations under the provisions of the
resolution,namely,all-encompassingnationallegislation
and comprehensive international legal instruments on
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism. The present
proliferation concerns, coupled with large-scale global
commerce, financial transactions and cyberrisks, place
unprecedented responsibilities on Member States. In
all parts of the world, transit trade and trans-shipments
are usually the most vulnerable links in the chain of
export control in terms of diversion. Reinforcing
transit inspections will continue to remain high among
Turkey's priorities with a view to strengthening export
controls. However, it would be unfair to impose the
burden of such controls on transit countries alone.
Here, genuinely fair burden- and responsibility-sharing
by source countries is needed.

As a country that has never pursued a weapons-of-
mass-destruction programme, Turkey firmly opposes
the development, production, stockpiling and use of
such weapons by States and non-State actors. In that
regard, the repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria
cannot be considered in isolation, as it is fully consistent
with the regime's chemical -weapons programmes.
And the gaps, discrepancies and inconsistencies in its
declarations to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are a testimony to the
regime's intentions.

The OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism established that culpability for the use of
chemical weapons against civilians lies with the Syrian
regime's armed forces and Da'esh. The use of toxic
chemicals, the most recent example of which was the
Khan Shaykhun attack on 4 April this year, is a brutal
reminder to the international community that, unless
the perpetrators of such attacks are held accountable
for their crimes, the attacks will continue unabated. In
that regard, we call upon the Security Council to take
measures in accordance with its relevant resolutions.

