Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We should also like to welcome and express our
pleasure at seeing the High Representative and
European Union Special Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Miroslav Lajcak. We congratulate
him on the arduous work he has done throughout
almost a full year in his post. We wish him every
success in the coming months, which will certainly be
critical for Bosnia and Herzegovina and its future in
Euro-Atlantic institutions.

It is clear that, despite major progress in
implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia
and Herzegovina still has a long way to go on its road
to Europe. The major disputes between the political
parties on key institutional reforms, particularly on the
Constitution and the police, do not augur well for
future political relations among the three nationalities
of the country. Unless a political consensus is reached
that transcends ethnicity and the nationalist goals that
led to war in the past, the viability of the State will
remain uncertain. Otherwise, the goal of the Dayton
Agreement, which was to cement peace in multi-ethnie
Bosnia, may get lost en route.

We reaffirm the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and urge its political leaders to cooperate among
themselves and with the High Representative to
accelerate institutional reform. The future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is in the hands of its citizens, but it
will also need the country's authorities to demonstrate
greater leadership, courage and vision than they have
in recent months.

Progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina will also
require the active participation of the international
community. Today more than ever, the international
community has a responsibility to guide Bosnia
towards liberal democracy and a free-market economy.
To that end, we reaffirm the five objectives and two
conditions agreed by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. Similarly, the European
Union must redouble its commitment to Bosnia if that
country is to meet the obligations that it has
undertaken. The European Union must energetically
and comprehensively maintain the responsibility it has
assumed in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a priority of its
members. The political transition in the Balkans can be
eased only by greater stability and interaction among
the people themselves.

