Mr. Pulkkinen: I am Lieutenant General Esa
Pulkkinen, and I am grateful to have the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the topic of the
Central African Republic and the biannual report
(S/2018/125) of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

The European Union (EU) greatly welcomes the
recent extension of the mandate of MINUSCA, which
was adopted in November 2017 (resolution 2387 (2017)).
As the Operational Commander, I particularly note that
MINUSCA has been given the task ofproviding support
to the progressive and coordinated redeployment of the
Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA) units trained by
the European Union Training Mission in the Central
African Republic (EUTM-RCA) as an element of the
strategy to extend State authority. In addition to the
extremely valuable joint deployments already under
way, this effort is crucial to restoring State authority.
Moreover, it is central to the United Nations and EU
achieving their wider strategic objectives in the Central
African Republic.
To put my role and that of my organization
in context, I am the Director of the EU's Military
Planning and Conduct Capability. This is a Brussels-
based organization that carries out the roles and
responsibilities of an operational headquarters.
Currently under my command are three EU training
missions in Africa, one of them being the training
mission in the Central African Republic.

I should underline that the EUTM-RCA is an
unarmed training mission. It contributes to defence
sector reform within the Central African effort to that
end being coordinated by MINUSCA. It assists in the
progressive development of a democratically controlled,
professional, credible, accountable and ethnically and
regionally balanced FACA. Its mandate includes close
coordination with MINUSCA. The joint MINUSCA-EU
delegation and EUTM-RCA support plan on security
sector reform and the rule of law in the Central African
Republic, signed in July last year, aims to define the
basis of our coordination and complementarity in all
our activities.

Despite some progress, we remain seriously
concerned by the worsening security and humanitarian
situation. The crisis in the Central African Republic
will not be resolved by force, but rather through
dialogue, justice and reconciliation. In that context,
the EU fully supports President Touadera and his
Government in their efforts to build peace in the Central
African Republic.

The Council is aware that the Central African
armed forces, trained by EUTM, have already
started to deploy to operations, with the support of
MINUSCA - albeit in small numbers and despite
considerable logistical constraints. Reports on their
performance in those joint deployments have been
favourable, both from the operational point of view and
with regard to non-governmental organizations and
public opinion. Although they are a step in the right
direction, these small-scale operations, originating in
Bangui, are not enough to reoperationalize the FACA.

All political actors and international partners agree
on the need to restore State authority throughout the
country as a key factor in resolving the crisis. Therefore,
the redeployment of the armed forces and the internal
security forces is recognized as critical to enabling the
return of public institutions and services to the entire
territory, as well as to deterring armed groups.

In order to restore authority to the regions, a
9,800-strong army is planned by 2021, with around
4,500 of those troops redeployed outside Bangui. That
implies a huge effort; infrastructure development,
sustainment capability and effective logistical support
will be crucial.

In the context of a Government that has been in
power for almost two years and whose army is largely
confined to Bangui, MINUSCA is the key enabler that
will allow us to capitalize on what has been achieved
to date. The troops that EUTM. has trained are now
being equipped, and we cannot lose momentum in their
deployment and operationalization.

MINUSCA remains a critical factor for
operationalizing the FACA and for ensuring basic
logistical support. Continued support to the FACA
in joint deployments on limited military operations
is important. But MINUSCA's support, in its next
mandate, for the progressive and coordinated
deployment in garrisons or decentralized hubs of
FACA troops trained by the EUTM. is absolutely critical
to the extension of the State authority. That, in turn,
supports the Central African Republic Government's
national defence plan and allows it to demonstrate its
willingness to address security and stabilization issues
across the whole country. A decentralized army that is
able to deploy outside of Bangui is fundamental. With
United Nations support, a progressive redeployment
of those forces could serve as a concrete example of
State authority returning to the provinces, and allow
MINUSCA an opportunity to redeploy to areas where
it is needed most - helping everyone reach their goals.

If MINUSCA's support for the FACA is withdrawn,
that progress would almost certainly stall and, with
it, MINUSCA's own mission. On its own, FACA does
not have the capacity to deploy or sustain itself, and
the critical extension of State authority will cease. The
most likely outcome would be FACA's return to Bangui,
and the opportunity to restore State control will be lost.

