Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I, too, would
like to express our appreciation for Germany's able
stewardship of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its organization of today's debate.

Rabindranath Tagore, the national poet of India,
said that "every child comes with the message that God
is not yet discouraged of man". Children constitute
one-third of humankind - the most important third.
They are also the weakest and therefore the most
susceptible to suffering. If we are to be judged by how
we treat the weakest among us, then we have a lot to
account for.

Children continue to suffer appallingly from
violence, hunger and illness. What is perhaps most
tragic is the manner in which millions of children are
condemned to live their lives on the margins, bereft of
opportunity and sometimes of hope. They do so as
other, more fortunate children embark upon lives of
unprecedented prosperity and promise.

President Nelson Mandela has said that "we owe
our children, the most vulnerable citizens in our
society, a life free of violence and fear". This is, in
some ways, the primary responsibility of every
Government - the most important element of the
social contract between Governments and citizens. The
work of the United Nations on children in general, and
on children and armed conflict in particular, is
therefore among its most important activities.

India believes that the international community
has the responsibility and, indeed, the obligation to do
its utmost to provide succour to children affected by
armed conflict. We have engaged constructively in the
ongoing efforts to make the work of the United Nations
more relevant and effective in this area. We strongly
support the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We have participated actively in its
deliberations and will continue to contribute to the
strengthening of a regime that protects children in
situations of armed conflict.

The work being done by the international
community in this area is in some ways on the cutting
edge of international politics and international law. We
need to move forward with deliberation, taking into
account the concerns and experiences of Member
States. India has a number of concerns about the
manner in which Security Council resolutions in this
area are being interpreted. Several representatives who
have spoken before me have raised the same concerns.

My delegation believes that the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations must be followed
consistently and scrupulously. Member States should
not outsource the exercise of their basic prerogatives
and responsibilities to international civil servants. The
actions of the international community that have legal
and judicial characteristics must be in accordance with
the doctrine of natural justice and separation of
powers. The principle of audi alteram partem - or
"hear the other side" - must be adhered to. Mandate
creep must be checked and countered.

India deplores grave violations and crimes
committed against children during war. We have
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols, and are committed to the norms
and practices associated with this international regime.

The Government of India accords the highest
priority to ensuring that the rights of children in India
are protected. Nineteen per cent of the world's children
are Indian, and we have created a legal and
institutional framework to protect and promote their
rights and their well-being. A national charter for
children has been adopted. Free and compulsory
education up to the age of 14 years has been declared a
fundamental right that is enforceable. A National
Commission for the Protection of Children has also
been set up and a national plan of action for children
has been adopted.

The Government of India is committed to
creating, through these and other initiatives, a
protective environment for children. In this connection,
I would also like to point out that Indian civil society is
an integral part of that framework. We consider civil
society to be a valued partner in our national and
international efforts on children's issues.

India has been at the forefront of converting the
Council's word into deed through its peacekeeping
mandates. More than 100,000 Indian troops and police
officers have participated in peacekeeping operations
over the past five decades. Based on our experience on
the ground, we would like to emphasize that the central
challenge to the implementation of the Council's
mandates is the question of resources.

I am sure that Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, whose zeal is remarkable, will agree
with me when I say that peacekeeping missions require
more child protection advisers with more resources.
My country would encourage the Special
Representative to work with national authorities in
developing capacities to deal with children in armed
conflict. We believe that support for efforts by national
authorities to end impunity and ensure accountability
should be a key focus area.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism
requires the involvement of Member States and close
supervision by them in order to ensure veracity and
credibility. We expect that the processes of data
collection and analysis and of listing and de-listing will
be carried out in a transparent and judicious manner
under the close supervision of Member States.

Vast numbers of children are affected and
traumatized by armed conflict. However, we cannot
lose sight of the economic and social marginalization
of the poorest nations that is driving hundreds of
millions of children towards childhoods that could well
make them part of tomorrow's problems rather than
tomorrow's solutions. We need to address this broader
picture of the destitution and desperation that claim
even more lives than armed conflict and often pave the
way for a fresh cycle of violence. This dynamic,
unfortunately, neither attracts international media
attention nor appears on the Security Council's agenda.
Nevertheless, in our discussions here the Council must
ensure its clear focus in order not to lose sight of the
emergency before it, which constitutes a global
challenge.

In concluding, I would like to quote an English
author who said that "children begin by loving their
parents; after a time, they judge them; rarely, if ever,
do they forgive them". We must not be found lacking
in our efforts if we expect any chance of forgiveness
from the children of our future.

