Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda, as President of
the Security Council for the month of July 2009, was
responsible for the preparation of the introduction of
the annual report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly, as you stated, Sir, in your introductory
remarks. In preparing the draft introduction, we relied
mainly on the monthly assessments and views
expressed by Council members. We were guided by the
need to ensure that the report was concise, accurate and
adequately reflected the Council's work, activities and
outcomes. The instances in which the Council was not
able to take action are also reported.

The first draft was circulated at the beginning of
August this year to all Security Council members and
to the Secretariat for their comments and input. It was
revised three times, incorporating the comments
received.

The Council carried out extensive work during
the reporting period, characterized by an increase in
2
the holding of open debates and open briefings. The
Council addressed a wide range of regional, thematic
and general issues, as highlighted in the introduction.

The report covers the three Council missions to
the field in Afghanistan, Haiti and Africa. The Security
Council was regularly briefed and took appropriate
actions on developments in conflict situations in
Africa. The Council also focused on strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations, particularly the African Union.

The Council intensified its engagement on the
situations in the Asian region, including Iraq,
Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Timor-Leste. The
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, received the close of the Council, particularly
with regard to the situation in the Gaza area in late
2008 and early 2009.

The Council also devoted close attention to the
consideration of thematic, general and other issues,
including peacekeeping, peacebuilding, mediation and
the settlement of conflicts, non-proliferation, terrorism,
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, children
and armed conflict, and women and peace and security.

I wish to inform the Council that, following the
precedent set by Viet Nam last year, an informal
meeting with Member States to exchange views on the
annual report is scheduled for 30 October. The
President of the Council, the incoming President,
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria, and I will
participate. We consider those interactions useful as
part of the process of fostering a closer working
relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation and gratitude to all Council members, as
well as former members, for their contribution and
cooperation. Last but not least, we thank and commend
the Secretariat for their invaluable support and
assistance.

