Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to express
our appreciation to His Excellency Minister Mihai
Razvan Ungureanu, and to the delegation of Romania
under his able leadership, for convening this meeting
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, which affords the Security
Council the opportunity to reassess this pertinent
subject in the light of the recent World Summit. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the representatives of
the various regional and subregional organizations in
attendance for their invaluable contribution to this
debate.

As stated in the President's concept paper, the
"time is right for the relationship between the Council
and regional organizations to become more focused
and organized" (S/2005/638, p. 3). Slightly over a
month ago, in the 2005 World Summit Outcome our
heads of State and Government clearly reaffirmed the
importance of regional and subregional organizations
for the international community as a whole and for the
work of the United Nations in the field of international
peace and security in particular. Institutional
cooperation with those organizations is certainly
required in key areas related to the settlement of
disputes, threats to and breaches of the peace, and acts
of aggression. In the outcome document their
indispensable role was recognized in the fields of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, responsibility to protect
and in efforts to meet the special needs of Africa.

The position taken in the outcome document
stems from undeniable empirical realities: in Darfur,
the African Union bears the brunt of the operations to
oversee the ceasefire; in West Africa, the Economic
Community of West African States has gone extra
miles to quell critical situations; in Nagorny-Karabakh,
OSCE relentlessly pursues an end to the territorial
dispute; in Kosovo and in Afghanistan, NATO provides
support to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, within the framework of the
relevant Security Council resolutions; and in Bosnia-
Herzegovina, the European Union has taken over the
task of consolidating peace.

In addition, I would like to focus on two
instances that are particularly close to Brazilian hearts
and minds. In Guinea-Bissau, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) has done
remarkable work - even more so if we consider its
restricted means - in helping to organize the recent
elections, which were deemed free and fair by
international observers. Now, CPLP is turning its
efforts towards providing support for institution-
building and restructuring. As is also the case with the
International Organization of la Francophonie,
organizations originally based on common cultural
backgrounds have been consistently increasing their
involvement, support and direct assistance to
peacemaking and peacebuilding initiatives. The
Council should expand cooperation with such
institutions.

In Haiti, the Organization of American States
(OAS) is closely cooperating with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti in organizing elections
and has succeeded so far in registering more than 3
million voters for the coming ballot. That amounts to
more registrations than in the last two elections in the
country. Such commendable work is not restricted to
the electoral field. In Haiti, electoral registration
provides a large segment of the population with its
only credible civil registration, another essential
instrument of citizenship. In the spirit of promoting the
kind of cooperation that this initiative by the Romanian
presidency stimulates, my country is making a
substantial contribution to the elections in Haiti, based
on an agreement recently signed between Brazil and
the United Nations Development Programme, and
based on our cooperation with the OAS.

Brazil welcomes increased coordination and
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. In establishing such
important connections, however, we must be careful
not to overstretch the limited resources of some of
those organizations and be mindful of their respective
competences. Constitutive charters do not always allow
for the kinds of cooperation the United Nations might
be seeking. Moreover, we believe that whenever the
situation of a country is brought to the attention of the
Council, the view of countries in the affected region
and members of regional organizations should be heard
and taken into account.

I would like to emphasize the need for increased
attention to an area where regional organizations can
play a crucial role: conflict prevention. More than
once, my delegation has stated in the Council that
major efforts by regional organizations should be
targeted at the root causes of conflicts, in particular
those that may be region-specific. Eradicating the root
causes of conflict usually demands time and strenuous
efforts. Regional organizations are in a unique position
to address those causes, be they of a political,
economic, cultural or social character. Their proximity
and inside knowledge of local conflict situations allows
regional organizations to deal with the specific
elements that may precipitate even more critical
situations.

Certainly, the Security Council can strengthen the
capabilities of regional organizations in conflict
prevention, and in the field special representatives of
the Secretary-General should be attentive at all times to

the views and capacities of relevant regional
organizations. Nevertheless, the principles determining
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should be sufficiently broad and based on
the central idea that for each afflicted area it is possible
to devise the optimum level of an organization's
contribution.

The delegation of Brazil believes that the
Peacebuilding Commission established by the outcome
document will greatly contribute to increased
coordination among regional organizations and the
United Nations, through the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. We expect that the
Commission will soon be operational and we are
working determinedly with other delegations towards
that end.

Regional organizations have the ability and
flexibility to muster support for initiatives aimed at
breaking vicious cycles of insecurity and violence that
plague so many countries all over the world. In areas
such as the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons they can and do make a difference. They are
also key players when it comes to involving civil
society, which quite often plays a major role in
peacebuilding as they possess the essential
understanding of domestic dynamics.

Brazil is acutely aware that no peace can be
expected to last if the people concerned cannot live a
dignified life. In that sense, the most relevant
contribution we can make is fostering development and
combating hunger and poverty, those infamous
seedbeds of conflict.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
United Nations bears the primary responsibility among
international organizations to promote peace and
security, foster development and guarantee respect for
human rights. Those are the main pillars of our
collective endeavours. Enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations will make our own tasks easier and our
efforts more efficient, thus strongly increasing the
likelihood that the Charter responsibilities of the
Security Council will be effectively met.

Finally, I would like to thank the Romanian
delegation for the draft resolution proposed on this
issue, which my delegation is prepared to support.

