Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President,
first of all, I would like to thank you for organizing this
important debate.

My delegation takes due note of the Secretary-
General's latest report on children and armed conflict.
We believe the recommendations therein merit careful
consideration and subsequent implementation and
compliance by Member States and parties to conflicts.

We commend the Security Council and its
Working Group for their continued efforts to end
violations against children in armed conflict. These
initiatives have yielded significant and tangible
successes. Several listed parties to armed conflict have
adopted action plans to end their recruitment or use of
child soldiers. Some have ended the practice. Others
are engaged in active dialogue with United Nations,
with the aim of being de-listed.

It is encouraging that the Council's monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave violations of children's
rights has been established in all the situations of armed
conflict listed in both the annexes to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 158). The
United Nations system-wide response to this issue is
also laudable. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves our
particular praise for her dedicated efforts in this regard.

The context of armed conflict has changed
dramatically over the years. Diverse forms of political
and armed violence have presented new threats to the
protection of children. These emerging concerns
necessitate prioritized and specific actions, as well as a
visionary and forward-looking approach.

As society breaks down during conflict, many
children perceive armed groups as their best chance for
survival. While some are coerced, some join armed
groups to escape poverty, while others do so out of
desperation to avenge the killing of family members.
Therefore, success in ending children's involvement in
armed conflicts ultimately depends on addressing the
root causes of motivation and on building societies
where the rights and dignity of all children are upheld.

Despite all the successes, the pace of progress is
still slow and its impact is not yet felt by the tens of
thousands of children in the ranks of fighting forces.
While progress has been made through action plans to
release child soldiers in several situations of concern,
the overall situation of children in armed conflict
remains grave. Peace remains the main hope for
securing the release of child soldiers from armed forces
and groups. While we appreciate the gradual expansion
of child protection provisions in the peacekeeping
missions, we would therefore like to see such
provisions made an integral part of the mandate of all
ongoing and future peacekeeping and political
missions. The Peacebuilding Commission has to ensure
that children's protection, demobilization and
reintegration needs are addressed in the initial planning
and implementation of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations.

We are of the View that the Security Council's
current framework to protect children from armed
conflicts should give equal consideration to all six
mandated grave violations. The application of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism should also be
expanded to include all situations of concern identified
in both annexes of the Secretary-General's report. A
thorough evaluation of the action plans and of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism would be helpful
to ensure their effectiveness.
Some kind of enforcement criteria could be
contemplated to make parties listed in the annexes,
particularly the persistent violators, comply fully with
the action plans in a time-bound manner. The issues of
children under foreign occupation need to be
appropriately addressed. Dialogue with all parties to
conflict, including non-State actors, is crucial to
developing a workable action plan. We encourage the
Working Group to utilize the full range of actions
identified in its toolkit. The increasing time lag
between considering reports and issuing conclusions,
however, needs to be addressed.

Member States have to put in place durable
protection mechanisms to prevent child recruitment
and other abuses against children at the national and
local levels. At the same time, national and
international justice systems have to take stronger
action to end impunity for crimes against children
within their jurisdictions.

We have a rich body indeed of international
instruments for the protection of children in armed
conflict, but the task ahead is also uphill. Our
challenge is to ensure that this framework is used to
maximum effect. This will require well-coordinated
and multipronged actions by a wide range of actors,
and sustained funding to rehabilitate and reintegrate
returning child soldiers and other war-affected children
into society. We would urge the Security Council to
build on the gains achieved so far and address the
existing gaps in the current system. To secure a better
future for the world, we have to protect our posterity
from the scourges of war and armed conflict. We
simply cannot afford to be slacking in our endeavour.

