Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): 1
would like to commend you, Sir, for convening an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. We are also grateful to the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Robert Serry.

Since 1947, when Peru joined the United Nations
Special Committee on Palestine, it has consistently
maintained a clear position on the question ofPalestine,
in line with the norms and principles of international
law, and in particular with people's right to self
determination. Peru therefore recognizes the need
to implement General Assembly resolution 181 (III),
which lays the groundwork for the creation of two
States in Palestinian territory, one Arab and one Jewish,
coexisting peacefully within mutually recognized,
secure borders, free from threat or acts of force.

Recognizing the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to establish its own independent State, and
convinced that the creation of a Palestinian State is
crucial for finding a peaceful, lasting solution to this
conflict, Peru has recognized Palestine as a State and has
supported resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
including the historic General Assembly resolution
67/19 of 29 November 29, which it co-sponsored,
granteing Palestine non-member observer status within
the Organization. In line with these same principles,
Peru voted in favour of Palestine's request to join
UNESCO.

In the same spirit, and as a sign of respect for the
two-State solution, Peru also recognizes the unwavering
right of the State of Israel to develop peacefully and in
harmony with its neighbours, within secure borders and
free of any threat against its citizens. Peru also firmly
condemns any act of aggression against Israel. However,
while it recognizes the right of Israel to preserve its
existence and security, this right must abide by human
rights and be enjoyed within internationally defined
and recognized borders.

My delegation reiterates that, under international
law, the acquisition of territories by force is unacceptable,
nullifying any act committed by Israel to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration. In line with the
provisions of numerous General Assembly resolutions,
Peru calls for an immediate end to settlement activities,
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem,

In keeping with its traditional and unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
Peru reaffirms its full support for a lasting peace
in the Middle East, which can come about only as a
result of direct negotiations between the parties and
on the basis of full compliance by all stakeholders
with their obligations under the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map and other agreements, in full
respect for international law, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Peru therefore welcomes
the initiative of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry to revive the peace process in the Middle East, as
well as any other peace initiative that could lead to the
implementation of the two-State solution 65 years after
it was first conceived.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses its serious
concern over the intensification ofthe conflict in Syria,
which, according to reports of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has already claimed
more than 90,000 lives and seen grave violations
of human rights, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. Peru condemns all types of violence, by
whomsoever committed, and expresses its concern for
the manifestations of sectarianism in the conflict. We
call on the international community to urge the parties
to launch an inclusive political dialogue, free from
preconditions, that will promote a political transition in
Syria on the basis of the road map set out in the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex).

