Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to thank Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, for the work they are doing in Afghanistan
under such difficult circumstances. We also commend
all of the staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

The information provided to us by Mr. Tom
Koenigs and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa in their reports
is, in certain respects, more encouraging than in the
past. We express our cautious optimism in that regard.

Nevertheless, the reduction in violence does not
mean that the insurgency has been defeated. We have
been told that the Taliban are preparing new, reinforced
attacks against national and international security
forces. We were pleased to hear the information about
preparations for an offence against insurgents, which
will no doubt begin when spring arrives. We are
grateful to Governments that have sent or pledged
reinforcements for the southern region of the country,
where violence is more widespread. We also encourage
other preparations in that regard. The reconstruction
process in the south can begin in earnest only when
there is peace and stability in the provinces there.

The most serious problem confronting the
Government and people of Afghanistan is the violence
generated by the insurgency carried out by the Taliban
and other illegally armed groups. We support initiatives
to stem the problem. Those initiatives must be strategic
and forward-looking, and not aimed solely at rectifying
the situation in the short term. The establishment of the
Policy Action Group was an excellent initiative to
address the crisis of violence.

Nevertheless, it is with certain reservations that
we welcome some of the programmes being
implemented by the Group - in particular the Afghan
National Auxiliary Police. We are concerned about the
capacity of a police force whose members receive only
10 days of training. Also of great importance is the
screening process for Auxiliary Police recruits, which
must be vigorous so as to ensure that the Government
of Afghanistan does train local militias. Finally, we
urge the Policy Action Group to incorporate the
Auxiliary Police force into the regular Afghan police
force as soon as possible.

In the course of the past year we have been able
to witness the link between a record poppy crop and
violence in the south of the country, where the largest
fields are found. The new report of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime is of great concern to us. It
indicates that the production of opium in Afghanistan
in 2007 could grow by almost 60 per cent over that of
the previous year. According to the report, the vicious
circle involving the sale of drugs, the financing of
insurgency and terrorism and support for drug
trafficking is stronger than ever. Programmes to
promote Viable alternatives to the poppy should be
strengthened and better funded and coordinated. At the
same time, the products generated by those
programmes should receive preferential access to
markets, so as to establish a virtuous circle involving
production, markets and sufficient capital to reinvest in
production.

Foreign support for the Taliban is one of the
major obstacles to the reconstruction process and to a
stable Afghanistan, which should be the goal of
everyone in the region, but especially of neighbouring
countries. We welcome the meetings that have been
held by the Tripartite Commission. Any improvement
in assistance, cooperation and coordination of
operations on the ground is a great step forward.

We urge the Government of Pakistan to redouble
its efforts, in steadfast accordance with international
law and human rights, to deny access to Pakistani
territory to those who organize and carry out attacks
against security forces in Afghanistan. In addition, we
urge the Government of Afghanistan to take
constructive steps with regard to its border dispute with
Pakistan, as well as to resume dialogue with its
neighbour in order to reach an agreement on borders.
For its part, the international community should be
more vigilant in ensuring that insurgent and
destabilizing forces do not have access to financing,
weapons or other elements that feed violence.

The Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
(JCMB) is the primary mechanism for coordinating the
efforts of the international community and Afghan
institutions. That coordination is key to success and
nourishes the spirit of the Afghanistan Compact.
Nevertheless, we believe that the Compact, despite its
sincere and laudable goals, has not set clear priorities.
That has led to inefficient deployment of efforts and a
far-from-optimal disbursement of funds. Lastly, we
encourage the JCMB to establish a framework of
priorities for the various goals and timelines of the
Compact, so as to make it a more efficient tool and
speed up the attainment of its goals. In addition, we are
concerned about the perception that various Afghan
State institutions, such as the National Assembly, have
been marginalized in the process of planning and
implementing some of the Compact's objectives. We
believe that it is necessary for the JCMB to strengthen
its ties with the various institutions, so as to promote a
sense of ownership over the Compact.

Finally, we would like once again to express our
gratitude for the considerable work done by UNAMA
staff, and especially by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and his
predecessors. When we debate the extension of
UNAMA's mandate, the delegation of Panama will
support extending it for 12 months. In the coming year,
we would like to see greater efforts to combat overall
corruption, so as to promote trust among the Afghan
people in their institutions and to eliminate anything
that might attract people to the insurgency. We would
also like to see efforts redoubled to improve the
condition of women and children, as well as the
humanitarian situation overall. We will have to
strengthen protection for UNAMA staff.

We support the appeal made to the international
community today by Mr. Koenigs for an increased
commitment to Afghanistan. All the good will in the
world is not sufficient to pay professors, heat homes or
train police. All those are elements of the daily lives of
the Afghan people, who do not yet enjoy even a
semblance of stability and normalcy. Continued
financing by the international community is essential to
achieving a stable and prosperous Afghanistan,
enjoying good governance that protects human rights
for all under the rule of law.

