Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I must first
thank the United Kingdom presidency for having
organized this briefing on the situation in Somalia. I
also thank Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minster of Somalia; Ms. Susana Malcorra, Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General; Mr. Nicholas Kay,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; and
Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, for their briefings.

Over the past few years, thanks to the huge
sacrifices and tireless joint efforts on the part of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali defence and security forces, significant success
has been achieved by military operations. Al-Shabaab
has been notably weakened and driven from its strategic
strongholds. Eighty per cent of Somalia's territory has
been won back. The security situation has improved
and a fertile political environment is developing slowly
but surely. We take this opportunity to highly commend
the AMISOM. contingents and the Somalian forces for
their invaluable efforts and successful achievements.
We also pay tribute to all the soldiers fallen for the
cause of peace.

We are also pleased to note that, on the political
level, the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia
have made possible significant progress, in particular
in the implementation of Vision 2016. That has been
demonstratedby, among otherthings, the implementation
of three interim regional administrations, the National
Independent Electoral Commission and the Boundaries
and Federation Commission. In addition, on 19 October,
the President of Somalia launched the work of the
National Consultative Forum, which brings together
all the major stakeholders to arrive at a consensus on
a more inclusive and transparent electoral process that
takes into account the diversity of the Somali people.
We call on the entire international community to step
up its efforts to complement those under way by the
Federal Government of Somalia aimed at setting up the
last interim regional administration between now and
the end of this year, at speeding up the review of the
Provisional Federal Constitution and at putting in place
a new electoral process for 2016.

Despite all of the undeniable progress that has
been made, the security situation continues to be of
concern because of the serious threat that the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab poses. Through its indiscriminate
and lethal attacks, that group continues to undermine
the peace process, with the sole goal of rendering
the country ungovernable. For that reason, the joint
offensive military operations by AMISOM. and the
Somali security forces must continue, while leaving
to door open to those willing to accept a negotiated
solution. Along those lines, there is an urgent need
to mobilize increased support to AMISOM. and the
Somali security and defence forces in order to fully
drive out Al-Shabaab from Somalia. In particular,
that must be done by providing AMISOM. with force
multipliers, which have been long-awaited. That will
allow AMISOM. to be more effective and better adapted
to countering terrorist mobility. It is equally important
to build the capacity of the Somali security forces so as
to gradually prepare them take over from AMISOM. in
the stabilization of liberated areas.

Moreover, it is fitting to note that military operations
alone are not enough. They must be accompanied by a
political opening and social and economic development
efforts, as well as an improvement in the humanitarian
situation. In that regard, it is particularly important
that support from the international community be
far-reaching, multifaceted and based on the premise
of rebuilding the country by according priority to
social and economic recovery, as well as by promoting
education and youth employment. In that same spirit,
we call on the international community to scale up its
humanitarian assistance to people in need, especially
those in areas where the terrorists have influence.

We hope that resolution 2245 (2015), which we have
just adopted, will contribute to significantly reinforce,
through the support of the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia, the joint efforts ofAMISOM. and the
Somali security forces, which from this point forward
will allow them to benefit from more significant,
flexible and timely logistical support. Along the
same lines, while we welcome the future deployment
of military personnel in Somalia announced by the
Government of the United Kingdom, we hope that that
deployment will provide the African Union forces with
support adapted to the fields of logistics, engineering
and medical assistance.

In conclusion, we once again convey our pride and
satisfaction in seeing ANISOM. and the Somali forces,
with the international community's support, accomplish
with dignity and devotion such a difficult mission to aid
the Somali people to recover from a long and disastrous
war. The Mission sufficiently proves that Africans can
well live up to the security challenges that Africa is
now facing, provided that the international community
agrees to provide them the material financial and
logistical support necessary. The lessons learned from
that exemplary cooperation among the African Union,
the United Nations and the European Union should lead
to the development of such a model in the framework of
other operations.

