First, I would like to thank Estonia for convening the open video-teleconference on this important subject and to express appreciation to Her Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of Estonia, for taking part. Kuwait aligns itself with the joint statement circulated by Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians. This annual open debate provides the Security Council and, more broadly, States Members of the United Nations with a unique opportunity to have a frank discussion about the cur-rent situation with regard to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, enhance compliance with international law and related accountability measures, and propose tangible steps to ensure that the protection of civilians agenda is implemented by Member States, the United Nations and other stakeholders, based on the Secretary-General's annual report on the subject, in particular given the new challenges we face with the spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. Today's meeting is taking place in unprecedented circumstances, as the United Nations and the international community continue to combat the spread of COVID-19 worldwide. The virus not only poses a grave threat to the health of us all. It is also exacerbating the security and safety challenges facing civilians because of ongoing armed conflicts. For that reason, the protection of civilians agenda has taken on even greater importance. Kuwait welcomes and continues to support the appeal by the Secretary-General, Antenio Guterres, for an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the pandemic. It urges the Security Council, as the United Nations body entrusted with maintaining international peace and security, to support that call. This meeting marks the first time that Kuwait has participated in an open debate of the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict since its term as a non-permanent member of the Council for the period 2018-2019 came to a close. During that time, it has contributed actively to the protection of civilians agenda by sponsoring, alongside the Netherlands, Sweden and Cete d'Ivoire, resolution 2417 (2018) on conflict and hunger. It also sponsored resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict, which was adopted unanimously on 11 June 2019. That resolution, which was inspired by a desire to strengthen the institutional and normative framework for the protection of civilians and by our country's own bitter experience, which continues to be a source of suffering for many Kuwaitis, was the first to be issued by the Council specifically addressing the issue of missing persons in armed conflict. In it, the Council calls on all parties to armed conflict to take appropriate measures to prevent persons from going missing, to actively search for persons reported missing, to enable the return of their remains, and to ensure impartial and effective investigations and the prosecution of offences linked to missing persons as a result of armed conflict. Another aim of the resolution is to reaffirm the relevant rules of international humanitarian and human rights law. We welcome the level of detail in the section on missing persons in this year's report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366), but note that there has been no let- up in the alarming number of cases of persons who have gone missing in armed conflicts over the past year. Member States should therefore ensure that they have appropriate national laws and policies to prevent persons from going missing. We encourage all parties concerned to take the measures necessary to address this issue in line with resolution 2474 (2019). Aside from the issue of missing persons, the Secretary-General paints a bleak picture in his annual report of the current situation with regard to the protection of civilians. The global civilian death toll and numbers of wounded and displaced persons remain unacceptably high. In that regard, Kuwait would like to underscore the following points. First, we reiterate the importance of ensuring compliance with the relevant provisions of international law and accountability for violations in situations of armed conflict. It is clear from the report of the Secretary-General that the suffering of civilians could be greatly reduced if all parties to conflicts respected international humanitarian and human rights law. There must be accountability for crimes committed in violation of that law so as to ensure that justice is served and victims have recourse to legal redress. As underlined in the report, those factors remain the most pressing challenges to strengthening the protection of civilians. We therefore urge the Security Council to continue to take effective measures to ensure compliance with international law and to develop the accountability measures necessary to strengthen effective protection of conflict-affected populations, in particular in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Secondly, we recall that violence and armed conflict, along with other factors such as bureaucracy and certain obstacles caused by sanctions and counter- terrorism measures, continue to hinder access to humanitarian aid. We therefore call on the Security Council to urge the parties to armed conflicts to ensure that humanitarian aid and goods are delivered to civilians in need wherever they are, and to condemn ongoing violence against humanitarian workers and assets, including killings, attacks, arbitrary detention, theft and the commandeering by the military of humanitarian sites. We call again for use of the veto to be refrained from when it comes to questions of access to humanitarian aid for civilians in need and under siege in times of conflict. Thirdly and last, we welcome the Secretary-General's increased focus in his report on new technologies and their impact on armed conflict. Some digital technologies have contributed to the protection of civilians and provided a range of opportunities for clear reporting on the number of victims and cases of missing persons. They have, however, also been misused by certain parties to conflicts, aggravating violence in some areas. We therefore call on the Security Council to stress the need to address the harmful misuse of digital technology and ensure that those new tools are used in compliance with existing obligations under international law and the Charter of the United Nations. In conclusion, we urge all members of the Security Council to intensify their efforts to ensure that innocent civilians do not pay the price for conflicts in which they have unwittingly been caught up and that the protection of civilians agenda is implemented fully. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, it is vital that we unite our efforts and mobilize the political will needed to strengthen the protection of civilians trapped amid endless conflicts around the world. Kuwait stands ready to continue to support those efforts.
