Mr. Danon (Israel): Members of the Security
Council meet in this forum and make statements.
On most days they give speeches. But, today, we
demand action.

Today we will make the case and prove that, beyond
a reasonable doubt, there is no greater threat to peace
and security than the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Iran has threatened the world for 38 years, and it
continues to threaten the world. Iran and its proxies
butcher innocent people. Iran violates human rights
and seeks to wipe Israel, a fellow State Member of
the United Nations, off the face of the Earth. When
terror strikes, a trail of bloody footprints can very
often be traced back to Iran. From Bangkok to Burgas;
from Buenos Aires to Beirut, and all the way back to
Tehran, there is no refuge from Iran's deadly deeds.
Iran threatens the entire international community. It is
therefore the duty of the members of the Council, on
behalf of the international community, to serve as the
judge andjury. Today, the Council must bear witness to
the dark realities for which Iran is responsible. It is the
Council that must decide the fate of Iran as we uncover
its horrific abuses.

On behalf of the State of Israel, I hereby indict the
Islamic Republic of Iran on the following charges: first,
sponsoring and endorsing worldwide terror; secondly,
violating human rights; thirdly, vilifying Jews and
promoting anti-Semitism; and fourthly; seeking to
destroy a State Member of the United Nations - the
State of Israel.

As I stand before the Council to indict the Iranian
regime, I stand with the people of Iran, and with good
people around the world, who are peace-loving and
freedom-seeking. Former United States Secretary of
State, Henry Kissinger once observed that Iran cannot
decide if it is a State or a cause. It is clear that Iran
is a cause, and its cause is terror - sponsoring and
endorsing terrorism all over the world. The Iranian
Revolutionary Guard claims to export revolution to the
world. What that really means is that it funds terrorism
all over the world. We applaud President Trump
for imposing tougher sanctions against the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps.

InSyria,IranhasarmedBasharAl-Assad-thebutcher
of Damascus. Iran's support has allowed Al-Assad to
pursue chemical weapons, Iran has provided thousands
of fighters from its proxy Hizbullah to support the
Al-Assad regime. Iran shows no signs of leaving Syria.
Without Iranian support, the Al-Assad regime would
have failed in its evil mission to murder its own people.
The Iranian Ayatollahs sponsor Hizbullah's war chest,
Hamas' budget of bloodshed and Islamic Jihad's terror
funds. Thanks to Iran, Hizbbullah has increased its
weapons arsenal to include more than 100,000 rockets
and missiles. Those weapons are stockpiled deliberately
in hospitals and schools throughout the villages of
southern Lebanon.

Hamas has built a terror-attack tunnel directly
underneath an elementary school of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Just last month, Yahya Sinwar, the leader of
Hamas in Gaza, described Hamas' relations with Iran
as "fantastic". He confirmed that Iran is "the largest
backer financially and militarily" of Hamas, and just a
few weeks prior to that, Sinwar told a group of young
people in Gaza that today Hamas could launch the same
number of rockets that it launched during the entire
2014 conflict in less than one hour. Those are not just
empty words. Hamas is already preparing for the next
war against Israel.

Those ties cannot be ignored. Iran is waging war
against Israel. Hamas and Hizbullah are simply doing
the dirty work. The blood money speaks for itself.
Hamas, Hizbullah and Islamic Jihad are internationally
recognized terrorist organizations. Iran is their puppet
master. It does not matter whether they are Sunni or
Shiite. Their cause is death. They love death as we love
life. One may ask: Does Iran limit its terror empire to
one region? The answer is no. Whether the explosions
in Bangkok, the suicide bombing against American
marines in Beirut, the attacks on Jewish and Israeli
sites in Buenos Aires or the suicide bus bombing in
Burgas, Iranian terror strikes throughout the world.
The evidence presented is conclusive and beyond all
reasonable doubt. Iran is guilty of sponsoring and
endorsing worldwide terror.

Allow me to make special mention of the people of
Iran. They refuse to have their spirits crushed by their
oppressive rulers, and they deeply desire to see the
day when they will be free from tyranny. With that, I
state the second charge. I accuse Iran of horrific human
rights violations against its own people. I shall now
present the evidence.

In Iran today, if you commit adultery, you will be
stoned to death. In today's Iran - 2017 - ifyou are gay,
lesbian or bisexual, you will be hanged from a crane. In
Iran, if you are a girl as young as nine-years-old, you
can be married off to a grown man. In Iran today, if you
are ajournalist and you criticize the regime, you will be
arrested with no right to trial. And in Iran today, if you
are sent to prison, you will be tortured. This is a regime
that is living in the dark ages. Those violations of human
rights cannot be taken lightly. Based on the evidence
shown, Iran is guilty of violating human rights.

Iran's hatred for innocent persons is not limited to
the confines of its borders, which brings me to the third
charge. It is the leading advocate for the world's oldest
form of racism - anti-Semitism. Ayatollah Khamenei,
the Supreme Leader of Iran, is a Holocaust denier. He
insults the memories of the 6 million Jews slaughtered
by the Nazi regime. He claims that the Holocaust was
"not real". He posts Holocaust denial videos online on
Holocaust Remembrance Day. On two occasions in
2015 and 2016, his regime sponsored a competition in
Tehran for the best Holocaust-denial cartoon. The total
prize money amounted to $50,000. Iran's sentiment
could not be clearer, but it does not end there.

A few weeks ago, Seyyed Abdolrahim Mousavi,
Commander-in-Chief of Iran's armed forces, declared,
"We will destroy the Zionist entity at lightning speed".
He said Iran would "turn Haifa and Tel Aviv into dust".
It was a clear call for the destruction of the Jewish State.
Israel shares no border with Iran. We have never had a
territorial dispute. Iran simply hates Israel because it is
the world's only Jewish State. That is nothing else other
than repackaged anti-Semitism. Therefore, concerning
the third charge of militant anti-Semitism, Iran is, once
again, guilty.

Iran has made it clear that it seeks to harm other
nations and innocent people. It continues to pose a
major threat to world peace and security by pursuing
advanced military capabilities. It has not been shy
about its ultimate goal: to wipe Israel off the map. It is
that threat that forms the fourth and final charge - the
assault on one United Nations Member State by another.
Iran plans to do that through deadly measures. It seeks
to destroy Israel by any means necessary. The Iranian
regime has tried to obtain nuclear capabilities for years.
Today, the regime's intentions are no different than
before. Iran's mission is not one of deterrence. It is one
of destruction.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) - the nuclear agreement - did not eliminate
the threat of nuclear destruction. At its best, if Iran
does not cheat with regard to the provisions of the
agreement, the pact just delays the nuclear programme.
It allows Iran's extremist regime to resume that
dangerous pursuit in just a few short years. The nuclear
deal gives Iran the benefit ofthe doubt. It places trust in
Iran to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). It allows the IAEA to monitor only the
locations that Iran has declared to be nuclear sites. It is
the Iranians who decide which sites are designated as
nuclear and which are not. It is a game in which Iran
makes the rules, picks the players and wins every time.

Iran's nuclear ambitions are not confined to within
the bounds of the JCPOA. Take ballistic missiles, for
instance. Iran launches illegal ballistic missiles capable
of carrying nuclear warheads. That is a direct violation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I challenge Security Council
members to explain how the testing ofballistic missiles
intended to carry nuclear warheads is non-nuclear.
Therefore, concerning the fourth and final charge of
attempting to destroy a fellow United Nations Member
State, Iran is guilty, as well.

I hereby repeat the charges: first, sponsoring and
endorsing worldwide terror; secondly, the extensive

violation of human rights; thirdly, vilifying Jews and
promoting anti-Semitism; and fourthly, seeking to
destroy a United Nations Member State - the State
of Israel. Concerning those charges, justice must be
served. The Islamic Republic of Iran must be found
guilty on all accounts. The Security Council now faces
a choice. It can confront the Iranian terror empire by
vigorously implementing its own resolutions, or it can
stand idly by as Iran's reign of terror penetrates entire
continents. Adopting and enforcing resolutions can
save innocent lives. It is the Council's responsibility to
implement them. Council members do not need to do
that for Israel's sake.

We will defend our citizens, our values and our way
of life, with all the necessary force and the full power of
our convictions. If we are attacked by Iran, the regime
will face no fiercer enemy than Israel. It is the innocent
people around the world who need the Council's help,
and we expect it to act. We must defend the lives of good
people everywhere. We must defeat racism once and for
all. And we must finally put an end to the Iranian threat
to peace and security.

