I thank the German presidency for organizing today's open debate, and I welcome the presence of the German Minister of Defence. I also wish to thank Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Shearer and Mr. Dismas Kitenge Senga for their briefings. The coronavirus disease, whose humanitarian, economic and social impacts are a destabilizing factor, illustrates the strong connection between human rights, development and peace. To achieve sustainable peace, progress must be made on these fronts in parallel, which is why the Security Council must take into account economic and social rights, as well as civil and political rights, when carrying out its mandate to maintain peace and security. The protection of human rights is not only an objective in itself; it also contributes to effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The human rights mandate given to peace operations and missions should be an integral part of the political strategy led by a Special Representative or Special Envoy in conjunction with United Nations country teams and national authorities. Such a political strategy must be based on an inclusive dialogue with all components of society - women, youth, human rights defenders and marginalized groups - in order to address the root causes of conflicts and prevent crises. This is what reform and the actions carried out by the Secretary-General, which we fully support, mean. The inclusion of women in peace processes must stop being a slogan and become a reality. I would like to commend the human rights components of the missions that perform essential functions. First, we note the warning role they play. For example, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Shabunda action plan, launched in response to investigations by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has led to the arrest of an armed group leader responsible for violations and abuses. Secondly, we acknowledge the importance of the human rights components' support for national authorities. For example, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali provides essential support for national investigations, and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic supported the creation of the Special Criminal Court by launching investigations into serious violations. Nevertheless, we reiterate that the primary responsibility lies with host countries; indeed, there can be no effective human rights protection without their mobilization. Thirdly, we note the human rights components' integration into local communities, which is at the root of early-warning mechanisms for the protection of civilians. Finally, through the human rights components' knowledge of victims, they are able to respond to victims' demands for reparations. The Global Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence, which France supports, should benefit from the expertise of peace missions and operations. To live up to this demanding mandate, peace operations and missions must be provided with the necessary skills, resources and budgets. Moreover, the United Nations and its peacekeepers should be exemplary when it comes to human rights. This is a priority for France. I would like to recall the importance of the zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse. We support the certification procedure for national military units designated to serve in operations, and we recall the importance of adequate training to prevent sexual violence. Every year, France trains 30,000 French-speaking African soldiers likely to be deployed in peacekeeping operations. Training extends to respect for international humanitarian law and human rights law. France also supports a strengthened role for regional organizations in this area, which is why we have provided legal advisers to the European training missions in Mali and the Central African Republic, the NATO mission in Iraq and the Group of Five for the Sahel. Let me recall the importance of the human rights due diligence policy followed by the United Nations in its cooperation with non-United Nations forces. It is a question of credibility but also of effectiveness. In the Sahel, the implementation of the human rights compliance framework is inseparable from the operationalization of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. In that regard, we commend the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Finally, there is no doubt that strict respect for international humanitarian law and human rights law is a precondition for the success of peacekeeping and the fight against terrorism. It requires a continuous dialogue on human rights that is constructive and solutions-oriented with a view to enabling States to meet the security, justice and prosperity needs of their people.
