Mr. Christian (Ghana): I too wish to thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing.

Mr. Holmes's briefing confirms that the
humanitarian situation in Somalia has deteriorated
because of the recent fighting in Mogadishu, which has
resulted in the rapid outflow of more than 400,000
inhabitants, including the most vulnerable: children,
women and the elderly. We are saddened by the fact
that many of these persons continue to live in
deplorable conditions, exposed to the elements and
without medical help.

My delegation is also very much concerned about
reports that the start of the rainy season has increased
the outbreak of disease among internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in southern and central Somalia.
Humanitarian access to these persons and their
protection pose significant challenges because of the
insecure environment. There is no doubt that, until the
security situation improves, the pace of humanitarian
activities will continue to be constricted.

We note, however, the good work being done by
the humanitarian agencies. Indeed, the Emergency
Relief Coordinator mentioned that 290,000 persons
have so far been reached with non-food items, while
the health and sanitation response has involved support
for hospitals, the provision of medicines and
chlorination activities. The World Food Programme
and CARE have also distributed food supplies to
approximately 180,000 people. But much more remains
to be done. We call upon the international community
to do more and to assist these poor and distressed
people through the humanitarian agencies. We
welcome the desire expressed by the Transitional
Federal Government to cooperate further with
international organizations on humanitarian priorities
and the coordination of activities.
With regard to northern Uganda, we note that
there is progress in the Juba process, as evidenced by

the recent signing of the agreement in which the
Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army committed themselves to finding lasting
solutions to the conflict between them. The two parties
also decided on an extension of the cessation of
hostilities agreement. We are encouraged by those
positive developments. We hope that both parties will
remain committed to non-violence and will promote
further confidence-building measures with the
objective of bringing an end to the displacement and
deprivation suffered by the people of northern Uganda.

We have noted that the Government of Uganda
cooperated effectively with the Emergency Relief
Coordinator during his visit. That gesture is reassuring
and provides the basis for enhanced partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Government of Uganda on the situation in northern
Uganda.

There are positive developments in northern
Uganda. The transition from military to civilian
security has started, and the Government of Uganda
has deployed police personnel as part of the
implementation of the emergency humanitarian action
plan. We hope that this process will continue and that
full civilian security, with an adequate command
presence, will be established throughout the camps.

While there is improvement in the general
security situation and while some IDPs have begun to
return to their homes, there are still many problems
that have to be resolved in such areas as Kitgum
district, which is home to more than 260,000 IDPs. The
continued insecurity in Karamoja threatens the safety
and well-being of civilians living in the district and in
other nearby communities. Any approach aimed at
alleviating the harsh conditions in this area must take
into account the lack of development and the
inadequate protection of civilians. Consequently, the
district must be better resourced, and an effective
protection strategy must be developed.

My delegation wishes to underscore the
importance of meeting the humanitarian needs of IDPs
during the return process. Therefore, we urge the
Government of Uganda to ensure that basic social
amenities are provided in settlement areas so that the
returnees can benefit from early recovery and can be
adequately reintegrated.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator's proposal of
a triple effort by the humanitarian community to ensure
continued emergency relief and protection for northern
Uganda should be commended. We appeal to donors to
continue to support humanitarian activities in northern
Uganda.

