Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my condolences to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation
in connection with the terrorist act in Saint Petersburg
and to condemn this cowardly act in the strongest terms.

I would like to congratulate you, Madam, on your
appointment to the position of Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
and for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of April. I assure you of my
delegation's readiness to cooperate with you, Madam
President, to carry out your presidency's mandate.
Furthermore, I would like to express our thanks and
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom for his delegation's outstanding
presidency of the Security Council during last month.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his substantial
report (S/2017/250). And I congratulate Ambassador
Mamabolo on his appointment to the position of Joint

Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We stand in full agreement with his briefing on the
situation in Darfur, as the Darfur of today is not the
Darfur of 2003. Moreover, I commend the high level
of cooperation between peacekeeping management
and UNAMID, on one hand, and the Government
of the Sudan, on the other hand. Such is the level of
cooperation to which we have been aspiring over past
reporting periods, and especially since 2007.

The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the progress achieved in Darfur during the latest
reporting period and notes the unprecedented stability
in terms of security owing to the efforts of Government
forces to securing the state of Darfur and ending clashes
attributable to certain armed movements. That has had
a positive impact on the situation in terms of security
and stability in the various states of Darfur, with the
exception ofa few enclaves in the country. In the report,
we note that the Jebel Marra is mostly secure, except
for a few pockets in which remnants of the rebel faction
of Abdul Wahid are positioned. The adhesion of many
of the leaders of that movement to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur was of great importance.

Owing to the efforts that were carried out by the
Government and regional partners, a number of the
opposition factions became signatories to the Doha
Document. The Government's six-month extension
of the ceasefire demonstrated its serious intentions to
revive the peace process and end Violence in that area
of the country and begin rebuilding and development.
In all our statements addressed to the Security
Council, we have reiterated the determination of the
Government of the Sudan to revive peace throughout
the country. Furthermore, we have stressed that it is
very important that the international community exert
pressure on the opposition movement, as it obstinately
continues to refuse to sign the peace agreement despite
defections. The leader of the rebel movement, Abdul
Wahid, continues to receive support, which only serves
to encourage his intransigence and refusal to sign the
peace agreement. That disadvantages other movements
and prevents them from seriously negotiating a lasting
peace and ending human trafficking and mercenary
activities. All of those points were mentioned in the
report by the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) in February.

With regard to internally displaced persons (IDPs),
we should acknowledge that the movement of all the
IDPs in 2016 - I am happy to say that we have not
witnessed any IDP movement in 2017 - was the result
ofAbdul Wahid's determination and insistence to resort
to armed violence.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur is a major
concern for the Government of the Sudan, not to speak of
the increasing number of returning IDPs. Moreover, the
continuing presence of IDP camps in Darfur following
the breakthrough in peace, stability and security is
unjustifiable, especially as the peace partners in Darfur
have made considerable efforts to prepare and equip
Villages for their voluntary return, through providing
all their basic needs as well as restoring security in the
IDPs' Villages of origin. International efforts therefore
should continue to encourage IDPS to voluntarily return,
and the Government of the Sudan developed a plan
based on three options. The first option involves the
voluntary return ofIDPs to their Villages - and I stress
the word "voluntary". The second option is to integrate
IDP camps into neighbouring cities after ramping up
their latter's capability to provide them with basic needs
and services. The third option provides IDPs with the
freedom to choose the area in which they would like to
be relocated, especially in Darfur.

The implementation of any one of those options
lacks the financial resources and the technical expertise,
as well as the international community's cooperation.
Again, it requires the cooperation of it international
community. In that regard, I would like to commend the
assistance offered by Qatar, the Leauge of Arab States
and other friendly countries ,such as China, Japan
and others in the framework of the Doha Document,
which was front and centre as the primary document
recognized by the Security Council. We must reiterate
that the Document is critical to peace, and we are not
here to call for a new agreement. However, we must
make every effort to commit to the Document, which is
at the core of the peace process that was initiated by the
Security Council. We call for the implementation of the
Doha Document, which should be followed up by the
establishment of an international commission including
the Security Council members and the peace partners.

If the implementation of Doha Document fails,
any such failure should therefore be referred to the
committee that meets every six months. That is one of
the very positive points that we found in the Document.
It also provides a window of time for the international
community to follow up on developments every six
months. Accordingly, I also refer members of the
Council to all the recommendations of the committee.
The committee meets every six months in Khartoum
and Doha.

The significant improvement in the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur and the reduction
of activity by the rebel groups, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's latest and previous reports, as well
as the report (see S/2017/22) by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), serve
to underscore that what the Government of the Sudan
had been calling for since 2014 was justified, namely,
the need to establish a strategic plan to phase out
UNAMID in Darfur. Moreover, developments in the
situation demonstrate daily that UNAMID is no longer
the appropriate framework for security engagement
by the international community, because our main
focus - especially with regard to Darfur - should
now be on development. I recall that the Sudan - or,
rahter, Darfur - is a least developed country. We must
realize the need for inclusive development, including
its economic, social and environmental dimensions.
In that regard, we refer to the important role that
should be played by the international community on
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of the former combatants. All of those tasks could be
undertaken by the United Nations country team, as long
as the international community provides the necessary
financial and humanitarian assistance.

My country's delegation hopes that the
recommendations put forward at the most recent
meeting of the joint working group, held on 26 February,
will be considered in order to develop a strategy for
the phasing out of UNAMID - a gradual exit strategy.
That should serve as an example for other United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

The Sudan has consolidated its regional and
international partnerships in areas of vital importance
for the international community, in particular counter-
terrorism, illegal immigration, regional peace efforts
and humanitarian assistance. You, Madam President,
are also aware of how far the cooperation between the
Sudan and your own country has come. As I speak here

before the Security Council, my country is hosting a
conference for African directors ofintelligence services
on counter-terrorism efforts on the African continent.

With regard to humanitarian issues, the Sudan
has continued to cooperate with the international
community. The Government of the Sudan agreed to a
proposal that was made by the United States regarding
humanitarian access to South Kordofan and Blue Nile
states. That same proposal, however, was refused by
the rebels. The Sudan has also consolidated its role in
providing relief to South Sudan.

All of those developments prove that the Sudan is
an effective member of the international community
and a reliable partner. It is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to cooperate with the Sudan.

Finally, we would like to thank UNAMID for its
efforts in the various areas. We would also like to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate the readiness of the Government of the Sudan
to cooperate with all regional and international partners
on the UNAMID mission, until the very last UNAMID
components leave the Sudan after completing their
mandate. Peacekeeping missions should not be deployed
indefinitely. If the mandate is finalized, it means that
peace has been restored.

