Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to join
preceding speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq; we thank Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, Permanent
Representative of the United States, for his briefing on
behalf of Multinational Force and Mr. Ashraf Jehangir
Qazi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq, for his briefing.

The continuing anxiety of Iraqi citizens is a
source of concern for us. We are particularly concerned
about the situation of humanitarian personnel, who are
attempting to alleviate the hardships of a population
exposed to constant conflict, kidnappings and attacks.
We are also concerned about the situation faced by
those who are participating in the reconstruction of the
country. All we ask is that the parties to the conflict
stop endangering the lives of innocent people.

We have also noted that the spiral of violence has
compelled entire populations to leave in order to
escape the violence. New restrictions on the migration
of displaced persons to other countries in the region are
complicating the human tragedy. We realize how
burdensome those movements are. However, we urge
neighbouring Governments to put humanitarian needs
before cold calculations concerning migration.

In this critical situation, greater financial
commitments will be essential. UNICEF's figures
regarding the situation of children and the lack of
access to drinking water and food reflect the gradual
deterioration seen in statistical indicators. It is
imperative to coordinate a comprehensive strategy that
does not leave these populations adrift.

We recognize that there are also reasons for
encouragement. The international community
unanimously recognizes the great importance of the
situation in Iraq. The International Compact with Iraq
gives us cause for optimism. Combined with the
goodwill of creditor countries in forgiving the debt of
the Iraqi State, it is an unequivocal signal of the
international community's interest in promoting the
development of Iraq. The energy invested by the Iraqi
Government in promoting peacebuilding, the human
rights monitoring being carried out by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), its
technical assistance to strengthen Iraq's electoral
system and constitutional organization, and the World
Food Programme's assistance efforts aimed at
vulnerable groups are also to be commended.

Finally, we support UNAMI and the Government
of Iraq in their efforts to achieve a peaceful Iraq with a
democratic Government and without foreign troops.
We can attain those objectives only if we insist
tenaciously on national dialogue. As the Iraqi poet
Salah Al-Hamdani urges us, "We must still traverse/
side by side/the barbed wire of words". Undoubtedly,
the results obtained by the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the Constitutional Review Committee
will be effective only if they reflect a sincere desire -
of which we now see little evidence - to find a
political solution to the impasse afflicting Iraq.

