Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this open meeting on
Afghanistan. I also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement.

China strongly condemns the multiple terrorist
attacks that took place in Afghanistan on 20 June.
We express our profound sympathy to the families of
the victims, as well as our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan.

By and large, the Afghan Government of National
Unity has recently been operating effectively and
making substantial efforts to develop its economy,
promote reconciliation and safeguard stability.
Afghanistan continues to face grim challenges in the
political, economic and security fields. There is a need
for unity on the part of all Afghan communities, as well
as the sustained attention, support and assistance of
the international community. I wish to emphasize the
following four points.

First, improvement in the security situation is
the basis for Afghan stability. Recently, the security
situation in Afghanistan has taken a turn for the worse.
Domestic armed clashes have been escalating, with
increasing civilian casualties. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida and other terrorist forces
are seizing the opportunity to enhance their presence
in Afghanistan, thus gravely jeopardizing Afghan
safety and stability. The international community
should enhance Afghan's self-defence and counter-
terrorism capabilities by increasing its assistance to the
country in the security sector so as to prevent setbacks
in the security situation. We hope that the United
Nations will strengthen its assessment of the security
situation in Afghanistan; promote cooperation between
Afghanistan and the countries of the region in the fight
against terrorism, drugs and transnational crimes; and
jointly create conditions conducive to improving the
security situation in Afghanistan.

Secondly, promoting national reconciliation is
a fundamental way of achieving a solution on the
question of Afghanistan. China welcomes the recent
peace agreement between the Afghan Government and
Hezb-i-Islami Afghanistan. We hope that it will serve
as an example for the Afghan national reconciliation
process. The international community should continue
to exercise a positive influence on the parties concerned
and fully support an inclusive reconciliation process led
and owned by Afghans. The Afghan parties concerned
must put the interests of the nation and the people above
all else and resume peace talks as soon as possible.

Thirdly, strengthening governance is an important
guarantee for Afghan development. In the final
analysis, Afghan affairs must be managed by the
Afghan people themselves. In the light of Afghanistan's
development strategy and its concrete needs, the
international community should provide more targeted
assistance to the Afghan Government in terms of
resources for governing the country and consolidate
the results of its nation-building efforts. With national
stability and prosperous development in mind, all
Afghan communities should strengthen their unity and
commit to resolving their differences through dialogue
and consultations.

Fourthly, the promotion of economic and social
development is a necessary condition for Afghan
prosperity and stability. The international community
must increase its assistance to Afghanistan; support
the Afghan Government's efforts to halt its economic
downturn, promote comprehensive economic and
social development in Afghanistan, encourage and
support the Afghan Govenrment in its efforts to fully
leverage its advantages in terms of resources and
location, strengthen cooperation with Afghanistan
in the areas of infrastructure, trade, investment and
human-resources training and promote Afghanistan's
cooperation with neighbouring countries in their
mutual interest so that Afghanistan can be integrated
into robust regional development.

Resolution 2274 (2016) calls on all parties to actively
participate in the One Belt, One Road initiative and
other initiatives in the area of economic cooperation. We
hope that all parties will comply with the resolution and
actively participate in building regional connectivity,
communication and economic cooperation. China and
Afghanistan are friendly neighbours. China hopes
that Afghanistan will achieve peace, security, stability
and development as soon as possible. Recently,
Mr. Abdullah, Afghanistan's Chief Executive Officer,
visited China. China and Afghanistan jointly signed
multiple important documents regarding cooperation
in economy, technology, connectivity, communication
and other areas.

China firmly supports Afghanistan's counter-
terrorism efforts and will continue to provide Afghanistan
with assistance to strengthen its security capabilities.

China firmly supports the Afghan peace and
reconciliation process and stands ready to continue to
play an active role in the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group mechanism in order to help promote
Afghan reconciliation.

China firmly supports Afghanistan's integration
into regional cooperation efforts. We will align the One
Belt, One Road initiative with Afghanistan's national
transition and development strategy and continue to
contribute to Afghans' early attainment of sustainable
peace and development.

