The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack in Baabda on
12 December 2007, which killed General
Francois el-Hajj of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and killed and injured several other persons.

"It expresses its deepest sympathy and
condolences to the families of the victims, to the
Lebanese Armed Forces and to the Government
of Lebanon.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
condemnation of this attempt to destabilize
Lebanese institutions, in this particular case the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
the

"The Security Council reiterates its
condemnation of all targeted assassinations of
Lebanese leaders, particularly since October
2004, and demands an immediate end of the use
of intimidation and violence against the
representatives of the Lebanese people and
institutions.

"It stresses that it is of the highest
importance that the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of this heinous crime are brought to
justice and expresses its determination to support
the efforts and commitment of the Government of
Lebanon to this end.

"The Security Council recalls its support for
the Secretary-General's efforts for the
establishment of the special tribunal for Lebanon
in a timely manner, as a means to put an end to
impunity in Lebanon and deter further
assassinations in Lebanon.

"It underlines that no attempt to destabilize
Lebanon should prevent the holding, without
delay, of a free and fair presidential election in
conformity with Lebanese constitutional rules,
without any foreign interference or influence, and
with full respect for democratic institutions.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the unity of all the Lebanese
people. It also reiterates its full support for all
ongoing efforts in Lebanon to combat terrorism,
solidify democratic institutions, engage in
political dialogue and pursue national
reconciliation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.
07-64132

