Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Our
delegation thanks the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
briefing and for presenting the sixteenth report of the
Prosecutor to the Security Council in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005).

As indicated in paragraph 2 of resolution 1593
(2005), the Government of the Sudan and all parties
involved in the situation in Darfur must cooperate to
assist the Court and its Prosecutor in their work. It is
on that legally binding basis that investigations and
judicial proceedings are carried out with regard to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
in conformity to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.

We note the report introduced by the Prosecutor,
which brings us up to date on the ongoing activities and
judicial proceedings being carried out by the Court, not
just in the Trial Chamber but also in its investigative
and monitoring activity of alleged crimes that have
the characteristics of acts of genocide and crimes
against humanity. Our delegation welcomes the actions
undertaken by the Court in this area in order to combat
the prevailing impunity in the region of Darfur.

Similarly, we note with extreme concern the
alleged attacks committed against and targeting the
civilian population, perpetrated both by Government
officials and by rebel militia groups, in particular in
internally displaced persons camps, where such attacks
include murder, pillaging, rape and the destruction of
property. Those acts are reprehensible in every possible
way and should be investigated and documented, as
they threaten the safety of the civilian population and,
consequently, greatly affect the incipient peace process
based on the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
Moreover, the information provided to us about the
constant restrictions confronting the distribution of
humanitarian aid aimed at alleviating the suffering of
the vulnerable population is unacceptable.

We are aware of the extraordinary sensitivity of the
Government of the Sudan with regard to the carrying out
of investigations and cooperating with the International
Criminal Court. In our View, by analysing the current
report and then hearing the statement of the Prosecutor
and the Permanent Representative of the Sudan, it is
obvious that there are still enormous gaps with regard to
the lack of cooperation with the International Criminal
Court by the Sudanese Government on the investigation
of the cases over which the Court has competence.
We appeal to the Government of the Sudan and to the
parties involved in the Court's judicial investigations to
cooperate effectively and responsibly in order to ensure
accountability for those crimes perpetrated since 2003
and the success of the judicial proceedings under way
today.

Our delegation, as a State party to the International
Criminal Court and consistent with our foreign
policy and in compliance with international human
rights instruments, cannot ignore the suffering of the
population and the serious crimes perpetrated in Darfur
since 2003 and the recent investigations revealing
acts of genocide and crimes against humanity. We are
aware of how complex it is to bring to justice those
responsible, indicated again in the Prosecutor's report,
for the crimes committed in Darfur. We believe that the
evidence collected and the judicial investigations are
in accordance with the principles of impartiality and
independence.

Under our presidency in the month of October, we
organized an open debate on strengthening cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849). In that context, our
delegation hopes that, from an institutional point
of view, the existing cooperation will be renewed,
combining the judicial and political aspects in order
to maintain international peace and security. That,
of course, does not mean politicizing the Court, nor
does it mean judicializing the Council, but rather the
combination of the two authorities, each one within
its respective competency, to fulfil the respective
mandates that they have in common - the prevention
of conflict and the combating of impunity.

Lastly, we would like to reiterate to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court Guatemala's
support and cooperation in carrying out her obligations.
The challenges are alarming, given the deterioration of
the situation in Darfur, which is compounded by the
prevailing impunity.

