The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to update the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. I thank His Excellency Mr. Henry
Bellingham, United Kingdom Parliamentary Under
Secretary of State, for chairing this meeting during his
country's presidency of the Council. I commend the
leadership and efforts of the United Kingdom for
sustaining international support for Somalia following
the London conference.

This is a critical moment for Somalia. Since my
last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6494), three major
developments have provided momentous impetus to the
Somalia peace process: first, the second Somali National
Garowe Consultative Constitutional Conference held
last month; secondly, the adoption of resolution 2036
(2012) on an expanded and well-resourced African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and thirdly, the
London conference held just 11 days ago.

These developments, coming in quick succession
within less than a month, present a rare opportunity to
the Somali people and the international community to
rapidly advance the peace process, albeit with guarded
optimism, and to bring Somalia fully back to the
international arena. The Garowe Principles provide
clear steps to end the transition by August of this year
and launch a new political dispensation. I particularly
welcome the inclusion of a requirement that women
hold a minimum of 30 per cent of the seats in the
Independent Electoral Commission, the Constituent
Assembly and the new Federal Parliament.

The decision of the Security Council to endorse
the expansion of the African Union Mission in Somalia
follows major gains by AMISOM, the forces of the
Transitional Federal Government and their partners in
the military effort against Al-Shabaab. This new
support will be crucial in enabling the Transitional
Federal Government to extend its authority across a
wider area of southern and central Somalia, and to
significantly degrade the insurgency's military
capability across the country. The military gains need
to be consolidated through continued progress by
Somalia's political leaders in the implementation of the
road map for ending the transition, which is the basis
for lasting peace and stability in Somalia.

The London conference reiterated the commitment
of the international community to strongly support the
establishment of the new institutions that would lead to
ending the transition, to provide support to AMISOM
12-25034
that would allow it to sustain the political process, and
to provide sustained international support for recovery
and development. London also strengthened the
collective resolve to protect human rights and increase
humanitarian assistance.

The London conference occurred during a respite
in Somalia's humanitarian crisis. Sustained high levels
of humanitarian assistance and an exceptional harvest
have improved the situation. However, this progress is
extremely fragile and will likely deteriorate in the
coming months as we move into the lean season before
the next and most important harvest period in August.
Somalia is not out of danger.

In London, I held a wide range of meetings,
including with President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed,
key stakeholders and regional leaders. My interlocutors
thanked the United Nations, urged continued assistance
and welcomed the Council's decision to support
AMISOM. I received assurances that the guard force,
as authorized by the Security Council, would be
deployed. But of course I look forward to the day when
Somalia forces themselves ensure security and that
force will no longer be needed. I also discussed the
challenge of Somali piracy with Mr. Koji Sekimizu,
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization. We agreed not only on the need for
security, deterrence and prosecutions, but also, and just
as importantly, for education and jobs.

Following the announcement I made during my
visit to Mogadishu in December, I am pleased to report
that my Special Representative has relocated to the
capital. The initial deployment is focusing on the core
business of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS), which encompasses the provision
of good offices to the Transitional Federal Institutions
and major Somali political and security actors in
Mogadishu, including the Joint Security Committee;
support for the road map process; coordination with
AMISOM; the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations country team and the
international community in Mogadishu; the provision
of timely and accurate information and analysis on
political issues; and outreach to key constituencies on
fundamental mission priorities and mandated tasks.
Additional staff will deploy as accommodation and
other logistical facilities become available. Our
intention is to move more staff from Nairobi to
Somalia in the coming weeks.
12-25034

Maintaining this momentum is critical. I thank
Turkey for agreeing to host the second Istanbul
conference, which I look forward to attending and
which I encourage others to attend at the highest level.
If it is to keep the Somalis committed and accountable,
this Council must show its continued engagement and
support in the political, security and recovery processes.

I ask the Security Council to encourage all
participants in the London conference and the entire
international community to support the implementation
of the London communique. For UNPOS in particular,
this will require immediate human and financial
resources to put in place the processes and structures
for ending the transition period in a satisfactory
manner within a tight time frame. My Special
Representative will elaborate on these and other
developments, as well as on plans for the remaining
transitional period.

As I emphasized at the London conference, in
particular to Somali leaders, a new window of
opportunity for peace and stability has opened. But it is
a narrow window. All stakeholders must act with
urgency and unity of purpose. We cannot afford to miss
this opportunity.

