Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Fall and Mr. Lezhnev, for their
comprehensive briefings and recommendations.

We have noted from the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/913) that the situation in Central
Africa remains volatile and highly charged by political
and security challenges. Nevertheless, we should not
overlook the positive progress that has been made in
the region since the beginning of the year, including the
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

Undoubtedly, the region is currently under close
observation by the international community. We
have heard on so many occasions that multilateral
and bilateral efforts to support the region are being
prepared and delivered. We need to collectively seize
that momentum in order to assist countries of the
region in their efforts to address various challenges to
ensure a better future for the region. We also welcome
the strategic review of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), which provides a
clear picture on how it can effectively support regional
efforts in Central Africa.

Allow me to focus my comments on the
following points.

First, the root causes of conflict should be
comprehensively addressed. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that an inclusive, genuine and
credible electoral process remains the key factor for the
region. The Governments of the region must regain the
trust of their peoples, especially after years of conflict
and political distrust. They must also earn one another's
trust. Good neighbours create good communities. The
international community should work together with the
Governments concerned to provide capacity in enabling
trust. In short, trust is important and partnership is key.

Peace and stability remain fragile. The region
is plagued by threats from armed groups, the illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, and
communicable diseases. The violence committed
by the Lord's Resistance Army and Boko Haram has
significantly affected the stability of the region. This
must stop.

Secondly, partnership between regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
United Nations, is needed. Indonesia adheres to the
principle that neighbours know best. As natural first
responders, regional and subregional organizations play
a very important role in enabling the region to solve
this crisis. We recognize the important work done by
the African Union and other subregional organizations
for the region.

We would also like to underline the importance of
a clear division of labour between UNOCA and other
United Nations entities. To that end, we encourage
stronger UNOCA support for strengthening the capacity
of the Economic Community of Central African States.
Regional challenges persist. It is our obligation, in
accordance with our mandate as the Security Council,
to continue providing support to countries of the region.

