Allow me to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia on having assumed the presidency of the Security Council during the month of August and to thank it for having organized this highly important and timely debate. Increasing globalization has created countless opportunities for social, economic and cultural development, but it has also brought with it multiple challenges and cross-border threats such as terrorism and transnational organized crime. Terrorism and transnational organized crime reinforce each other for financial and/or material benefits through a nexus based on coexistence or convergence of criminal interests. Criminal activities provide terrorist groups with substantial financial resources from various sources such as illicit trafficking; the smuggling of weapons, drugs, cigarettes, vehicles, cultural goods and artefacts, and human beings; and extortion and kidnapping for ransom. The nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime undermines the conditions necessary for sustainable economic development and the consolidation of the rule of law in some already unstable regions. Many existing factors contribute to reinforcing that threat, mainly porosity of borders, insufficient capacities of the authorities, lack of technical resources on the part of the defence and security forces, inadequate capacity of the criminal justice and penitentiary systems, and lack of police and judicial cooperation at the national, regional and international levels. For Morocco, responding to the nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime requires a realistic vision and the establishment of an approach based primarily on inclusive cooperation, as well as coordinated action and shared responsibilities. Because of its geographical position at the crossroads of strategic maritime, land and air routes, Morocco is directly confronted with multiple security and cross- border threats, including terrorism and transnational organized crime. Accordingly, it has adopted a comprehensive multidimensional strategy to combat both threats. That strategy is based on three main axes: synergy and coordination between the security services and local authorities, with a view to devising an effective and rule- of-law-based response to the terrorist and criminal threats; strengthening the fight against the exclusion and marginalization of the most disadvantaged social strata; and strengthening cooperation with our bilateral and international partners. In addition to its known and recognized measures to combat terrorism, Morocco has also strengthened its institutional, operational and technical capacities to combat transnational organized crime. Part of that effort involves ensuring that training sessions for law-enforcement officers, prosecutors and judges focus on the interconnection between illicit trafficking and terrorism. In accordance with international, regional and interregional legal instruments, Morocco contributes to the efforts of the international community by making use of cooperation channels, including exploring opportunities for information exchange at both the bilateral level, via liaison officers, and the multilateral level, via INTERPOL, in order to achieve a fruitful exchange of information and ensure effective access to data on persons and entities with suspected links to terrorism and transnational organized crime. Morocco also has an extremely fruitful and multidimensional cooperation with United Nations entities in charge of combating the scourge of terrorism and transnational organized crime. Finally, as one of the co-Chairs of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, Morocco supported the development of The Hague Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism and its policy toolkit, which are aimed at providing practitioners, policymakers and governmental experts with a practical tool to formulate effective responses and concrete actions to address the challenge posed by that nexus.
