Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to take the opportunity
provided by this meeting of the Security Council
devoted to sanctions to explain the position of the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire.

It should be recalled that it was the African
Union, in 2004, that raised the issue of sanctions
against C6te d'Ivoire. For some time now, the
Economic Community of African States (ECOWAS)
and the African Union have called for the lifting of
those sanctions. Against that backdrop, on 24 April
2009 my delegation asked the Security Council to
review the individual sanctions against certain Ivorian
political stakeholders. Moreover, we did so on the basis
of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement (see S/2007/l44, annex), which, in its paragraph 6.4, calls
for the immediate lifting of individual sanctions. It
should also be recalled that the Ouagadougou
Agreement was endorsed by ECOWAS and the African
Union, of which the Security Council took note.

The Ivorian peace process cannot proceed
without the support of the international community.
The need to back that hopeful process requires that the
individual measures taken against certain Ivorian
political stakeholders be reviewed, given the current
environment of peace and reconciliation and the
resolute commitment of those individuals in the search
for peace and reconciliation. The question asked today
by all Ivorians is whether United Nations sanctions
exist for the purpose of repression. Is the goal to
punish individuals, or by means of sanctions to restore
peace in Cote d'Ivoire? Now that the former
belligerents are actively contributing to the return of
lasting peace and have reconciled with one another, is
09-58296
there any other goal that the United Nations might
want to achieve by maintaining these sanctions?

In our view, sanctions should be applied in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
relevant provisions of international law and following
impartial and specific criteria. Sanctions should have
clearly defined objectives and in any case should never
be imposed for purposes of repression or retaliation.
The purpose of sanctions is to ensure that a country, a
party, an individual or an entity changes its behaviour.
The purpose of sanctions is not to chastise or to punish
in any way whatsoever. Moreover, sanctions should be
accompanied by specific deadlines and timetables.
They should be subject to periodic review and be lifted
as soon as they have achieved their goals. The situation
has substantially changed since November 2004, when
resolution 1572 (2004) was passed, and there is no
reason why individual sanctions should be maintained.

I would therefore like to express my delegation's
disappointment at the outcome of the vote on today's
resolution, which certainly does not correspond to what
the Government of Cote d'Ivoire had hoped for. My
delegation had expected to obtain today a clear
commitment by the Security Council to lift sanctions
after the presidential elections.
09-58296

The fact that identical resolutions have followed
one another since 2004, while the situation has steadily
improved in Cote d'Ivoire, shows the anachronistic
nature of today's decision to maintain the sanctions
regime for yet another year. The resolution adopted
today is not, in fact, designed to assist Ivorians in their
process of reconciliation, which has made great
progress since the signing of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement and which is but a few weeks
away from finalization following the presidential
elections.

By way of conclusion, I would like to point out
that given the obstacles that my Government notes at
the level of the Security Council, Cote d'Ivoire will
now undertake steps at the level of the Economic
Community of West African States to implement the
provisions of the Ouagadougou Agreement, namely the
immediate lifting of sanctions against individuals and
the lifting of the arms embargo three months after the
presidential elections. Similar steps will also be
undertaken at the level of the African Union.

