Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes to New York Mr. Angelino Alfano, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Italy, to preside over this meeting.
China also welcomes Foreign Minister Siala of Libya.
China thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salame, and
Ambassador Olof Skoog for their respective briefings.

The Libyan Political Agreement, concluded in
December 2015, represents a major achievement of the
Libyan people in their endeavour to restore peace and
stability. Over the past two years, the people of Libya
have made tireless efforts to implement the Libyan
Political Agreement, and have achieved a certain degree
of progress. In the meantime, Libya is facing multiple
major challenges, ranging from significant political
divergence, a fragile security situation, rampant
terrorism and the problem of refugees and migrants.

China is following the situation and developments
in Libya with close attention, and supports any and all
attempts aimed at advancing the political process and
promoting the united efforts of Libyan parties to fight
terrorism. The Libyan parties should work together
and adopt positive measures to advance the political
process. The international community should reach a
further common understanding on the matter and offer
effective assistance to the Libyan peace process.

First, the search for a political solution must
continue. The international community should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya and continue to promote a political process
that is led and owned by the Libyans themselves. The
Libyan parties should demonstrate goodwill, settle
their differences through inclusive political dialogue
and, on the basis of the Libyan Political Agreement,
find a solution that accommodates the concerns of
all parties in order to restore national authority and
achieve national reconciliation, peace, stability and the
development of the country.

Secondly, maximum efforts must be made to secure
security in Libya and to create enabling conditions for
an inclusive and sustainable political dialogue. China
supports the efforts of Libya to safeguard its national
security and stability, and hopes that the Libyan
parties will strengthen their dialogue, set aside their
differences, and continue to cooperate in areas of
common interest to the Libyan people, such as fighting
terrorism and accelerating economic development.

Thirdly, the United Nations should remain the
main channel for mediation. Recently, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), under
the leadership of Mr. Salame, has been working on
the United Nations action plan to promote the political
process in Libya. UNSMIL has extensively engaged
with Libyan parties, facilitated dialogue between the
House of Representatives and the High State Council,
and conducted the meaningful exploration ofkey issues,
such as amendments to the Libyan Political Agreement.

China supports Mr. Salame' in steadily carrying
out his work and appreciates the efforts of the
neighbouring States, the League of Arab States and the
African Union to facilitate dialogue among Libyans.
We hope that the parties concerned will continue to
advocate peace and promote dialogue and we urge
all parties to demonstrate flexibility and actively
participate in national reconciliation. China is ready
to work consistently with the international community
and make its own contribution to the early restoration
of security, stability and prosperity in Libya.

