Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria is very grateful to
Spain for organizing this debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for providing a concept note
(S/2015/793, annex) to guide our deliberations. We also
welcome the convening of the debate in an open format.
It allows the Council to hear from the wider United
Nations membership on matters of concern to all of us.
Indeed, the large number of delegations that I see today
participating in the debate is a clear indication of the
interest of Member States in the working methods of
the Security Council.

We want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
the President of the General Assembly and the
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council for
their briefings.

The topic of working methods, I believe, is the
subject of a continuing discourse. We strongly believe
that the change that we all seek will be achieved
incrementally - not through a revolution. As the
principal organ of the United Nations charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council plays a unique role in the global
security architecture.

However, in carrying out that role, Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations makes it clear that the
Council acts on behalf of the Members of the United
Nations. That being the case, there is a need for the
Council to conduct its affairs in a manner that is not
only transparent, but accountable. We acknowledge the
positive changes in the Council's practices in recent
times. Much has been achieved in making the Council
more open. However, we believe that a great deal more
can be done and, indeed, should be done.

In recent years, the Council has embraced greater
transparency and inclusiveness by making more
frequent use of public meetings, such as this debate,
where interested Member States are free to participate.
We have also witnessed instances where Member
States participating in the Council's open debates have
been granted the right of reply to respond on issues
of concern to them. We welcome that as a sign of the
Council's readiness to accommodate the interests of
other Member States.

The convening of meetings in open format in the
Council Chamber is a remarkable way by which the
Council has engaged with Member States. We believe
that giving Member States the opportunity to hear the
briefers speak and present their own perspectives on
matters concerning them adds value to the work of the
Council and underscores the effectiveness of rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

Engagement with regional organizations is also
significant in facilitating the work of the Council. In
recent times, the Security Council has made vigorous
efforts to deepen its engagement with regional
organizations, within the framework of partnerships
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that context, we want to take special note of the
Council's relationship with the African Union. I believe
that is a valid point of departure. It has not been smooth
sailing - the beginning was a bit stormy - but that
is a partnership that we would like to see strengthened
in the interest of peace and security on the African
continent, as most of the items on the Council's agenda,
as members know, are African issues.

On the relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly, the adoption of Assembly resolution
69/321, on the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
especially the aspects pertaining to the appointment of

the Secretary-General, is a significant step in lending
greater transparency and inclusiveness to the selection
and appointment process. It is our hope that the requisite
political will is manifest in implementing the resolution
in a manner that will yield concrete results.

On the Peacebuilding Commission, we recognize
the critical role it plays in supporting the work of
the Security Council. As a vital component of the
United Nations peace and security architecture, the
Peacebuilding Commission has worked assiduously
to fulfil its mandate of post-conflict peacebuilding,
preventing the recurrence of conflicts, improving
coordination within and outside the United Nations
for continued engagement in post-conflict countries
and marshalling resources to support peace. Nigeria
encourages periodic stocktaking briefings and
interactive exchanges with the Commission. We believe
that enhanced coordination and cooperation between
the Council and the Commission is indeed essential to
promoting peace in post-conflict situations. The Council
can draw on the Commission's advice, in particular
in the areas of revisiting mandates, establishing
benchmarks and reviewing peace operations.

With regard to the Economic and Social Council,
Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations states
that "it may furnish information to the Security
Council and shall assist the Security Council upon its
request." While we have seen significant engagement
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, interaction between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council has been almost
negligible. It is significant to note that, of the three
pillars of the United Nations - peace and security,
development and human rights - two of them, namely,
development and human rights, fall under the purview
of the Economic and Social Council. We would
therefore like to see closer interaction between both
Councils, considering the importance of the mandate
of the Economic and Social Council and how it has
a bearing on peace and security. That is particularly
crucial in the framework of the 2030 Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals.

As the international scene evolves and the dynamics
of global peace and security change, the Security
Council must become more receptive to the notion
of closer engagement and coordination with various
actors on the world stage, within and outside the United
Nations system. They have an important role to play
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

That cooperation, symmetry and symbiotic relationship
must be established.

