Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, President
Kafando, for his insightful briefing.

Kazakhstan reiterates the importance of
implementing the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and of establishing meaningful
inter-Burundian dialogue. Those, we can say, are the
most important and the only viable instruments for a
peaceful resolution of the political situation in Burundi.
We therefore call on all parties to engage in direct and
constructive cooperation with the aim of holding the
next round of the dialogue.

We commend the decision of the President of
Burundi, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, not to run for another
term, thereby helping to ease the political strain. This
measure will certainly assist in sustaining peace,
security and democracy in the country. We express
hope that the forthcoming presidential elections in
2020 will be held in a peaceful, free, fair, transparent
and inclusive manner, with the participation and broad
consensus of all stakeholders. Only such an approach
would ensure durable peace, and it should be supported
by the international community.

We also emphasize the importance of respecting
the fundamental rights and freedoms of all citizens,
and reaffirm the primary responsibility of the Burundi
Government for providing security, thereby protecting
its population. We further stress the importance of the
committed efforts of the African Union and the East
African Community in revitalizing the political process
in Burundi. We particularly support the activities of the
facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa, and the
mediator, President Museveni.

The work of the joint technical working group
is also crucial in promoting confidence-building
measures. We encourage the regional and subregional
organizations and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts and contribute
to finding a political solution to the current situation
in country. That nationally owned process should be
undertaken with respect for the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity of Burundi.

At the same time, while the security situation in
Burundi is generally calm, a large number of internally
displaced persons and thousands of refugees are in
need of assistance. This issue needs to be continuously
addressed by the Council, the United Nations and
bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
other international institutions. Such collective effort
is needed for the development work that must be
rigorously undertaken.

We also commendtheregionalhostcountries fortheir
assistance and reiterate that the repatriation of refugees
must be voluntary and in accordance with the principles
of respect and dignity, as enshrined in international and
human rights law. The close coordination between the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
structures would have a significant impact on the
political and humanitarian dimensions.

Finally, we commend the determined efforts of
the Special Envoy and the United Nations system to
achieve peace, security and long-term stability. We also
acknowledge the significant role of the Peacebuilding
Commission's Burundi configuration as a platform for
the Burundi authorities to address existing economic
challenges, for which the support of international
partners is critical.

