Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you very much, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council.

Jordan submitted, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, the text of a special Arab draft resolution
(S/2014/9l6), setting a deadline for ending the Israeli
occupation and the establishment of the Palestinian
State, in implemention ofthe resolution ofthe Council of
the League of Arab States at the ministerial level. This
is based on our belief that the Security Council must
respond to the legitimate Palestinian demand to live in
freedom and dignity in its independent, fully sovereign
and viable State within the borders of4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, in peace and security and
within secure borders with all other States of the region,
in accordance with the accepted terms of reference in
this matter, including the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council - inter alia, resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) - and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Jordan has proceeded in this process within the
Security Council guided by the Arab consensus,
and primarily in support of the political decision of
the Palestinian leadership, represented by President
Mahmoud Abbas. In the Security Council and all
other international forums, Jordan will remain at the
forefront of the champions of the Palestinian cause
and all the rights of the brotherly Palestinian people,
because Jordan is committed to resolving this matter
and to achieving its own higher, vital interests.

We had hoped that the Security Council would today
adopt the draft Arab resolution because the Council
bears both the legal and the moral responsibilities to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is the
core of the conflict in the Middle East. All elements of
the draft resolution were acceptable to the members not
only of the Security Council, but of the international
community as a whole. These elements include the right
of the Palestinian people to sustainable development
and to the attainment of a peaceful solution that would
end the occupation of Palestinian territory, realize the
two-State solution, justly resolve the question of the
Palestinian refugees and other issues, and establish
East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State.

The failure to adopt the draft resolution will in no
way prevent us from continuing to urge the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
towards effective engagement in achieving a settlement
to the conflict. We will continue to work assiduously
for a resumption of the peace negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis, within a serious and
committed framework, leading to an embodiment of
the two-State solution within a reasonable time frame
and to an end to the conflict through the resolution of
all substantive issues - including Jerusalem, refugees,
security, borders and water - pursuant to the accepted
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative in all its elements and in a manner that fully
addresses and protects Jordan's higher, vital interests.

The Jordanian position on this matter is very well
known. We submitted the draft resolution without
prejudice to our legal positions and on the understanding
that its content in no way indicates a change in our
positions. Our submission of the draft Arab resolution
can in no way be interpreted as a unilateral step. It
reflects a legitimate right of the Palestinian people,
who have opted for the path of peace and turned to
the United Nations as a forum of last resort now that
Israel has blocked all paths leading to the achievement
of their legitimate aspirations. It is Israel that engages
in unilateral moves, including in particular settlement
activities and the adoption of discriminatory legislation,
such as the Nationality Law, in addition to its other
illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
which draw us further away from peace every day and
threaten the future of the two-State solution.

The international community must address the
gravity of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the growing suffering of our Palestinian
brothers in the Gaza Strip as a result of the most recent
Israeli war there. It must recognize that the status quo
cannot be maintained without pushing the region into
further cycles of violence and conflict. The outcome
of today's decision must not prevent us from stepping
up our efforts through consultations, negotiations
and discussions with a view to achieving a just and
comprehensive solution of the Palestinian question,
leading to the establishment of a contiguous, viable,
independent and sovereign Palestinian State in the
context of the two-State solution, in a manner that
protects the peace and security of all in the region.
We must pursue our efforts until we achieve that noble
objective.

