Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia.

Let me start by thanking the Chinese presidency
for organizing this open debate, and Angola, China and
Senegal for the thoughtful concept note (S/20116/321, annex). Allow me also to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for his briefing.

The European Union and its member States remain
concerned about the continued incidents of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. According
to the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the
Gulf of Guinea accounts for nearly 40 per cent of all
piracy and armed robbery at sea reported worldwide
so far this year. In 2015 the Gulf of Guinea represented
the third-most dangerous maritime area of the globe.
Since the beginning of this year, there has been a
36 per cent increase in reported incidents as compared
to the same period last year, and the number of people
kidnapped from ships already matches the total for
the whole of 2015, with several particularly violent
incidents being a source of particular concern. On
average, there are approximately 40 European Union
member State-flagged or owned vessels at any one time
in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea. The constant risk
of criminal attacks in the Gulf of Guinea is therefore a
widely shared international concern. The risk of piracy
and armed robbery at sea exists both in international
waters and in the territorial waters of the countries
in the region, especially at anchorage sites and in the
Niger Delta.

Safe waters and safe passage at sea are ofparamount
importance for the economic and human development
of the countries of the Gulf of Guinea. The maritime
domain is an enabler of prosperity and sustainable
development. The growing threat of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea is therefore in
the first place a threat against the coastal States of the
region and to their development. Beyond the immediate
threat against the shipping industry, it is also the
complex, interconnected and often cross-border nature
of the threat that is worrying, as it has the potential to
endanger the authority and stability of some States in
the region.

From the outset, the European Union has been
fully supportive of regional and international efforts to
stem piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
Following the adoption of resolution 2018 (2011) and
resolution 2039 (2012), as well as the interregional
Summit in Yaounde' in June 2013 by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC), in March 2014 the European Union adopted
its own strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, in support
of the Yaounde process. Just like the Yaounde Code
of Conduct, the EU strategy goes beyond piracy
and armed robbery at sea and also addresses illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, trafficking, and
pollution, including oil bunkering. It also contains
measures to address conducive causes on land, by
promoting the development of coastal economies and
the strengthening of law enforcement. In March 2015,
the EU strategy was complemented by an action plan,
a first report on whose implementation so far has just
been finalized.

The EU and its member States are committed to
continuing their assistance to the countries ofthe Gulfof
Guinea to make the Yaounde' Code ofConduct successful,
under the leadership of the three organizations that
the region itself has chosen - ECOWAS, ECCAS and
the GGC. We welcome the high-level meeting held in
February, which should allow for the operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre based in
Yaounde by July. We encourage all the parties concerned
to implement the Code of Conduct swiftly and in full.

Financial and technical support has already been
provided by the European Union to the International
Criminal Court and to the Regional Centre on Maritime
Security in Central Africa, based in in Pointe Noire,
Congo. The European Union and its member States
have also developed a concept for live exercises at sea
and crisis response training, and have also provided
training for maritime stakeholders carried out by two
universities in Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire. We also highly
value the supportive work in the Group of Seven Plus
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which is currently under
Portuguese presidency and meets twice every year.
In our View, that is the adequate forum to develop
ideas and actions to support the implementation of the
Yaounde' Code of Conduct and to ensure that partners
work in synergy.

As already stated, the European Union and its
member States are already active in the Gulf of Guinea
with the implementation of national and regional
projects. Further such support is underway. By the end
of this year, additional projects will be formulated that
will support the Yaounde' architecture, in full alignment
with the 2050 African Union Integrated Maritime
Strategy. We also acknowledge the work already done
by several United Nations bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the IMO,
and others such as Interpol. We remain committed to
working closely and effectively with them.

The African Union summit on maritime security
and safety and development in Africa, to be held in
Lome' on 15 October, will offer an excellent opportunity
to sustain momentum and awareness regarding the Gulf
of Guinea. To that end, we are ready to support the
Togolese Government and the African Union in their
work preparing for concrete deliverables at the Summit.

In conclusion, today's debate comes at a decisive
moment. I would therefore like to once again thank
Angola, China and Senegal for taking the initiative to
hold this debate. Overall, we are experiencing a growing
and possibly still underestimated threat to maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea. It is therefore the right
moment to consider how we can do more collectively
to prevent the situation from worsening further. The
work should proceed on several fronts - root causes,
law enforcement, capacity-building, maritime domain
awareness and job creation.

From the outset, the EU has been a fully committed
partner of the Gulf of Guinea countries and is
determined to remain so. Local ownership and local
leadership, particularly on the part of regional States
and organizations, is essential if our support, and that
of other international partners, will be focused where it
is most needed.

