Mr. Mladenov: On behalfofthe Secretary-General,
I devote my regular briefing on the situation in the
Middle East today to introducing the fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering the
period from 18 December 2017 to 25 March 2018. I will
focus on the developments on the ground in accordance
with the provisions of the resolution, including on
the regional and international efforts to advance the
peace process.

Let me reiterate from the outset that developments
on the ground cannot be divorced from the broader
context of continued military occupation of Palestinian
territory, uncertainties about the future of the peace
process and the two-State solution, unilateral actions
that undermine peace efforts, and continued turmoil in
the wider region.

Allow me to also express my continued concern over
the $446-milli0n funding gap for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). It must be bridged urgently
to ensure that UNRWA can provide basic services to
Palestine refugees, including to school half a million
children across the Middle East, until a just and
lasting peace is achieved. I welcome the approximately
$100 million pledged at the recent Extraordinary
Ministerial Conference in Rome. I encourage Member
States to consider urgently providing additional new
funding for UNRWA's critical work.

In its paragraph 2, resolution 2334 (2016) calls
on Israel to "immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem" and to fully respect
all its legal obligations in this regard. No such steps
were taken during the reporting period. I reiterate that
the United Nations considers all settlement activities to
be a violation of international law and a major obstacle
to peace.

Israel advanced 22 plans for some 1,500 housing
units in Area C settlements. Around a dozen units
were approved for construction - significantly lower
than the 1,200 units approved during the previous
three-month period. Ten tenders for some 900
housing units in seven Area C settlements were also
announced. Official figures released last week show
that construction starts in Area C settlements declined
in 2017 to nearly half the number of 2016, which was
the highest in over a decade. The plans include 15
temporary housing units near Gush Etzion, south of
Bethlehem, in an area outside the jurisdiction of nearby
settlements. These units are planned for residents of
the Netiv Ha'avot outpost whose homes are slated for
demolition on 15 June.

In response to the January shooting attack that killed
a rabbi from the Havat Gilad outpost, on 4 February the
Israeli Government approved the establishment of a new
settlement to absorb its residents. Havat Gilad is built
almost entirely on privately owned Palestinian land.

In related potentially significant legislative
developments, in January the Knesset passed an
amendment to the Basic Law on Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel. By requiring a super-majority of 80 votes in
the Knesset, the change will make it more difficult for
Israel to transfer territories that are currently within the
Israeli-defined Jerusalem municipality boundaries to a
future Palestinian State. Conversely, it also makes it
somewhat easier to change those municipal boundaries,
by lowering the previously required Knesset threshold
to a simple majority. On 7 March, the Knesset also
approved an amendment to Israel's law on entry to
Israel, allowing the revocation of the permanent

residency status of Palestinians in East Jerusalem
who are involved in terrorist activities, treason or
espionage, as defined in Israeli law. On 25 February, the
Government endorsed a bill transferring jurisdiction
over certain categories of petitions related to decisions
by Israeli authorities in the West Bank from the High
Court of Justice to the Court for Administrative Affairs
in Jerusalem. The bill's sponsors have described it as
a step towards equating legal procedures and norms in
the West Bank and Israel.

The Israeli authorities have continued to demolish
Palestinian-owned structures across the occupied West
Bank, including in East Jerusalem, albeit at last year's
relatively low rate. Ninety-two structures, including 15
that were donor-funded, were demolished, for reasons
that included a lack of building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. As a result,
104 Palestinians, including 42 children, were displaced,
affecting the livelihoods of more than 360 people. The
demolition of two donor-funded classrooms serving 26
children in the Palestinian Bedouin community of Abu
Nuwar was particularly worrying. For at least three
years now, the United Nations has been warning that
Israel has been putting steady pressure on Abu Nuwar
residents to move. The community is in the strategic
E-l area planned for the expansion of Ma'ale Adumim,
which would result in the creation of a continuous built-
up area between the settlement and East Jerusalem,
further dividing East Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank.

Similarly, on 21 March the Bedouin village ofUmm
Al-Hiran also came under renewed threat as Israeli
authorities posted eviction notices on homes indicating
that evictions could take place at any time between
14 and 29 April. In late December, in the Masafer Yatta
area of Hebron, where there are demolition orders
on most structures, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
blocked several access routes and issued a military
order requiring Palestinians to obtain permits to cross,
limiting access to services and livelihoods for some
1,400 residents in 12 communities.

Turning to the persistent problem of Violence,
the reporting period was characterized by continuing
demonstrations and clashes following the announcement
on 6 December in which the United States recognized
Jerusalem as Israel's capital, and the growing tensions
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and
along the Gaza fence. Israeli security forces killed
23 Palestinians, including six children, in various
incidents, including reported attacks against Israelis,
demonstrations, clashes and military operations in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Five Israelis - three
civilians and two soldiers - were killed by Palestinians
in separate attacks in the West Bank, including in East
Jerusalem. On 5 February, a resident of the Har Bracha
settlement was stabbed to death at the entrance to the
Ariel settlement. On 9 January, a rabbi from the Havat
Gilad outpost was killed in a drive-by shooting. Two
of the three alleged perpetrators were killed by Israeli
security forces during subsequent search-and-arrest
operations. On 18 March, an Israeli civilian was stabbed
to death in Jerusalem's Old City. The alleged assailant,
a Palestinian man from the West Bank town of Aqraba,
was shot dead by Israeli security forces. On 10 March, a
Palestinian teenager was shot dead during clashes with
Israeli security forces and settlers in the village of Urif,
after confrontations turned violent between Palestinian
villagers and residents of the nearby Yitzhar settlement.

During the reporting period, there was a worrying
escalation of violence in and around the Gaza Strip.
Improvised explosive devices placed near the Gaza
fence by Palestinian militants exploded on three
occasions, wounding four Israeli soldiers in one
incident on 17 February. On each occasion, Israeli
forces responded with air strikes and shelling against
Hamas targets. The Israeli military also announced that
it had destroyed three tunnels either fully inside Gaza or
leading from Gaza into Israeli territory. On 13 January,
before the escalation, the IDF also destroyed a tunnel
extending from Gaza into Israel and Egypt under the
Kerem Shalom crossing. In addition, 33 rockets were
fired from Gaza towards Israel, of which 11 landed in
Israel itself. The IDF retaliated against Hamas military
sites in Gaza. No injuries were reported on either side.

On 13 March, an improvised explosive device
targeting the convoy of Palestinian Prime Minister
Hamdallah and the Head of Palestinian General
Intelligence exploded in Gaza, with minor injuries to
six people. No one has claimed responsibility for that
so far. On 22 March, Hamas security forces conducted
an operation in the Nuseirat camp in Gaza, reportedly
targeting the chief suspect in the bombing of the Prime
Minister's convoy. During the operation, the suspect
and an accomplice were critically wounded and later
succumbed to their wounds. Two members of Hamas's
security forces were also killed during the incident.

Despite the call in Security Council resolution
2334 (2016) for the parties to refrain from acts of
provocation, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric,
such statements have continued. Fatah's official
social-media pages continued to feature posts
glorifying the perpetrators of past violence against
Israeli civilians, including terror attacks that killed
civilians and children. In addition, Palestinian officials
continued to make statements denying the historical
and religious connection of Jews to Jerusalem and its
holy sites. One senior religious leader made the false
claim that Jews had lived in historical Jerusalem for
only 70 or 80 years. Others continue to describe Israel
as a colonial project. I urge the Palestinian leadership
to continue to speak out against violence in general and
to condemn specific attacks against civilians. Senior
Israeli officials also made provocative statements
encouraging annexation of all or parts of the occupied
West Bank and categorically rejecting the notion of a
two-State solution. Some claimed that Palestinians are
an invented people; others referred to Palestinians as
bloodthirsty barbarians; and one political leader called
for more injuries and deaths in Gaza, complaining that
Israeli military strikes responding to rocket fire were
not producing enough casualties among militants. I urge
political leaders to refrain from provocative statements
and actions that fuel an already tense environment.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the calls by
the Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be
taken to reverse negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling a two-State solution. The period
has witnessed both positive and negative actions by
the parties in that regard. In January, after years of
negotiations, Israel approved the operation of local
Palestinian 3G service in the West Bank, allowing
Palestinian telecommunications companies to offer
higher speed data services and somewhat improve
their competitiveness.

There were two high-level meetings, in Paris
on 15 February between the Israeli and Palestinian
Ministers of Economy, and on 19 February in
Ramallah between the Israeli Minister of Finance
and the Palestinian Prime Minister and Minister of
Finance, aimed at discussing a range of economic and
infrastructure issues concerning the West Bank and
Gaza. On 18 February, Israel's Ministerial Committee
for Legislation endorsed a bill that would allow Israel
to withhold tax revenues that are collected by Israel
on behalf of the Palestinian Authority. The amount
withheld would be equivalent to the money used for
payments to the families of Palestinian perpetrators of
attacks on Israelis or for prisoners held in Israeli jails.
On 5 March, the Knesset advanced a more restrictive
version of the same bill.

Meanwhile, implementation of the intra-Palestinian
agreement of 12 October between Fatah and Hamas
has stalled. In February and March, Egypt hosted
delegations from the two parties in an effort to advance
the process of returning Gaza to the control of the
Palestinian Authority. I also held multiple meetings
with senior Palestinian and Egyptian officials in
support of that process.

On 4 March, the Palestinian Government approved
a $5.1 billion budget for 2018, while presenting the
option that if it were empowered in Gaza, it could
amend the budget and absorb up to 20,000 Gaza civil
servants as well.

In Gaza, the electricity supply remains far below
people's needs, with power cuts of up to 20 hours per
day. Without emergency fuel, 55 sewage pools are at a
significant risk of overflowing and the functioning of
48 water desalination plants has been reduced to around
20 per cent of their working capacity. Water is piped to
households for only a few hours a day, every four or
five days. Basic services continue to function thanks
to United Nations-distributed, donor-funded fuel for
generators, which is expected to last, at best, only until
September. Over 40 per cent of essential medicines
remain at zero stock due to the lack of funding.

After a lO-year delay, the Northern Gaza Emergency
Sewage Treatment project finally began operating on
1 March, albeit at minimum capacity. More sustainable
energy supply and other infrastructure projects need to
be urgently pursued in order to allow it to function at
full capacity.

In addition to a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian
situation, Gaza's economy remains on the brink of
collapse. Urgent interventions, alongside increased
commitment to short-, medium- and long-term projects,
provided the basis for discussions at the meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 20 March in
Brussels. Two preparatory meetings 4 one in Cairo and
the other in Washington, DC, respectively - helped
develop a series of priority engagements aimed at
improving the electricity, water and health situations
in Gaza.

A European Union (EU)-hosted pledging
conference for the Gaza Central Desalination Plant,
which also took place on 20 March, saw Member States
commit some $565 million - nearly 80 per cent of the
project's costs - thereby enabling the tendering process
to begin. That is a positive development for the people
and infrastructure of Gaza. Nevertheless, it is only one,
albeit important project required to ensure that Gaza
remains livable beyond the foreseeable future.

In a welcome development, over the past two
months, Israel has approved thousands of pending
residential cases, more than 130 private-sector
projects and over 1,200 requests for the import of
items that Israel considers to be of dual civilian and
military use. On 14 February, at a trilateral meeting
convened by the United Nations, Israel and the
Palestinian Authority agreed to continue with the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism and conduct a joint review
in order to improve the functionality, transparency and
predictability of the Mechanism.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all States to
distinguish in their relevant dealings between the
territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. There are two developments to report in that
regard. On 23 January, the Danish Parliament passed
a resolution with reference to resolution 2334 (2016),
and in line with European Union policy, urging that
future agreements between Denmark and Israel clearly
state their inapplicability to occupied territory and
encouraging the Government to strengthen its guidance
to private and public investors.

Also in January, the European Commission signed
a financing agreement with Israel, allowing the latter's
participation in the Joint Operational Programme of
the Mediterranean Sea Basin Programme under the
European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
for 2014-2020. In continuation of an existing EU
practice, the agreement includes a territorial clause
stating that

"[i]n accordance with EU policy, the agreement
shall not apply to the geographic areas that came
under the administration of the State of Israel after
5 June 1967".

Regrettably, the reporting period saw no progress
towards advancing the goal of a lasting peace, as also
called for in the resolution.

On 31 January, Norway and the European Union
convened an extraordinary meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, in which support for the two-
State solution, in line with relevant United Nations
resolutions, was reiterated. The participants stated their
support for ongoing efforts to restore unity between the
West Bank and Gaza under the control of the legitimate
Palestinian Authority, by focusing, inter alia, on urgent
projects that address pressing electricity, water and
humanitarian needs.

Speaking before the Security Council on
20 February (see S/PV.8183), Palestinian President
Abbas called for an international peace conference to
be held by the middle of the year to form a multilateral
mechanism in support of the parties to negotiate all
permanent-status issues within a specific time frame
and secure full United Nations membership for the
State of Palestine and mutual recognition of Palestinian
and Israeli statehood on the 1967 lines. On 23 February,
the United States announced that it would move its
embassy to Jerusalem on 14 May, which will coincide
with the seventieth anniversary of Israel's declaration
of independence.

In closing, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the provisions of the resolution
on the reporting period.

First, Israel's illegal settlement expansion and
related activities continue to further threaten the
viability of the two-State solution and erode the
prospects for peace. The latest decision to establish
a new settlement - for the second time since the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), following Amihai
in May 2017 - is particularly troubling. Meanwhile,
Palestinian development remains extremely restricted.
In Area C alone, there are nearly 13,000 outstanding
demolition orders against Palestinian-owned
structures, of which some 500 are ready for execution.
Less than 1 per cent of Area C, comprising over 60 per
cent of the West Bank and critical to the contiguity of
a future Palestinian State, is available for Palestinian
construction under approved plans.

Secondly, violence and incitement continue to fuel
hatred, division, distrust and fear. Continuing terror
attacks on Israelis and the attempt on the life of the
Palestinian Prime Minister illustrate the growing risk
of destabilization and the empowerment of radicals
and extremists. The use of force by Israel must also
be calibrated. Israel must uphold its responsibilities
under international human rights and humanitarian
law. Lethal force should be used only as a last resort,
with any resulting fatalities properly investigated by
the authorities. I once again urge the security forces to
exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid casualties.

I note the developing Palestinian plans for a march
on the Gaza fence on 30 March. I call on all sides to
exercise restraint and to take the necessary steps to
avoid a violent escalation. It is imperative that civilians,
in particular children, not be targeted and that all actors
refrain from putting children at risk at any time. I also
take this opportunity to reiterate my call on Hamas to
provide full information on the two Israeli soldiers and
two civilians who are being held in Gaza, as required
by international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, steps taken on the ground in Area C and
Gaza are welcome, but far from transformative. The
relaxation on the import of certain dual-use items and
the increased number of permits issued to business
people in Gaza are nevertheless important developments
that need to be sustained and augmented. Economic
development, critical as it is, is no substitute for
sovereignty and statehood. Efforts aimed at achieving
both must proceed in parallel.

Fourthly, the terrorist attack against the convoy
of Prime Minister Hamdallah in Gaza was a serious
attempt to derail the Cairo process and its perpetrators
must be brought to justice. In that respect, I call on
Palestinian factions to engage earnestly with Egypt
and move forward on the implementation of the Cairo
agreement. That includes the paying of salaries for civil
servants and the full empowerment of the Government
in Gaza. A fully empowered Palestinian Authority in
Gaza remains key to lifting the closures, alleviating
the humanitarian and development crisis in Gaza, and
furthering national aspirations for statehood.

I commend the Prime Minister's commitment
to continuing his efforts towards reconciliation and
commend Egypt for its tireless efforts in that regard.
The United Nations remains committed to supporting
Egyptian efforts to advance the process and welcomes
the efforts of the international community for a more
coordinated engagement in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.

I note with concern, however, that reports have
emerged today, indicating that Hamas has set up a
checkpoint at the Erez, or Beit Hanoun, crossing, which
controls the entrance of national and international
personnel into Gaza and the exit of all Gaza
identification holders. As per the intra-Palestinian
agreement of 12 October, all checkpoints should be
handed over to the Palestinian Authority.

Fifthly, I remain greatly concerned by the state
of our collective efforts to advance peace. Long-held
international consensus positions on final status issues,
including on Jerusalem and refugees, and United
Nations principles must remain the guiding framework
of a negotiated process towards the ultimate goal of a
two-State solution. Any deviation from those principles
would be dangerous. Resolution 2334 (2016) states in
paragraph 3 that the Security Council

"will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed by the parties through negotiations".

All final-status issues should be resolved on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, bilateral
agreements and international law.

As the Secretary-General has repeatedly reminded
the Council, the United Nations strongly urges Israelis,
Palestinians and the international community to take
concrete measures that will reverse the current course
of the conflict and advance the goal of a just and
sustainable peace, based on the two-State solution.
Generations of Palestinian and Israeli lives have been
shaped by the conflict. It is time to begin building a
different future, based on mutual respect, dignity
and the belief that even the deepest and most painful
divisions can be resolved if there is a genuine desire
for change.

