Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Shearer for his
informative briefing.

One year ago, South Sudan's leaders signed the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in South Sudan. Since then, the parties have taken
some meaningful steps towards lasting peace. Political
violence has decreased, and local reconciliation efforts
have gained traction.

The decisions of President Salva Kiir and
opposition leader Riek Machar to meet in Juba are also
welcome developments. However, to build confidence
in the peace process, engagement focused on tangible
outcomes is still needed. Unfortunately, the peace
process in South Sudan has focused too much on
dialogue between political elites and too little on the
suffering of the people of South Sudan. Seven million
people face food insecurity; 185,000 seek refuge in
protection-of-civilians sites, and more than 4 million
are afraid to return to their homes.

While these numbers are shocking, they cannot
describe what it must be like to see another harvest
come and go without enough food to feed your family.
These statistics fail to capture the struggle of moving
from camp to camp fleeing outbreaks of violence, only
finally to return home and find your house burned to
the ground. Meanwhile, the Government and other
parties impede the flow of humanitarian assistance,
and opposition recruitment has been reported at
protection-of-civilians sites. These practices must
stop immediately.

The Government of South Sudan and other parties
continue to conduct military operations, particularly
in the Equatorias, that brutalize their own people. We
call on the South Sudanese parties that have not signed
the Revitalized Agreement to renounce violence and
seek political resolution. We call on those who have
signed the agreement to engage with such parties in
a non-violent manner. Despite ongoing activity that
contradicts the letter and the spirit of the Revitalized
Agreement, the United States believes there is still
time for the parties to move closer to peace before
November's political deadline. To that end, we call on
South Sudan's leaders to agree to terms for security
arrangements and to resolve the critical issue of the
number and boundaries of states in South Sudan. We
also urge them to formally establish the hybrid court,
in partnership with the African Union, whose role in
the peace process, along with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), we support.

The people of South Sudan and key stakeholders
have stressed that durable peace is possible if women
play a central role in the peace process. We urge South
Sudan's leaders to recommit themselves to ensuring a
full and meaningful role for women in the mechanism of
the peace agreement and the transitional Government.

We endorse the call by the IGAD Council of
Ministers, on 21 August, for an ordinary summit
in September. We expect that such as summit would
address outstanding issues, including Mr. Machar's
freedom of movement and the appointment of a
permanent chairperson for the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. We also
encourage all relevant parties to continue seeking a
sustainable path forward for the protection of civilian
sites, as well as for the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of internally displaced persons.

As a final word, I am pleased to share that, in
partnership with South Africa, the United States
plans to lead a Security Council visit to Juba in the
near future. I encourage all of my colleagues on the
Council to participate in the visit so that we can use the
opportunity to personally convey our joint desire to see
South Sudan usher in a new era of peace and stability.
Likewise, the visit will give South Sudan's leaders the
chance to demonstrate to us that they have built the
foundation necessary to establish a credible, inclusive
and accountable transitional Government.

