Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Everyone acknowledges
that this is a decisive moment for the Security Council
and for international peace and security. The
importance of this meeting is evident, Sir, from your
presence here to preside over the proceedings of the
Security Council and from the participation of nine
other Foreign Ministers.

The Pakistan delegation has listened to the latest
reports from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, and we are
grateful to them for having once again made the
journey to provide us with the latest update on the
situation. Those reports indicate some important
developments since 27 January, and they also indicate
what remains to be done. The Iraqi Government has
responded positively to the three benchmarks on
process identified by Mr. Blix: acceptance of aerial
surveillance, interviews without minders, and the
adoption of national legislation. There were also
responses concerning substantive issues - for
example, the record of destruction of munitions.

Of course, as both Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
have made clear, there are a significant number of
questions and concerns that remain outstanding and
that must be addressed. Mr. Blix continues to see a
serious attitude on Iraq's part towards cooperation on
process, with greater cooperation required on
substance. It continues to be Mr. ElBaradei's
assessment that it is possible to disarm Iraq through
inspections. Of course, it is understandable that the
patience of some important members of the Security
Council is running out. It has been 12 years that United
Nations inspectors have had the job of seeking out
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction capabilities.

The intention of resolution 1441 (2002) was that
this process of discovery and destruction would be
accelerated. At the same time, we have also noted the
call to caution in the statement issued by three
members of the Council and endorsed by some other
Member States. The call by the Security Council in
resolution 1441 (2002) was credible because it was
unanimous. Iraq's new cooperation was due in no small
measure to the credibility of the Council's
determination to secure the elimination of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction.

We believe that the Security Council must
maintain this unity of purpose and action. We believe
that there are at present three elements around which
the Council can still unite. The first is the general
preference, even at this late stage, to secure the
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
through peaceful means.

The second is the conviction that, to achieve this,
in the words of resolution 1441 (2002), Iraq will have
to offer immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation - that is, to actually participate in the
destruction of its weapons of mass destruction
capabilities and to credibly demonstrate to the
inspectors of UNMOVIC that these weapons have been
destroyed. We believe that such cooperation would be
in Iraq's supreme interests. We are open to proposals
for strengthening the inspections mechanisms if that
can serve to accelerate the process.

The third is the readiness to allow some more
time to achieve the peaceful elimination of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction, but consistent with the
spirit and sense of resolution 1441 (2002). Mr. Blix has
said that, with Iraq's immediate, active and
unconditional cooperation, that time could be relatively
short.

Obviously, all people of good will desire that all
the possibilities for a peaceful resolution of this crisis
should be exhausted before the Council may decide to
bring into play the enforcement mechanism. The
decision to use force cannot be an easy one for anyone.
For Pakistan, an Islamic country of the region, such a
decision will be a most difficult one and we would
therefore like to see every effort exhausted for a
peaceful resolution of this crisis.

Pakistan attaches the highest importance to the
preservation of the unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq. We have a stake in the preservation of peace and
stability in the entire region. For us, the primary
concern is the well-being and welfare of the Iraqi
people. We must make every possible effort to ensure
that the suffering of the Iraqi people is not further
exacerbated. Indeed, our aim must be to bring an end to
the suffering of the Iraqi people. We trust and hope that
the Iraqi leadership will also put its people first.

