Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the outset, Djibouti wishes to express its deep gratitude to the delegations of Viet Nam for having convened this open debate on an issue of critical importance for the maintenance of peace and international security. We condemn the terrorist attack of unprecedented violence that brutally claimed the lives of 89 soldiers in Niger. The upsurge in terrorism and violent extremism and the enormous loss of life that they cause is a source of grave concern for the African continent. We must equip ourselves with the appropriate tools and develop a comprehensive approach to stop the perpetrators of such acts aimed at spreading terror and sowing death. Djibouti reiterates its congratulations to the incoming members of the Security Council and wishes them success. (spoke in English) The seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations provides an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the system of international law and international relations that the Charter put into place and to consider ways to further strengthen this vital institution, which has done so much to safeguard international peace and security and foster economic and social development. Reviewing the Charter's Preamble, as well as its purposes and principles as set out in Articles | and 2, one cannot help but be struck by how the concerns that motivated the Charter's adoption remain salient today, more than seven decades later. In fact, many of the most urgent challenges currently facing the international community can by their very nature only be effectively addressed through the approach of such collective action as is reflected at the foundation of the United Nations system. As we evaluate the United Nations' capacity for meeting those global challenges, one is heartened by the central role that the United Nations has already played in advancing the causes of peace, development and self-determination. Indeed, many of the most effective means for resolving disputes are explicitly mentioned in Article 33 of the Charter, which requires parties to a dispute likely to endanger international peace and security to seek its solution by, among other means, negotiation, mediation, arbitration and judicial settlement. Much of the international infrastructure for resolving such disputes is already in place. For example, the Charter's creation of the International Court of Justice as the United Nations' principal judicial organ provides forapermanent court to resolve legal disputes between States. It is encouraging to see how frequently States have invoked the Court's jurisdiction in recent years, not just to resolve disputes concerning international boundaries - which have become increasingly important to address, particularly as the extension of maritime rights to 200 nautical miles or beyond can give rise to disputes over access to ocean-based resources - but also to resolve disputes concerning such varied but important matters as transboundary pollution and human rights. States should be encouraged to make - as Djibouti has done - declarations under article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court, accepting the Court's compulsory jurisdiction. Where a State fails to comply with a judgement of the Court, the Security Council must not hesitate to act under article 94 of the Charter to decide upon measures to give the judgement effect. When the Charter was adopted, most of the world's peoples were subjected to colonial domination, especially in Africa. That is no longer the case. Much of the credit rightfully belongs to the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations. The Charter refers to the determination of the peoples of the United Nations to "save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind". It is a matter of deep regret that the world has often failed to meet that objective. Therefore, there is an urgent need to adapt the tools of the United Nations to current realities and the emerging transnational threats. We also need to collectively reflect on the decision-making process in the Security Council. Continued divisions and conflicts of interpretation of the Charter of the United Nations have undermined the Council's ability to respond effectively and decisively to emerging crises. Djibouti has joined the two initiatives that have been developed in response to the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities - the France-Mexico initiative on veto restraint and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct. The United Nations system offers tools for addressing many of the world's vexing problems, but to be effective they must be utilized, which in turn requires a greater level of awareness of their availability and the possibilities they hold. Djibouti urges the United Nations to engage in a concerted effort to make those mechanisms available through enhanced training and capacity-building. Under the rules of the African Union, it is indisputable that Djibouti should be the sole candidate of the Group of African States for a seat at the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, at the elections to be held in June. If elected, Djibouti will tirelessly continue to uphold and promote the rules of the United Nations Charter. Together, let us recommit to strengthening the rules-based international order. Together, let us open the new decade from 2020 to 2029 as a decade of the rule of law.
