Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Madame President, for presiding over this
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
in the Council today of Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao and to thank him for his briefing this morning.
This is an opportunity to acknowledge that his own
leadership and the constancy of his personal
commitment to the people of Timor-Leste have been
instrumental in the evolution of his nation.

I would also like to congratulate Special
Representative Ameerah Haq for the crucial work she
has been doing in Timor-Leste and for her helpful
briefing this morning. Of course, I also want to thank
the Secretary-General for that most recent report
(S/2011/32).

The progress Timor-Leste that has made over the
past few years is very impressive. The country today
enjoys a measure of security that would have seemed
almost unimaginable in the dark days of 2006. The
security forces, working with the support of United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
are developing the capacity to provide the security that
will underpin Timor-Leste's development themselves.
It is good to see that the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has now resumed primary
policing responsibility in 10 of Timor-Leste's 13
districts, reflecting the significant progress the PNTL
has made in recent years. An effective policing
capacity is fundamental in any country, just as a mature
and mutually understood relationship between the
police and the military is critical.

When we look at East Timor today, we see a
country that has had good rates of economic growth for
the past four years. Timor-Leste's Petroleum Fund is
performing well, which, together with wise public
investment and diversification in the nation's
development, should provide a sustainable basis into
the future.

The support of the United Nations and the
international community for Timor-Leste's
development has been important in assisting the
Government to make this progress. The United Nations
still has a key role to play to help to ensure that
progress made to date is sustained, as well as to
continue to support Timor-Leste's ongoing development
goals over both the short- and longer-terms.

In spite of the improvements of recent years,
significant challenges remain, as we all know. There
has been some progress in reducing poverty, increasing
school enrolments, achieving immunization and
tuberculosis control targets and reducing infant
mortality. But the fact is that many of the Millennium
Development Goal indicators are unfortunately still off
track and poverty levels still remain high, particularly
in rural areas. The health and education sectors remain
underdeveloped. The economy remains heavily reliant
on petroleum revenues. We encourage Timor-Leste to
continue working to resolve uncertainties over land
tenure and simplify business regulation, both measures
which would encourage the private sector growth that
is essential for economic development. It is also vital
that Timor-Leste continue to strengthen the
institutional framework for good governance. This will
require strong and effective leadership - the sort of

leadership we are in fact already seeing - and a
commitment from all levels of Government, civil
society and the broader community.

None of this, of course, is easy for any
Government, and identifying the problems is in no way
intended to sound negative, but rather to recall for all
of us the enormity of task that still needs to be done.
The Timor-Leste Government is showing real
leadership in this task, but the international community
continues to have a critical role to play.

The national elections scheduled for 2012 will be
a key milestone and a significant test for the national
police. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, it is
impressive as well as determinative to hear politicians
across the board in Timor-Leste eschew violence to
achieve political ends. We remain hopeful that, like the
suco elections in 2009, the national elections will
proceed peacefully and help to further cement Timor-
Leste's democratic foundations.

Australia supports the current plans outlined in
the Secretary-General's report for the United Nations
police contingent to conduct a modest drawdown this
year and then remain steady until after the 2012
elections. Of course, the final drawdown should take
into account the security environment in Timor-Leste
at the time. We also support the decision to conduct an
independent assessment of the PNTL and the United
Nations-led police expert assessment mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report.

Given that 2012 is close, there is clearly an
urgent need to plan for the end of the United Nations
Integrated Mission, not just in the policing sector but
in respect of the broad range of support it provides in
other sectors. We commend the work already done by
the Government and UNMIT to commence this
transition preparation and note that a lot more work
will need to be done quickly to ensure that the
transition process goes smoothly. This includes
ensuring that donors have time to factor into their own
planning any additional responsibilities that might
ensue.

We welcome Timorese resumption of policing
responsibilities. As I said, the resumption of primary
policing responsibility in 10 of 13 districts and most
units is a vital step. We look forward to the resumption
of policing responsibility in the remaining districts
once they have met the agreed conditions. It is
important that the integrity and reputation of the PNTL
is upheld, including through ensuring that the criminal
or disciplinary cases against individual PNTL officers
are completed and appropriate action taken.

Australia is aware that there will be an ongoing
need to support the development of the PNTL's
capability. We are working directly with Timor-Leste to
improve the capacity of its security forces, through
substantial bilateral programmes to assist with the
development of the PNTL and the Timorese armed
forces.

Through the International Stabilization Force
(ISF) and our contribution to the United Nations
police, Australia will continue to support the Timorese
Government and UNMIT to maintain security. As
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste, we
expect that the International Stabilization Force will
remain until after the 2012 elections. Future reductions
in the ISF will be made in close consultation with the
Timorese Government, our ISF partner New Zealand
and the United Nations. We are keen to ensure that ISF
structure and force levels are coordinated and
commensurate with UNMIT.

On development, we have heard the Timorese
Government's clear message to all of us that the people
of Timor-Leste must drive their own development
agenda. We welcome the forthcoming release of Timor-
Leste's Strategic Development Plan, which will guide
our own contribution to Timor-Leste's development.
We are currently its largest bilateral partner and this
year we will deliver over $100 million through the
partnership. This will help create employment by
assisting Timor-Leste to improve agricultural
productivity, infrastructure, vocational education,
private sector development and labour-intensive works,
such as road maintenance, which give jobs to young
people. It will also support the delivery of health and
education services and the Timorese Government's
own efforts to improve Government accountability.
To return briefly to the question of youth
unemployment, as we have said before the Council in
the past, this remains perhaps the biggest single
challenge and threat to future stability in Timor-Leste,
This is not a unique situation, as we know. As is now
starkly obvious, youth unemployment and its
consequences are among the defining realities globally
in our era.

In conclusion, let me state the obvious. Nation-
building is a very hard thing to do. Outsiders all expect

Governments to do probably too much in possibly too
short a time. Too many countries still struggle to break
the downward cycle. But Timor-Leste shows that it can
be done. Australia itself has had what for us has been a
unique bond with this new nation. We are very
seriously committed to standing with Timor-Leste to
help it secure a successful future, and to help it secure
that future on Timor-Leste's own terms. The
international community has equally been decisive in
working for Timor-Leste's future. We have confidence
that it will remain committed to what Prime Minister
Gusmao himself described this morning as a noble
mission.

