Mr. de Charette (France) (interpretation from French): The commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary
of our Organization would not be complete without a
solemn reaffirmation by the Security Council - upon
which the Charter of the United Nations confers primary
responsibility in this respect - of its commitment to
maintain international peace and security as well as its
determination to work, together with other United Nations
bodies, to meet the challenges of the next half century.

Allow me at the outset to express France's
wholehearted appreciation for Italy's laudable initiative to
hold this meeting at the Foreign Minister level. Members
of the Council can thus express their views on the system

 

of collective security of the Charter and assess what they
have learned from past experiences.

I should like also on this occasion to pay tribute to the
work of the Secretary-General of our Organization, whose
address before the Council bears witness once again to the
will and clarity that animate his efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations.

France has on numerous occasions had the opportunity
to present its views on ways and means to expand our
Council in order to enable it to better carry out the many
difficult missions with which it is charged.

I shall not go into detail with respect to our ideas, but
I should like to emphasize France's commitment to support
a rapid conclusion to the work of the Working Group of the
General Assembly. Two principles will guide France in this
undertaking: the necessary effectiveness of the functioning
of the Council, which must be preserved, and its
indispensable representative nature, which the changes in
today's world impose on us.
France has also shown concern to better meet the
request for transparency that has emerged without, however,
hindering the Council's ability to take rapidly the necessary
decisions. That is why my country last year adopted an
initiative aimed at assigning the proper importance to public
debate in the decision-making process.

At a time when no criticism is being spared this
Organization or our Council and accusations of inaction and
even impotence are repeatedly being made, we need only,
in order to be convinced that the world needs the United
Nations, tally up the Organization's accomplishments in
settling the conflicts born of, or inherited from, the cold
war and the new crises that have emerged in the wake of
the collapse of blocs.

A fair assessment should also highlight the
irreplaceable contribution of the United Nations: democracy
rebuilt in Namibia and Haiti; peace restored in Cambodia;
and thousands of human lives saved in the former
Yugoslavia. I should like, moreover, to pay tribute on this
occasion to the exemplary actions of all personnel who
have served under the United Nations flag in peace-keeping
or peacemaking operations, which have often taken a very
heavy toll in human lives. Nevertheless, tremendous
progress remains to be made. Major changes are necessary.
The restructuring of the United Nations can wait no longer.

The building of Europe, the primary axis of French
foreign policy, bears witness to the energizing nature of
historic reconciliations. That is why France lends its
support everywhere to the affirmation of solidarity and to
regional frameworks.

France believes that the regional organizations,
which are encouraged by the Charter to work towards the
peaceful settlement of disputes, can make a contribution
to international peace and stability, in keeping with the
principles of the United Nations.

None the less, according to the very terms of the
Charter, adopted 50 years ago in San Francisco, the
United Nations remains the only forum for the
organization of peace and security at the global level.
When a crisis requires a binding solution, the Charter
obliges us to go to the Security Council. It is up to the
Council, and the Council alone, to decide on measures of
constraint or on the use of force and thus give them the
legitimacy and expressed will of the entire international
community.

May this fiftieth anniversary of our Organization
lead us to pay tribute to the successes achieved thus far,
but especially to affirm our determination to reform the
United Nations and enable it, and our Council in
particular, to meet the challenges of the twenty-first
century. This political will on the part of all the members
of the international community will indeed be the best
guarantee of the full achievement of the ideals of the
Charter of San Francisco.

