Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, first of all let me congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to express our conviction that the
work of the Council under your presidency will be a
success.

This open debate on the situation in Afghanistan is
one of the links in this work and has provided a most
valuable opportunity for the many interested delegations
to express their views on the events unfolding in that
country.

Today's examination of the situation in Afghanistan
is not routine work for the Council; rather, it was dictated
by concern at witnessing the situation there become more
difficult. The Government of Uzbekistan welcomes the
consistent efforts by the United Nations aimed at national
reconstruction in Afghanistan.

The General Assembly resolutions adopted over the
last few years, the frequent statements by the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General's reports
on the situation in Afghanistan are testaments to these
efforts. This is equally so of the latest report. We support
the conclusions and recommendations it contains. We
should like to express our profound gratitude to the
Secretary-General, for his personal, great efforts in the
search for peace and national reconciliation in
Afghanistan.

We should like to express our satisfaction at and
support for the work of the United Nations Special
Mission in Afghanistan headed by Mahmoud Mestiri in
its efforts to mediate in that country. Even though the
results of the Mission's efforts to carry out its assigned
tasks are open to various interpretations, what is patently
obvious and not open to doubt is one thing: the activities
of the Mission are of extreme importance for achieving

 

peace in Afghanistan, it should be encouraged in every way
possible and the Council should take steps to bolster it
further. We note with satisfaction the recent decision for the
Special Mission to begin ongoing, practical activities
actually inside Afghanistan itself, in Jalalabad,

The Government of Uzbekistan hopes that
implementing the United Nations plan to restore peace and
achieve national reconciliation in Afghanistan will, at the
end of the day, bring peace to the peoples of that country.
We are absolutely sure that the international community
should take very seriously indeed the question of translating
into reality the documents and statements on this issue that
have been adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council. I should like to point in particular to the
importance of implementing General Assembly resolution
50/88 of 19 December 1995, particularly operative
paragraph 9 of its part B, which calls for an end to the
supply to the parties of weapons and of equipment to make
them.

In this connection, we would once again like to recall
the appeals made to the Security Council by the President
of Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Islam Karimov, during
the forty-eighth and fiftieth sessions of the General
Assembly. Please allow me to quote here from his address
to the Special Commemorative Meeting of the General
Assembly on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations:

"We believe that the conflict in Afghanistan could be
settled, first of all, by eliminating the interference of
external forces (...) We appeal once again to the
Security Council to impose an embargo on the supply
of arms to Afghanistan, irrespective of its source."
(Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 40th meeting, p. 13)

That idea is being supported by a growing number of
countries, as we can see at numerous meetings and talks at
various levels. We are aware of the enormous difficulties
connected with the practical implementation of that
decision. However, we feel that there is increased
awareness of the need to achieve peace in Afghanistan, not
only by implementing measures within that country but also
by fulfilling the obligations undertaken by all countries of
the world community. Only through collective efforts on
the part of the international community will it be possible
to put an end to the war in Afghanistan, and all countries
must comply with their obligations in that respect.

We all must focus our attention on the report of the
Secretary-General, on the statements made here and on
the idea of holding an international conference on the
question of Afghanistan under United Nations auspices.
Only through the collective efforts of the international
community will it be possible to put an end to the war in
Afghanistan, and only by ending the war there can we
begin to hope for security in all the Central Asian region.

