Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. China very
much appreciates the great amount of work he has done
to take forward the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). China has always
attached great importance to the Committee's work
and is ready to cooperate with its Chairman in an
orderly and stable manner to move forward all the work
associated with the Committee.

The resolution needs to be implemented in a
comprehensive and precise manner; however, sanctions
are not the fundamental objective of the resolution. The
Committee and the Panel of Experts should be amenable
to diplomatic efforts to resolve the nuclear issue.

In the period under review, the parties maintained
close contact on the relevant work of the Committee,
including on sensitive and complicated issues. China
believes that the parties should bear in mind the goal
of the resolution in a cautious, objective and balanced
manner so as to hold practical in-depth discussions to
cautiously arrive at conclusions.

As to the alleged violations, the investigation
should be conducted on clear facts and hard evidence.

China greatly appreciates the efforts made by the
Panel of Experts in drafting its report. We welcome the
extension of the Panel's mandate and will continue to
provide it with assistance and support. We hope that the
Panel will strictly abide by its mandate and that, under
the Committee's leadership, observe the principle
of neutrality and objectivity. At the same time, the
Council and the Committee should strengthen follow-
up and guidance to the Panel, in order to ensure that it
plays it proper role.

The nuclear issue has a bearing on the authority
of the regime established by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as on
peace and stability in the Middle East region. Finding a
solution to this issue through dialogue and negotiation
is the only correct, viable path. That is also the universal
aspiration of the international community.

China has always opposed the use or threat of use
of force. We do not favour increased pressure or new
sanctions against Iran. China has always maintained
that the international community should resolve the
Iran nuclear issue through dialogue, cooperation and
peaceful means. The six countries involved in this
process have reiterated that the issue should be resolved
in a phased and equal manner, and on the basis of
mutual respect in finding a comprehensive and long-
term solution to the nuclear issue. The parties should
now seize the opportunity to harness the positive
momentum and begin a new round of dialogue as
soon as possible. They should also foster confidence
and adopt a practical and flexible approach, duly take
into consideration one another's concerns and actively
expand consensus so as to take forward the dialogue.
At the same time, Iran should maintain and strengthen
dialogue and cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency so as to achieve agreement to resolve
pending issues.

China has maintained an objective, just and
responsible approach on the Iranian nuclear issue. We
have made contributions to continuing and advancing
the process of dialogue. China will continue to work
with all parties to make a constructive effort to resolve
this issue through diplomatic means.

