Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Afghan Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Tanin.

Uganda joins other members of the Council in
paying tribute to Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for
his tireless service and efforts in the pursuit of peace,
security and stability in Afghanistan. We once again
offer our sympathy and condolences on his passing to
his family and to the Government and people of the
United States.

Uganda congratulates the people of Afghanistan
on the completion of their elections, despite the
irregularities that were reported. We consider the
elections a positive step in the democratization and
healing process of the country. Now that elections are
over, we would like to encourage the Government to
reach out to all Afghans in the quest for peace and
stability in the country. There is no doubt that all sides
in the political spectrum will have to make efforts and
compromises in order to achieve a just and durable
political settlement.

We are concerned that the security situation in
some parts of the country has continued to deteriorate,
in spite of the efforts of the Government, supported by
the international community. Uganda condemns the
terrorist attacks by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups, which are aimed at disrupting peace
and security in the country. We welcome the efforts by
the Afghan Government to forge ahead with their
programmes for improving security, reintegration and
the formulation of a framework by which security
responsibilities will be handed to over to Afghan forces
in 2014. We commend UNAMA for providing support
in this transition period.

We welcome the improved bilateral and regional
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
are convinced that the stability and prosperity of
Afghanistan are inextricably linked to those of its
neighbours. We therefore encourage Afghanistan to
strengthen even further cooperation with neighbouring
countries on the basis of the mutual desire to respond
to security concerns and enhance economic
cooperation.

We also welcome the progress that the Afghan
Government and people are making by increasingly
taking leadership and responsibility for the
development of their country. That is, in our view, a
prerequisite for building sustainable peace and
development.

Afghanistan will continue to require international
support and partnership. We welcome the Kabul
process agreed upon by the Afghan Government and its
international partners. We call upon development
partners to align their support to priorities set by the
country.

Finally, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff
of UNAMA for the work that they continue to carry out
under very difficult and challenging circumstances.

Since this may be the last formal meeting of the
Security Council in which I participate as the
representative of Uganda, I wish to say, as we approach
the end of our two-year tenure on the Security Council,
how much of an honour and a pleasure it has been for
me and my delegation to work with all Council
delegates. I wish to express our sincere appreciation to
you, Madam President, and the Council's respective
delegations for the valuable cooperation and support
that the Ugandan delegation has received.

I also wish to express our appreciation and thanks
to the Security Council secretariat team and all other
staff members of the United Nations Secretariat who
have worked behind the scenes for their
professionalism and unwavering support during this
period.

Let me conclude by expressing our best wishes to
the delegations of Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal
and South Africa as incoming members of the Security
Council.

