Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela would like to begin by thanking
Japan for having convened this open debate, and we
welcome the participation therein of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who recently visited a
number of countries in the Middle East region. That
was part of his very firm commitment to seeking peace
and stability. Our country endorses the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

This open debate on the Middle East is occurring at
a very complex time on the international stage. Despite
the existing difficulties, the international community,
international and regional organizations, and countries
in the region are carrying out efforts to achieve peace
on the various war fronts. Nevertheless, we believe that
one of the fundamental elements needed to achieve
peace in the region is the resumption of peace talks
between Israel and Palestine. Those talks, which have
been stagnant for many years, constitute an ongoing
source of conflict in the region. To that end, with regard
to Palestine, we welcome the efforts made by France,
which resulted in the holding of an international
conference on the Middle East in early June. Similarly,
we take note of the recently released report of the
Middle East Quartet.

We had hoped for much more from that report. Most
of all, we had hoped for a more balanced report that
would have adequately described the disproportionate
Israeli violence against the Palestinian people and that
would have characterized the Israeli occupation as the
root cause of all the violence and conflict. We believe
that, had the Quartet report taken a clearer and firmer
stance, that stance could have persuaded the parties of
the need to resume dialogue and negotiations in order
to put an end to a conflict that has affected regional
stability for decades.

Unfortunately, we must recognize that, in spite
of the good intentions of the Quartet and all of the
diplomatic initiatives taken to create conditions for
dialogue and peace, we continue to face a key obstacle,
namely, the Israeli Government's refusal to put an
end to its illegal occupation of Palestinian territories
and its criminal blockade on the Gaza Strip. That and
that alone constitutes the main source of disruption
in Palestinian-Israeli relations. Guided by the most
extremist elements in its society, the Israeli Government
is acting in an aggressive and arrogant manner. It
refuses to participate in bilateral dialogue, because it
knows that it has a powerful and disproportionately
large military capacity and the support of prominent
Security Council members.

At previous Security Council meetings, we have
clearly stated our concern at the continually deteriorating
living conditions of the Palestinian people as a result of
the Israeli occupation. The occupying Power's impact
on the Palestinian people is felt in every aspect of their
lives. That includes the loss of the lives of at least 140
Palestinians since October 2015, deaths that occurred
at the hands of the Israeli security forces. There are
also military operations, clashes, demonstrations and
presumed or real attacks against Israeli citizens. We
do, of course, condemn those attacks. We reject and
repudiate the assassinations committed against the
defenceless Palestinian people by the occupying forces,
who are acting in a disproportionate manner and
who, to date, have yet to be held accountable for their
crimes and massive violations of the human rights of
Palestinians and of international law.
We also recall that since October of last year,
some 50 Palestinian minors have died at the hands
of Israeli military and security forces. Not only have
those confrontations been unequal, but in fact, many
boys and girls have died while engaging in activities
entirely unrelated to confrontation. Let us not forget
that, to date, thousands of Palestinians - including
more than 1,300 children - have been wounded since
the last quarter of 2015 as a result of Israel's actions. It
is outrageous that those actions have not been roundly
condemned and that demands for the occupying Power
to put an end to those abuses are not being made.

In addition to physical disappearances, Palestinians
are also being detained and imprisoned. More than
6,000 Palestinians, 400 of them boys and girls, are
currently detained and are serving sentences in Israeli
prisons. Of the total number detained, some 700 are in
what is known as administrative detention, an arbitrary
means of oppressing Palestinians, in flagrant violation
of their human rights.

The occupying Power is not content to simply
physically oppress the Palestinians. It has also devoted
efforts to negating any possibility for development
in Palestine, making the two-State solution
virtually impossible. The main instrument used by the
occupying Power to obstruct a definitive resolution, as
noted in the Quartet report, is the Israeli settlements
in occupied Palestine, recognized and denounced by
the international community as illegal and as a serious
obstacle to achieving a firm and lasting peace. Right
now Israeli settlers hold some 60 per cent of the land
in Area C, which has some of the most productive land
and the principal natural resources.

More than half a million Israeli settlers are living
illegally on Palestinian land, including 200,000 in East
Jerusalem. They undoubtedly represent the lack of
commitment by the Israeli counterpart to a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the Middle East conflict. The
fact that the Government of Israel says that the Quartet
report perpetuates the myth that Israeli construction in
the West Bank is an obstacle to peace only confirms
that Government's obsession to block any possibility
of a just and lasting solution that will guarantee peace
and security for both peoples and for the region. Israel
continues to act, in violation of international law and
resolutions of this Council, in a brutal and systematic
process of colonization of Palestine.

Israel's settlement policy in occupied Palestine
has also brought other harmful consequences, like
the violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
communities surrounding settlements. The settlers in
the West Bank have harassed, humiliated and violently
attacked Palestinian communities through vandalism
and criminal acts and destruction of Palestinian
property and have done so with total impunity, without
being punished by the Israeli authorities. On the
contrary, the authorities act to support some of those
excesses by the settlements.

To the defenceless position of the Palestinians we
must add Israeli restrictions on the movement of goods
and people to and from the occupied West Bank and the
criminal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip. That further
complicates reconstruction and the normalization of
life in that area. Similarly, it must be considered that
Israel's activities to modify in its favour the geographic
continuity of Palestine and its demographic composition
are accompanied by actions to alter the cultural identity
of regions that have historically been Palestinian. This
includes a lack of respect for holy sites, such as the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

This situation of suffocating and intolerable
oppression of the Palestinians cannot be concealed
or compared to other violent acts in the occupied
territories. All that Violence is the fault of Israel. It is
the result of the occupation of Palestine - an illegal
and criminal occupation that is constantly inciting and
provoking violence, declining to respect international
law and to seek a political solution that is based on the
two-State solution.

In this context, we call upon the Security Council
to emerge from its state of inaction with regard to the
occupation of Palestine by Israel. Council members
must urgently take up our commitment to this matter
and take action as soon as possible to make an effective
contribution to ending the conflict and to finding a
peaceful, just and lasting solution. We cannot continue
to hear in this meeting those grim accounts of violence
and death in the occupied territories.

The Council must also consider measures to
establish an international system of protection for the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention and
resolution 904 (1994). We also reiterate our call to the
Council to assume its commitment to the Palestinians,
to the United Nations and to the mandate granted it in
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security. It must demand
the end of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories - the cause of the conflict - while firmly
commiting to support Palestine's incorporation as a
full-fledged Member State of the United Nations.

With regard to the report ofthe Middle East Quartet,
we thank its members for the report and for their efforts
in considering the Palestinian question. Obviously, we
share the concerns expressed in the report with regard to
the two-State solution and how it is being compromised.
We agree that we must reject unilateral actions by
any of the parties that may affect the outcome of the
negotiations. We reject extremist violence, terrorism
and incitement to violence by Israelis or Palestinians.
Nevertheless, we should point out that we had hoped
that the document would be more comprehensive and
would have taken a broad perspective on what is a
serious conflict that is affecting the two-State solution.

In that context, we are concerned that the report
dilutes and minimizes Israel's responsibility as the
Power occupying Palestinian territory, attempting to
assign to Palestine the same level ofresponsibility in the
conflict, when the fact is that one cannot equate violent
Palestinian actions - which we do condemn - with
the disproportionate response of the Israeli authorities.

We all know of the efforts of the Palestinian
authorities to prevent and condemn violence, restrict
violent rhetoric and reduce tensions, strengthen its
governance and develop their economy. Those actions
appear as recommendations in the report, but none
of them have ended the Israeli occupation. On the
contrary, the aggressions of the occupying Power
have increased with the passage of time. Israel cannot
impose conditions, which we know are imposibile to
meet in the current situation, for the resumption of the
dialogue to find a political solution to the conflict.

The report and its recommendations suggest a
course of action. In the framework of the Arab Peace
Initiative, we must promote the peace process towards
a two-State solution, in which Israel and a free
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, live side
by side within secure and internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. That is the ideal
way to achieve the goal of establishing an independent
Palestinian State that will allow the Palestinian people
to enjoy their legitimate and inalienable right to self-
determination, and thereby put an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Finally, we urge the Security Council to fully
comply with its responsibilities in this regard. The men
and women of Palestine, and all those in the world who
yearn and struggle for peace with justice and dignity,
can count on the tireless support of Venezuela, within
the Security Council and outside it, for the Middle East
to be a region of peace.

