Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): First
and foremost, allow me to thank the Dominican
presidency for organizing this timely debate on such
a critical matter. This open debate provides us with
a unique opportunity to shine a light not only on the
question of climate-related disasters in all its urgency
and complexity, but also on how to best address it
institutionally under the aegis of the United Nations.

Brazil empathizes profoundly with the predicament
of countries affected by climate-related disasters,
especially those people located in disaster-prone areas,
who time and again are faced with the insurmountable
task of starting anew at the end of every hurricane
season or when the earth finally stops shaking.
Brazil recognizes the particular challenges that small
island developing States face, dealing with the fallout
caused by earthquakes, floods, mudslides and other
climate-related disasters on their people's safety and
well-being, as well as on critical national infrastructure.
Multilateral humanitarian coordination in the wake of
natural disasters is crucial to improving the situation on
the ground, be it by saving lives, providing immediate
relief to those in need or, at a later stage, assisting the
disaster-struck country with its reconstruction efforts.

Brazil has a long history of showing solidarity
with disaster-struck nations, and it could not act any
differently. To highlight one example among many, in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake that struck
Haiti a little over eight years ago, Brazilian Blue Helmets,
serving under the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, were able to act as first responders, handing
out clean water, food and basic medicine to the most
vulnerable segments of the Haitian population. Host to
both the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development in Rio in 1992 and its follow up
conference, Rio+20, Brazil is proud of its credentials
on sustainable development and climate change, both
domestically and internationally.

Our understanding is that environmental issues
do not fall squarely under the authority of the Security
Council, the primary organ charged with maintaining
international peace and security by the Charter of
the United Nations. Linking security issues to the
environmental agenda risks mistakenly assuming that
any environmental stress, or natural disaster for that
matter, will automatically lead to social unrest, armed
conflict and, eventually, to a threat to international
peace and security. There is no direct cause-and-effect
relationship between a natural disaster and the outbreak
of conflict, the causes of which, most of the time, are
manifold and vary on a case-by-case basis.

That is not to say that the Security Council should
refrain from taking climate factors into consideration
when a concrete and specific situation surfaces that
poses a danger to international peace and security.
If, on the one hand, natural disasters can have
consequences for the security environment, it is also
true that, conversely, armed conflicts can pose a danger
to the environment. Involving the entire community
of nations, and not only a few selected members, is
critical to coming up with the legal formula and the
institutional mechanisms necessary to put in place
the risk management strategies and the coordination
efforts needed to help Member States, Governments
and their peoples reduce the impact of natural disasters.
We should spare no effort in ensuring that our counties
are equipped with the legal framework and institutional
architecture necessary to deal with natural disasters.

