Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Norway, Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova.

Two months ago the Council held a public
meeting on Timor-Leste (see S/PV.5457); the situation
in the country seemed critical at that time. Sporadic
violence, arson, looting and gang clashes continued to
take place and the direction of events still seemed
unclear. Since then, the overall security situation has
been stabilized and the emergency phase has passed.
The European Union commends the countries that
responded positively when they were asked for help.
The quick reaction of Australia, Portugal, Malaysia and
New Zealand has been of immense importance.

In political terms, very significant steps forward
were taken when Mr. J ose Ramos-Horta was appointed
as Prime Minister on 10 July 2006 and when the new
Government was formed soon after that. The European
Union welcomes that political progress and wishes to
congratulate Prime Minister Ramos-Horta and Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, for their challenging assignments. The
European Union wants to assure the Security Council
of continuous European support for Timor-Leste and
the new Government.

It is necessary to emphasize, however, that it
would be erroneous to believe that the situation in
Timor-Leste is now stable and in order. The tension is
still there, and the humanitarian needs of a significant
part of the population are still clearly not being met.
More than 150,000 people are still internally displaced;
many refuse to return to their homes. Numerous
weapons remain unaccounted for and are presumed to
be under the control of both individuals and organized
groups. That climate of fear is a clear sign of the
prevailing fragility of the situation and of the need to
address the underlying factors of the crisis, which is far
from resolved.

The events of recent months will have to be
analysed with seriousness and honesty. The real
problems under the surface will have to be addressed in
order to achieve national reconciliation. The European
Union is pleased to note that that seems to be exactly
what the new Prime Minister intends to do. The
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-
Leste, as requested by Mr. Ramos-Horta and
announced by the Secretary-General, will have a
significant role in that effort. The Commission is
expected to report its findings by early October 2006.
The European Union also underlines that the
demand for justice and accountability for the serious
crimes committed in 1999 remains a fundamental issue
in the lives of many Timorese. The Union therefore
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste and its
recommendations aimed at completing investigations
into unresolved serious-crimes cases and promoting
reconciliation and community healing. The presidential
and parliamentary elections in 2007 naturally underline
the importance of political and national reconciliation.

The urgent goal of the international community is
to support Timor-Leste in consolidating public order
and pursuing reconciliation among all stakeholders and
all levels of society. It is obvious that the United
Nations will have a central role in that process.
Consequently, it is obvious that a strengthened and
long-term United Nations engagement will be needed
as we ensure Timorese ownership and the sustainability
of United Nations efforts.

The views of the Timorese Government -
clearly expressed in the letter dated 4 August 2006
from Prime Minister Ramos-Horta addressed to the
President of the Security Council - and the
assessment presented in the report of the Secretary-
General on Timor-Leste pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1690 (2006) must be among the guiding
factors when a decision is made on the size and form of
the future United Nations mission after the mandate of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
expires in a few days' time.

The United Nations should commit itself to
providing substantial support in various sectors,
including the rule of law, human rights, gender,
institutional capacity-building, conflict resolution and
comprehensive security-sector reform. It is essential
that the core functions of the new multidimensional
and integrated United Nations mission be carefully
identified and that the mission's mandate be decided in
a manner that avoids any unnecessary overlapping with
current United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other development partners, which are
already making very valuable contributions to the
development of Timor-Leste. Efficient coordination,
clear responsibilities and a clear division of labour are
preconditions for success.

The European Union and its member States have
been major development partners of Timor-Leste for
years, and the Union continues to pay close attention to
the situation in the country. The European

Commission's Special Envoy to Timor-Leste,
Mr. Miguel Amado, visited Dili quite recently to assess
the current situation and to consider ways to strengthen
European Commission cooperation with Timor-Leste,
including by establishing a Commission delegation in
Dili. The European Union is committed to continuing
to support Timor-Leste and is confident that, in these
times of difficulty, the United Nations will respond to
Timor-Leste's call for help in an adequate manner.

