Ms. Bird (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his commitment
to the plight of children caught in conflict and our
briefers for their tireless efforts to protect the world's
most vulnerable.

Australia reaffirms its commitment to the Paris
Principles and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on children in armed
conflict. We encourage all States that have not already
ratified or acceded to the Convention and Protocol to
do so expeditiously.

Despite the progress made in the 16 years since
the issue of children and armed conflict first appeared
on the Council's agenda, armed conflict continues to
take a terrible toll on children around the globe. As the
conflict in Syria enters its fourth year, the Al-Assad
regime's cruelty shows no signs of abating. A generation
of Syrian children faces deprivation, displacement,
violence, under-vaccination, malnutrition and disrupted
education. Schools are attacked, most often by Syrian
Government forces. Half of the refugees from Syria are
children.

We are alarmed by the threat posed to children
by extremist groups. Daesh continues its deplorable
campaign of Violence, including crucifixions,
beheadings and mass executions. Children are not
immune, as victims, witnesses and - disturbingly - as
forced participants.

Girls are especially vulnerable. Daesh supports the
sexual abuse of girls who have not yet reached puberty
and operates brothels where non-Muslim Iraqi women
and girls are held as sex slaves for Daesh terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2178 (2014) requires all nations
to prevent the financing, travel and activities of these
terrorists. It must be implemented fully by all States.
Stronger and more effective measures must be taken to
protect children, and, importantly, to rehabilitate them.

Non-State armed groups engaged in peace
processes are more likely to engage on child protection.
In the Philippines, Australia has worked closely with
UNICEF and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
(MILF) to establish community-based child-protection
networks, which have strengthened child-protection
systems in MILF command and conflict-affected areas.

It is crucial that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General continue her efforts to conclude
action plans with non-State armed groups, difficult
though that is. We urge Governments to facilitate and
support engagement by the Special Representative
to develop action plans and prevent the abuse and
exploitation of children.

Where parties to a conflict fail to adhere to their
obligations under international law, the Council should
use the tools at its disposal to ensure accountability,
including by providing political support for the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). ICC actions
can have an important deterrent effect on the use of
child soldiers by rebel groups. The vast majority of
groups listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
reports have been abusing children for more than five
years. This impunity cannot persist. Sanctions should
be used to full effect against those perpetrating grave
violations against children. We welcome the fact that
five sanctions Committees are already focused on child
protection.

The world has expressed its outrage at Boko Haram's
kidnapping of children and its targeting of schools. As
others have done, we encourage the Council to expand
its listing criteria to include abductions of children, and
request the Secretary-General to include in his annual
report those parties to a conflict that engage in these
abhorrent acts.

We expect that the high-level review of sanctions
will provide a strong blueprint to improve the
coordination and implementation of sanctions,
including the Council's response to the abuse and
exploitation of children. We encourage all States to
redouble their efforts to protect children caught up in
conflict. The Council must continue to seek practical
means to ensure the protection of children. We cannot
do enough to protect children. As others here have said
today, they are, after all, our future.

