The President (spoke in Arabic): I would now
like to make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Algeria.

I would like to thank the members of the Council
for their kind words addressed to me and to my
country, and I join them in thanking Mr. Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his excellent briefing on the progress made in the area
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict and for
the important information he has provided on what
remains to be done in this area so closely linked to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In spite of the gaps that remain to be filled,
significant progress has been made in the area of
protection, and we believe that it is appropriate to
welcome those advances in the context the Millennium
Declaration and the major projects undertaken - or to
come - aimed at adapting the Organization's response
to new challenges.

We are thinking, in particular, of the gains
resulting from the gradual implementation of the
recommendations of the report of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations, of the progress made in
halting impunity, of the improved coordination of
efforts in conflict prevention, particularly through the
establishment of an ongoing relationship with regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter and, more generally, of the progress made in
the reform of the United Nations.

That progress should be consolidated next year
by the decisions to be adopted following the debate on
the relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General
in response to the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change. It is timely that the
summit to be held in 2005 on the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals will be followed by
the periodic review requested of the Secretary-General,
thus enabling a timely five-year assessment.

The first report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957),
issued in September 1999 at the request of the Security
Council, and the exchanges between the two organs
pursuant to that report have provided some structure in
this area, which we think should be highlighted. At
various stages, the exchanges have enabled the
Organization to create inter-institutional mechanisms
and better-planned multidisciplinary peacekeeping
operations in order to address this very difficult issue.

In fact, the key concerns in the area of protection
are systematically highlighted in Security Council
resolutions, and greater importance is given to them in
the mandates of United Nations operations. Those
concerns relate to attacks against civilians, sexual
violence against vulnerable groups, humanitarian
access and the process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation, which remains the
fundamental element in the transition to peace.

Moreover, the more rapid deployment of United
Nations peacekeeping forces and of forces authorized
by the United Nations has given concrete substance to
the concept of preventive deployment, which is
intrinsically linked to the progress made in the regional
approach to conflict prevention. The regional
dimension of the protection of civilians is reflected
particularly in the decisions taken in the area of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation and the cross-border movement of
refugees, combatants and small and light arms.

That definite progress should not lead us to
overlook the numerous gaps in the legal and physical
protection of civilian populations caught in the grips of
war. That remains a long-term task. In fact, far from
decreasing over the last five years, the number of
people requiring protection has increased from 30 to 50
million. The complex nature of crises and aggravating
factors, such as illicit arms trafficking, illegal
exploitation of natural resources and mercenaries, all
contribute to the deliberate targeting of non-
combatants and have increased considerably the level
of resources required in response.

The international community has in recent years
shown on many occasions its determination to react
swiftly to situations of emerging crises with the
appropriate means, namely by providing peacekeeping
operations with strong mandates. In our opinion, it
should show the same determination to mobilize the
necessary resources as soon as it is foreseen that such
needs will increase before the positive long-term
effects of conflict prevention are felt.

We are particularly concerned about preserving,
through the allocation of an adequate level of
resources, the gains that have been made through the
regional approach to protection, because the burden in
that respect continues to fall primarily on those States
neighbouring conflict zones and on subregional
organizations, whose main goal is not the maintenance
of international peace and security but, rather,
integration and cooperation among their members.

Furthermore, the fact that immunity of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel is increasingly
being breached is a disturbing development that raises
the issue of respect for international humanitarian law
as well as that of impunity. We must accordingly
strengthen the mandates and capacities of
peacekeeping operations as well as increase awareness
of the norms of international law and insist on their
respect by the parties to a conflict, including non-State
armed groups.

With respect to United Nations peacekeeping
forces, whose primary mission must be to reassure and
protect civilians, their behaviour vis-a-vis civilians, in
particular towards women and children, must meet the
highest standards in terms of respect for the law. Given
that reports indicate that certain reprehensible acts
continue to be carried out by some United Nations and
peacekeeping operation personnel, despite the circular
issued by the Secretary-General, greater firmness must
be shown in that regard.

Let me now turn to an important aspect of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which has not
always received the necessary attention from the
Council. My delegation believes that the first line of
defence with respect to international humanitarian law
and the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which form its
basis, can be found in the occupied territories.

In occupied Palestine and elsewhere in the
Middle East, situations persist that are characterized by
massive and flagrant violations of international law and
of the humanitarian principles that govern the
protection of civilians. Although such violations are
committed by clearly identified State actors, the
Council has not always shown its usual determination
and resolve in that respect. There can be no doubt that
its credibility and that of the international community,
with respect to the very sensitive issue of impunity, are
being sorely tried by the use of a policy of double
standards, which benefits in particular Israel.

The current debate provides the Security Council
with a fresh opportunity to make the necessary
adjustments. From the normative point of view,
situations of occupation have shown that renewed
efforts must be made to take into account military
operations conducted by regular armies in an urban
environment or in heavily populated areas in order to
limit the questionable concept of "collateral damage".
Given the proliferation today of highly destructive

conventional weapons, the message sent by the
international community with regard to protecting
civilians would be that much stronger.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I propose, with the consent of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
