Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to begin,
Mr. President, by commending the excellent work
done by your delegation during your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Through you, I would
like to extend our deepest appreciation for the job well
done by Malaysia during its presidency of the Council
for the previous month. I would also like to extend our
deep appreciation to Mr. Mladenov for his sobering
briefing.

We meet today while the Middle East faces new
challenges, but the Middle East is still tormented by
the Israeli occupation. One year ago, Israel unleashed
its military operation against Palestinian civilians in
Gaza 4 51 days of continuous Israeli raids, killings,
massive destruction and disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force. The words of an Israeli
soldier from the report entitled This Is How We Fought
in Gaza say it all: "By the time we got out of there, it
was all like a sandbox". That is what they did to the
people, while also maintaining their blockade on Gaza.
Today the situation in Gaza continues to deteriorate.
The Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
reports that not one of the 12,620 totally destroyed
units has been rebuilt, while the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East states that 880,000 Palestine refugees rely on
quarterly food assistance. The International Monetary
Fund sounded the alarm when it declared that the
unemployment rate had reached 46 per cent.

Makarim Wibisono, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, captured the essence of Israeli
practices in the West Bank and East Jerusalem when
he said that occupation policies constrain Palestinian
life and push Palestinians to leave their land and
homes, especially in Area C of the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. Suffice it to mention that in 2014
the Government of Israel demolished 493 Palestinian
structures in Area C, and today it threatens to demolish
the village of Susiya village, near Hebron. In the first
quarter of 2015, the same Government authorized the
continued construction of settlements in the West Bank,
with a 219 per cent spike in completed housing and a
93 per cent rise in starts. That is a typical approach by
Israel: not to miss an opportunity to negate the two-
State solution by stalling the process and seizing land.

In the midst ofthis desolation, the historic agreement
between the Vatican and the State of Palestine is a ray
of hope. It should summon the moral audacity of the
international community to finally break the political
stalemate and to translate the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people into realities. Indeed, the Security
Council should do much more to establish a new,
credible and comprehensive framework for negotiations
to be concluded in a defined time frame and based on
the well-known parameters set by the relevant United
Nations resolutions 4 in particular General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) - the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

During this month, the total number of Syrian
refugees has exceeded 4 million 4 the biggest refugee
population from a single conflict in a generation,
according to High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio
Guterres. More than 1.2 million of those refugees fled
to my country and are registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The
situation of those refugees and their host community
remains extremely challenging. My Government
continues to work relentlessly with the international
community. The latest endeavour in this regard was
the adoption of the Lebanese crisis response plan.
Yet it is alarming that only 21 per cent of the plan
has been funded. Time and again, we have reiterated
that it is imperative to counter the refugees' despair
by widening the humanitarian space, based on the
principle of shared responsibility, and by intensifying
resettlement programmes. Those refugees and their
host communities should not be forgotten or ignored.

This month coincides with the commemoration
of many atrocities around the world: the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica, the ninth
anniversary of the Israeli war on Lebanon, which
ended with the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), and
the first anniversary of the most recent Israeli war on
Gaza. For all the victims 4 women, children and the
elderly - our message and actions today should be:
"Never again".

