Mr. Michel (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey - align
themselves with this statement.

Allow me, first of all, to extend my thanks to the
members of the Security Council and more particularly
to its presidency, for having organized this open
discussion at a time when significant developments are
taking place in Afghanistan. The Northern Alliance has
entered Mazar-e-Sharif and Kabul. At a time when the
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, is preparing his recommendations for the
Security Council and the Security Council is preparing
to adopt a resolution that will support the efforts of the
United Nations and Mr. Brahimi in Afghanistan, this
meeting provides the international community as a
whole with the opportunity to make its voice heard.

At the outset, I wish to restate the European
Union's support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative. The Union will look
favourably on any recommendations Mr. Brahimi may
prepare, and we salute his efforts to date. I also wish to
recall that the European Union as such wishes to
participate actively, under the aegis of the United
Nations, in the quest for a political solution and in the
subsequent reconstruction of Afghanistan.

All of us here agree that terrorism is a real
challenge for the whole world. On several occasions
the European Union has expressed its total solidarity
with the American people and Government. It has also
made it a priority objective to combat the scourge of
terrorism. We are convinced that this fight requires as
broad an international coalition as possible, under the
aegis of the United Nations. This Organization remains
the most appropriate forum for reinvigorating and
reinforcing the efforts aimed at eliminating
international terrorism. By holding yesterday's
ministerial discussion and adopting a resolution, the
Security Council highlighted this fact once again,
which I welcome. The threat we face today is global,
and so must be the cooperation between all cultures,
religions and societies. The fight against terrorism is
not directed at the Muslim world. We respect the
Islamic traditions and the values it has brought to the
world.

The European Union firmly supports the targeted
military operations that began on 7 October, which are
legitimate and in accordance with the terms of the
Charter and Security Council resolution 1368 (2001).

As our heads of State and Government stated on
19 October, the objective is, and will continue to be, to
eliminate the Al Qaeda terrorist organization, which
was unquestionably behind the terrorist attacks on 11
September. Its leaders have not been handed over by
the Taliban regime, which has, on the contrary,
continued to harbour them. The target of this military
campaign in Afghanistan is clearly not the civilian
population. We believe that this civilian population,
which is already the victim of a serious humanitarian
crisis and which has endured the oppressive Taliban
regime for far too long, must as far as possible be
spared the consequences of the military operations.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
quite simply alarming and is continuing to deteriorate.
We know that this crisis will worsen with the onset of
winter. The evolution of the situation on the ground has
to be used to quickly improve the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and to come to the aid of the
refugees and the displaced persons.

Emergency humanitarian aid remains an absolute
priority for the Union, which has undertaken to
mobilize without delay aid amounting to more than 320
million euros. We also wish to stress the importance of
releasing the funds promised by the international
community.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
United Nations specialized agencies, of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and of all
humanitarian organizations involved in seeking
practical and flexible solutions adapted to needs. It also
appeals to the countries of the region to facilitate, by
all means possible, the humanitarian operations for
taking in new flows of Afghan refugees. As I was able
to see during my recent trip to the region, the
neighbouring countries are also suffering the
consequences of the crisis in Afghanistan. The Union
therefore calls on the international community to come
to the aid of these countries.

At this crucial moment for the future of
Afghanistan and regional stability, the European Union
would like to reiterate the position it has taken since
the beginning. There will never be peace and stability
in this country unless a democratic and broad-based
Government, including all ethnic groups, is established
there. That Government will have to adhere to the
commonly accepted principles of respect for human
rights and law.

The European Union believes that it is up to the
United Nations and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to play a central role in helping the
Afghans in their difficult task of establishing such a
Government. The Union stands ready to support the
United Nations' plans wards this end. It strongly insists
that the Northern Alliance contribute without any
reservations to those efforts, in particular by
temporarily holding Kabul in trust, for the benefit of
the entire Afghan people. We are convinced that any
political settlement in Afghanistan must be based on
the will of the Afghans themselves.

We wholeheartedly support the current and future
United Nations efforts to achieve this strategic
objective. However, no one underestimates the
difficulties that remain to be overcome. The
uncertainties surrounding the length and consequences
of the military campaign mean that the United Nations
will have to play it by ear to a certain extent. Any
strategic vision must take this into account.

The European Union stresses the importance of
incorporating a human rights dimension into any
settlement concerning Afghanistan. Under the Taliban
regime, serious violations of human rights and of the
principles of humanitarian law have been committed.
We have in particular condemned the discriminatory
and inadmissible treatment of women, whose most
basic rights are systematically and methodically
flouted.

Post-conflict resolution represents a tremendous
challenge. Afghanistan is one of the poorest countries
in the world. It has been through 20 years of invasion,
civil war and natural disaster. For more than four years
now it has been beset by drought. Once we have
succeeded in establishing a Government that is stable,
legitimate and representative of the whole population,
the international community will have to embark on a
programme to reconstruct the country. That is why the
Union considers it so important to initiate a plan for the
economic and institutional reconstruction of
Afghanistan right away. It is essential for the political
process to be backed up by economic aid. The
development of agriculture will help to combat the
cultivation of opium poppies and drug-trafficking. The
implementation of a mine clearance plan will facilitate
the aid delivery and the return and reintegration of
refugees and displaced persons.

The challenge before us is vast and
multidimensional. Success will depend in large
measure on our ability to take account of the regional
dimension. It is clear that stability in Afghanistan will
increase regional stability. On the other hand, a lasting
solution in Afghanistan presupposes that the legitimate
interests of neighbouring countries are taken into
account. It is therefore vital for those neighbouring
countries to be closely involved and to play a
constructive part in the United Nations efforts. These
efforts would be further facilitated by coordination
between the countries of the region themselves. The
Union intends to enhance its relations with
Afghanistan's neighbours and hopes to contribute
through its initiatives to reinforcing the process of
regional stabilization to be led by the United Nations.

The aim of our action is to assist the United
Nations in its efforts to help the Afghan people help
themselves. It is essential for the international
community to participate in these efforts. The
neighbouring countries and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference will obviously have an important
part to play. As for the European Union, the Council
can count on its active support.

