Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important debate.

This topic is not a new issue for us, but remains very
relevant today. Therefore, Indonesia has set counter-
terrorism and synergy between the United Nations
and regional organizations as two of four Indonesian
priorities during its term on the Security Council. Iwould
like to underline once again that the link between the
two is indeed pertinent in today's context, particularly
in addressing the current phenomenon whereby the
global terrorism movement has transformed itself into
small franchise cells, finding its breading ground in
our region and home.

One thing is for sure - terrorism will always
find new ways and forms in posing a threat to the
world. It is our job to be ready to deter it. That is why
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is vital to preventing,
countering and safeguarding our community from all
present and future threats posed by terrorism. With
that in mind, there are at least three points on how we
can strengthen, expand and enhance cooperation in
this area.

First, there is the matter of strengthening efforts to
prevent the spread of terrorist ideology. There should
be no room, space or condition for the terrorist ideology
to grow. We need to ensure that there are no precursor
conditions that allow terrorists to spread their ideology.
Such precursor conditions - including, inter alia,
prolonged conflicts, poverty, religious intolerance,
violent extremism, Islamophobia and nationalist right-
wing movements - must be addressed.

For prevention, we need to ensure fully functional
Government, advance socioeconomic growth and
development, promote inclusive and tolerant societies
and develop early warning mechanisms, among others.
Such efforts should begin at the national level and can
be supported by regional and global efforts.

Secondly, there is the need to strengthen regional
and subregional mechanisms in countering terrorism.
Developing the right tools and mechanisms is key to
addressing terrorism and its many manifestations. That
is why, in addition to the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Convention on Counter-Terrorism
and its 2012 plan of action, Indonesia, Malaysia and the
Philippines have also established trilateral cooperation
to address distinct transnational threats posed by
terrorist groups in the Sulu Sea. The framework enables
joint air, land and sea exercises and border patrols, and
has so far been effective in reducing the number of
terrorist attacks and incidents in the Sulu Sea.

Thirdly, we must replicate and align strategy at the
global level with those at the subregional, regional and
national levels. Efforts at the multilateral level should
strengthen our endeavour at the regional and national
levels. This has been the case in our region, where
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism became the main point of reference
for the creation of ASEAN Plan of Action to Prevent
and Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent
Extremism 2018-2025, which in turn has become
the main source of our draft national action plan on
countering violent extremism.

In conclusion, no country or region is immune from
the threat ofterrorism. Therefore, global cooperation is
the only feasible way to counter it. Our meeting today is
very useful for strengthening our global collaboration
in countering terrorism.

