Ms. Bellamy: Let me begin by thanking the
Argentinean presidency for giving us the opportunity
to address the Security Council in its open debate on
Haiti.

The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) is
pleased to note the continued interest of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in
the human development dimensions of building peace
and security in Haiti. We have, through our team on the
ground, seen many examples of personal engagement
by the contributing troops to the well-being of
children, whether in Gonai'ves or elsewhere in the
country.

I would also take this opportunity to acknowledge
the important leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Juan Gabriel Valdes.

Today, I have been invited to contribute our
perspective on the situation of Haitian children, who,
as this Council may be aware, represent close to one
out of every two Haitians. In Haiti, one child under
five dies each hour. Every day, a mother dies giving
birth. Four children out of 10 do not go to school. One
child out of four suffers from chronic malnutrition, his
or her growth stunted forever. How can we guarantee
Haitian children their childhood? How can we build
peace and security and the future of that country
without ensuring the survival of its children?

The present peace process in Haiti is the third in a
period of 15 years. Imagine if we had invested much
more in Haitian children 15 years ago. Let us get it
right this time around and recognize that investment in
children is the best foundation to build a strong and
peaceful nation.

Haiti has never had universal and free education,
a fundamental factor for peacebuilding, for
reconciliation and for long-term sustainable
development. Education not only protects children, it
builds and gives them a sense of purpose and of a more
positive future. It helps them to become responsible
citizens who can contribute to the development of
Haiti. Simply, it takes them out of the negative vicious
circle of poverty and violence. It gives them hope.

I do, however, have good news. Under the
auspices of the Transitional Government, education is
becoming a more dynamic sector in Haiti, actively
supported by the donor community. Equally
encouraging, the private education sector, which
represents about 85 per cent of the total, is now more
integrated into the national education system.

A truly global, integrated approach also requires
essentials such as immunization, access to clean water
and decent sanitation, good nutrition, care and
protection from abuse. Children who have lived
through what no child should ever have to live through
need psychosocial affective support. Together with
many partners in the United Nations and externally, we
are strongly supporting actions in those areas.

Traditional donors, international financial
institutions, as well as countries in the region are
responding to the commitments they made about six
months ago in Washington, DC. In our view, after the
difficult year 2004, Haiti is now at a turning point.
There are good signs of progress, but children still face
major challenges. For example, we are increasingly
concerned by the thousands of children in Haiti living
today on the streets, often serving as domestic helpers
in slavery-like conditions, being trafficked or
experiencing other forms of exploitation. Many have
been drawn into gangs, their childhood literally stolen.

It is incumbent on all of us - adults, decision-
makers and leaders - to help break the cycle of
violence in Haiti and better to prevent and protect
children from abuse. So I would like to make a special
appeal to the Council and to MINUSTAH. In slum
areas like Cite Soleil and very poor urban areas - for
example, around Gonai'ves - children are held hostage
under the brutal and criminal rule of local gangs.
Today, the children in those places are denied their
very basic human rights. My plea to the Council is to
help them. I urge the Mission to keep on securing
urban areas such as Cite Soleil to guarantee a degree of
normal life and to allow the Haitian institutions, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
to work unhindered.

Finally, UNICEF appeals to every actor to
redouble its support for Haitian children. All of us
share in the responsibility for relieving their suffering.
Investing now in the survival, education and protection
of children is indeed investing in the future of Haiti.

