Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank Ambassador Greenstock for his excellent and
inclusive leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the important work carried out
so far. I would like also to thank the Secretariat and the
team of CTC experts. The tasks they perform greatly
facilitate the effective and uniform implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by the Member States.

The legitimacy of, and global adherence to, the
Committee's work is clearly demonstrated by the
number of reports submitted to it. We look forward to
reports by all Member States.

Information obtained so far suggests that terrorist
groups are already finding it increasingly difficult to
receive funding through international channels.

For the legal and financial measures envisaged in
resolution 1373 (2001) to function as intended, it is
essential that all Member States implement the same
barriers on the transfer of terrorist funds. Norway
supports the CTC approach to offer assistance to those
States that have not been able to report on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) to the
Committee. We have submitted information to the CTC
about available Norwegian experts in various relevant
fields.

Norway highly appreciates the cooperation of,
and partnership with, African countries in combating
terrorism. Recently, Norway concluded an agreement
with the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on a
project aimed at the effective and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the OAU
and its member States.

There is, in our View, no contradiction between
the obligations set forth in resolution 1373 (2001) on
the one hand and the obligation to protect human rights
on the other. The effective implementation of anti-
terrorist measures nationally should not be perceived
by anyone as an excuse to disallow fundamental rights
and freedoms. Continued contact between the CTC and
the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
will prove mutually useful.

