Ms. Khurram: Early one morning, a young father
was taking a walk with his children in the quiet of his
village. As the father slowed to fix his ride, he told his
children to go on ahead. Only a few moments had gone
by when a horrific sound shook their fragile little hearts
beating apace. As they rushed back to their father, they
saw him torn to pieces and what was left of him on fire.
They hurried to put out the fire consuming what was
left of their beloved guardian, and then they rushed to
gather up his remains. Sohaila, who is only two, and
Wajidullah, aged four, have yet to realize they were the
victims ofa drone strike.

A few short miles from this scene, there is
an orphanage where I have visited the orphans of
war. Most of them are victims of suicide bombing
attacks - a scene that has forever changed my life. I
heard one child, Royina, speak for the rest, her words
cracking everyone's heart in the room as she spoke of
her miseries. Another, Zuhra, only nine years old, lost
her father in a rogue suicide bombing attack in Kabul.
That was the moment they each lost not only a parent
but their future, a breadwinner who should have held
their hands throughout their childhood. Now, eyes
filled with tears, one cried out the words: "How can I
think of the future? I do not want to just peddle away
my childhood on the streets."

I am privileged to address the Security Council in
my capacity as Afghan Youth Representative to United
Nations. The events that I described at the beginning of
my speech are not stories from the last century or from
the medieval era. This humanitarian catastrophe is the
reality of our age, and for this we all will be judged
by history, just as history has judged those before us,
for the injustice that we allow and for the silence that
we choose to keep. Are we still deluded that we will
be forgiven?

Such scenes are rare for many people in this world,
but we are living this reality. More than 100 people are
killed or wounded on a daily basis in my country. They
have families. It is hard to explain what they feel and
go through when they see the dead bodies of their loved
ones. Civilians, in particular youth and children, have
become witnesses and victims who are often caught in
the increasingly ruthless violence carried out by the
warring parties.

This war has crushed hopes, destroyed dreams
and snuffed out innocent lives, but amid this chaos we,
the Afghan youth, commend resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted by this very Council, which has bestowed upon
me the privilege and the responsibility to deliver the
genuine messages and share the concerns of Afghan
youth, mindful of the enormous challenges of our
moment in history. I applaud the Afghans for their
efforts, progressive thinking and organization, and the
German Embassy in Kabul, which, in collaboration
with the United Nations, has provided this remarkable
opportunity to Afghan youth.

Violence across Afghanistan underscores the urgent
need to end the conflict through a negotiated settlement.
This war is an imposition upon the Afghan people, the
product ofa great game, and we have been dragged into
it and made its primary victims by no will of our own.
Eighteen years of ground and aerial operations have not
succeeded in bringing an end to the conflict. We want
a peace that is balanced and sustained so as to prevent
crises like these from ever happening again.

We meet at a time when Afghanistan is in a
critical but highly uncertain situation. The ongoing
peace process, presidential elections and the possible
withdrawal of foreign troops are combining to define the
fate and future of our country at a time when Afghans
are deeply frustrated and weary of the continued
violence. This is not just a war on terrorism anymore;
this is now a war against innocent civilians who want
nothing but peace. And the most heartfelt cries one will
hear from Afghan victims suffering from this calamity
will be their pleas to stop the war and cease the killings.
Afghan villages are no threat to anyone.

Afghanistan is one of the most youthful countries
in the world, with 63 per cent of its population under 25
years old. Therefore, the greatest price for this conflict
is not paid by politicians or battlefield elites; it is paid
by Afghan children and youth. Violent conflict has
plagued our country for decades, and that exposure to
violence and uncertainty has shaped the lives of young
Afghans. I am here for them today because this is also
their United Nations, and my generation trusts that the
truth alone will ensure international action.

The message I deliver today on behalf of
Afghanistan's younger generation is one of hope, but at
this critical moment in time, hope has been overtaken
by the fear - the fear of being excluded, forgotten and
sacrificed. Over the past two months, I have redoubled
my efforts to reach out to as many young people as I
could. I have been to several universities, academic
institutions, orphanages and community groups. I
have launched an online survey and created a hashtag
on social media with the name of #AfghanYouthCall.
I have met young people from almost every province
of Afghanistan in the Afghanistan National Youth
Assembly for Peace. I have travelled outside Kabul
province and organized round table discussions. As I
travelled - mile after mile, door after door, community
after community - all I found was a shared craving
for peace. One common message echoed over and over
again - "We want peace, a safe life and access to
education, and we want to have a voice in the decisions
that affect our future."

Right now, reconciliation and peace are
Afghanistan's highest priority, and the key to ensuring
sustainable reconciliation is to ensure that the voices
of Afghan youth from both sides of the conflict are
considered in the peace process. Since this peace belongs
to the people of Afghanistan more than to anyone else,
it should bear our endorsement. Our endorsement alone
will ensure the legitimacy of any deal reached during
the peace process. And that endorsement, in particular
that of the Afghan youth, will have to be earned. And it
will be earned only if the miles we have walked on the
path to progress are respected; only if our achievements
are preserved and our rights protected.

It has been almost a year since peace negotiations
between the Taliban and the United States took place
in Doha. The young people of Afghanistan want a
transparent and vigilant mechanism that protects their
rights and achievements in any possible peace deal,
because where we are today is the product of great effort
and sacrifices. In this crucial moment of our history, we
ask the Security Council to make untiring and sincere
efforts, to play an active role and become the guarantor
of our rights in any future peace agreement. My people,
my fellow Afghan youth want the Security Council to
commit to peace. They want an end to suicide bombings
attacks, air strikes and night raids now. And we believe
that the future will be forged by deeds, not simply
words. Speeches alone will not solve our problems; it
will take sincere efforts and persistent action to bring
peace and stability back to Afghanistan.

My fellow Afghan youth demonstrate the marvel
of human resolve - at a time of widespread violence
and humanitarian catastrophe - to rebuild, to learn, to
love and to live. Our schools, universities and academic
institutions were bombed, and hundreds of our fellow
young people lost their lives, but the next morning we
went back to our classrooms. Those bombs, bullets and
attacks could never silence us. We went back every day.
We coped with the risks because we understand that
no matter how much our lives are threatened on a daily
basis, we have no future without an education. I assure
the Council of the strong resolve of Afghan youth to
rebuild their country. They are driven to build their
country under fire if they must; they will continue to
attend school while being bombed, if they must. We do
not want future generations to look back and wonder
why we refused to act or why we failed to pass on to
them a situation that they deserved to inherit.

Although there will be setbacks, false starts and
tough days ahead, we will never waver in our pursuit
for peace. We have a youthful, productive and dynamic
population that not only craves peace but fearlessly
works for it at every level. Afghanistan's first robotics
girls team, comprised of young girls, participated in
their first global challenge, tasked with building a robot
for a competition. They have captivated the public with
their inspiring message of hope and determination.
They have proved that after years of darkness, young
Afghan boys and girls across the country can finally
take charge and aspire to be the masters of their
own destiny.

The message I should take back today to my fellow
young Afghans should be one of reassurance that they
are being heard and that a war so futile and aimless
will no longer darken their days, rattle their nights and
destroy their lives. If humankind is to prevail over the
ill will of a few, then I must here and now secure a
commitment from the international community, from
this very Council - a resounding confirmation that
we do stand for human rights, that every innocent life
matters and that humanity will prevail over all else.
It is here and now that I must secure the Council's
commitment to advancing the peace process, with the
primary objective of preserving human dignity and of
ending this infamous humanitarian catastrophe. Those
are the values that must prevail over national interests.

Let me put forward four pillars that I believe are
fundamental to the future we want for the young people
of Afghanistan and generations to come: first, the need
for the Security Council to play a proactive role in
the Afghan peace process; secondly, the preservation
of our rights and achievements in any possible peace
agreement guaranteed by the Security Council; thirdly,
an immediate end to the ongoing violence and a country-
wide ceasefire; and fourthly, the substantive inclusion
of all Afghan youth, including young Taliban members,
in the peace process.

We, Afghan youth, are committed to building
a society of coexistence, peace and tolerance. We
stand together with young people all over the world
to advance the cause of humankind. Let us build a
peaceful and prosperous world together. So, bolstered
by my generation's will and commitment to effecting
positive change, I call on the global community to join
and support us in building the future that my generation
so richly deserves.

