Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs. Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for his briefing to the Council on the latest developments
pertaining to the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

I will focus in my statement on two issues:
developments in the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
and political and security developments.

First, with regard to developments in the
humanitarian situation, we are greatly concerned by
warning of the imminent danger of food insecurity in
Yemen, as detailed by Mr. Lowcock in his briefing.
More than 3.5 million of our Yemenis brothers are
facing the threat of food insecurity. The continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen
is the inevitable result of the ongoing armed conflict,
which affects the economy sector first and foremost.
In the light of the non-payment of salaries and the
unprecedented depreciation of the Yemeni rial against
foreign currencies, the international community has a
maj or responsibility to support the Yemeni Government
in order to ensure that it succeeds in stopping the
depreciation of the national currency.

The international community must also support
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, including
confidence-building measures, to unify the Yemeni
financial institutions, the foremost of which is the
Central Bank, with a view to establishing new
mechanisms to collect revenues from different Yemeni
regions in order to pay the salaries, which undoubtedly
would help to alleviate humanitarian suffering.

In that regard, we commend the support provided
recently by the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to the Yemeni Central Bank through its
deposit of $200 million, thereby increasing its total
deposits to approximately $3.2 billion. In addition, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, along with the United Arab
Emirates, has also provided $70 million to support the
payment of teacher salaries in Yemen, in coordination
with UNICEF.

Secondly, with regard to political and security
developments, our meeting today to discuss the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen is
an expected result of the coup against the legitimate
Government of Yemen, led by the Houthis, who took
control of most State institutions by military force. The
Houthis have refused to cooperate with any political
effort to end the crisis, as seen recently by their absence
from the consultations that were supposed to take place
in Geneva on 6 September and were fully supported by
the Council.

The Houthis also continue to deliberately obstruct
humanitarian assistance through seizures and looting.
The Houthis have confiscated more than 690 relief
trucks and more than 15,000 food baskets, and detained
and stopped 84 oil and food vessels. As Mr. Lowcock
said, the Houthis have also taken control of humanitarian
warehouses in Al-Hudaydah.

In addition, the Houthis have taken control of
Al-Hudaydah city and port and transformed them into a
military operations zone, thereby preventing safe access
to the grain silos and threatening to disrupt international
navigation. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) has condemned Houthi attacks
on commercial vessels in the Red Sea and confirmed
that such attacks violate international humanitarian
law and may seriously affect access to humanitarian
assistance and routes of commercial shipments.

We reiterate that the State of Kuwait stands ready
to support and facilitate all international efforts
aimed at prioritizing the political solution based on
resolutions of international legitimacy. We also stand
ready to facilitate the work of the Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and his ongoing efforts
in order to gather all Yemeni parties at the dialogue
table despite the security challenges, including the
Houthi threat to regional peace and security posed by
the targeting of the territories of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia with nearly 250 ballistic missiles and 67,000
explosive projectiles.

In conclusion, we underscore our support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy. Any effort to end the
crisis in Yemen must be based on a political solution
in accordance with the three terms of reference: the
Gulf Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the national dialogue and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2216
(2015), while ensuring the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen and non-interference
in its internal affairs.

