Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the presidency of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today's
open debate and for the concept paper (S/2014/30, annex), which provides us with insights into the United
Nations experience when it comes to meaningful
reconciliation and the strengthening of peace.

Today, we should reflect not only on the
achievements of the United Nations since its inception,
but even more on the shortcomings, as they are the
true lessons that need to be learned. Every particular
case of war has its own peculiarities, and there is no
one-size-fits-all solution. Nevertheless, they share
some common features that we need to identify, analyse
and use in our approach.

To that end, allow me first to share with the
Council the experience from the conflict in my country,
Georgia, which has been subject to aggression and, as
a result, waves of refugees and internally displaced
persons, totalling over 400,000 in 2008, when the full-
scale war was followed by the occupation of 20 per
cent of my nation. The ceasefire agreement brokered
by the European Union in August 2008 remains
unimplemented today, as international monitors are
not given access to the occupied territories; hence, the
war-divided communities there are denied basic human
rights and freedoms.

Since January 2013, Russian occupation forces
have begun large-scale installation of barbed wire
and fences along the occupation line in the Tskhinvali
region of my country. As of today, the total length of
barbed wire along the Tskhinvali occupation line has
reached 50 kilometres, and the installation process is
ongoing. Very recently, in the run-up to the Olympics,
the Russian Federation expanded the so-called
security zone 11 kilometres deeper into Georgia's
sovereign territory, south of the Psou River where the
international border between Georgia and Russia lies,
in violation of international law and the provisions
of the August 2008 ceasefire agreement. The Games
were further politicized through the promotion of
the so-called independent status of Abkhazia, when
the Russian transport authorities granted permits
to 500 "Abkhazian" vehicles, implying thereby the
independent status of that occupied region of Georgia.

Without going into further details of a long
chain of events pertaining to the matters mentioned
previously, let me draw the Council's attention to
some of the lessons learned from our experience. First,
peacekeeper impartiality is key to solving conflicts
like ours. In Georgia's case, for 15 years peacekeeping
functions were exercised by a State that not only had
a vested interest in maintaining the conflict but in
fact was also the party to it. Eventually, that lead to
a preposterous development when, in the aftermath of
a full-scale war, the United Nations left the conflict-
affected area at a time when its presence was needed
most. In spring 2009, the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was
vetoed by a Security Council member, notwithstanding
the fact that the host nation, Georgia, and the entire
international community, pleaded for its extension.
Thus, in 2009 a dangerous precedent in the history of
the United Nations was set when a 15 year-old mission
was terminated by the veto ofjust one member of the
Security Council. Today, as the years have passed and
we see the void where no one is allowed to monitor
the violations of human rights, we believe that there is
even greater need for all of us to embark on a wider
discussion of the appropriateness of exercising the right
of veto with regard to conflict-affected areas so that
cases like Georgia's can be avoided in the future.
Secondly, let me stress the importance of an
efficient negotiating format. It took more than a decade
and, unfortunately, a full-scale war for the wider
international community to engage and set up a truly
international negotiating format in which a deal could
be honestly brokered. Today, Georgia and Russia are
participating in the Geneva international discussions,
mediated by the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union. The war could have been avoided had such
a mechanism existed earlier. Maintaining those
negotiations, together with operational mechanisms,
is vital to creating an environment conducive to long-
term conflict settlement.

Thirdly, I would like to highlight the importance
of the timely engagement of international and regional
organizations. A relevant toolkit should be developed at
all levels to respond when early warning mechanisms
for conflict prevention and crisis management are
triggered. The timely use and implementation of such
mechanisms can largely facilitate the peace process.

The foregoing are some of the lessons the
international community could learn from our case.
We fully realize that long-term conflict resolution is
a comprehensive process that requires political will
and dedicated effort on behalf of all parties. Georgia
remains committed to that goal. Obviously, we all need
to redouble our efforts to embrace the best practices that
can guide us as we strive to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable security. In that context, we also welcome
the Jordanian initiative to mandate a United Nations
historical advisory team.

