Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their valuable briefings. I reiterate my country's support for their efforts. Tunisia is following with great concern the developments in Yemen and regrets the military escalation and the return of infighting, which threatens to further exacerbate the situation and increase the suffering of the Yemeni people, in addition to obstructing efforts to reach a political solution. We stress that Yemen can emerge from this crisis only by discarding military options, putting an end to the escalation, initiating peaceful political dialogue, positively engaging with the Special Envoy's initiative and returning to the negotiating table to reach a political settlement based on the agreed terms of reference - the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2215). We stress that a military option can only plunge Yemen deeper into the spiral of violence. United Nations reports indicate distressing levels of loss of life, destruction of infrastructure and humanitarian tragedies - undermining opportunities to achieve a political solution and restore peace and security. We call on all Yemeni parties to a join a ceasefire, put an end to the military offensive in response, inter alia, to the Secretary-General's appeal and resolution 2532 (2020), and prioritize the interests of the Yemeni people in the face of the unprecedented humanitarian crisis. We commend the efforts of Mr. Griffiths and look forward to the Yemeni parties' agreement on the joint declaration as a first step towards more comprehensive and direct negotiations and as a ray of hope in the reform of the economic system and in the improvement of the humanitarian conditions, with the reopening of the Sana'a International Airport, the payment of salaries and the facilitation of the entry of imports into Yemen through Al-Hudaydah. The conflict has contributed to deepening the suffering of the Yemeni people, which has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease, a lack of medical infrastructure and proper health facilities, and deteriorating economic conditions. We would like to mention the UNICEF report that warned against a famine in Yemen that, as it worsens, will intensify food shortages. Against the backdrop of the critical humanitarian conditions, we stress the importance of facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid, and we call on donor countries to support the Yemeni people. With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we reiterate the call to take the necessary measures without delay or preconditions to facilitate the arrival of a United Nations team of experts to assess the situation and follow through with urgent steps to avoid an unprecedented environmental crisis, which could have severe humanitarian and economic repercussions in the region.
