Mr. Liu Yang (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz for their briefings on the recent
work of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. During the reporting period, Judge
Agius assumed the presidency, four new judges were
appointed, Registrar Elias was reappointed for another
term and the work of the Mechanism continued to
make progress.

China takes note of the gradual progress in the
Mechanism's judicial activities in the past six months
and its projections for the completion of the remaining
cases. The Mechanism should make headway with the
cases concerned in a pragmatic and efficient manner
based on the estimated timelines.
China takes note of the in-person plenary of the
judges hosted by President Agius and the three main
priorities he proposed, including ensuring that the
residual judicial procedures of the Mechanism are
concluded efficiently in a timely manner to enhance
the unique mandate of the Mechanism through better
inter-branch coordination and other means and to foster
a better working environment for its staff. We also
note that the Office of the Prosecutor has continued
its efforts to track down and apprehend the fugitives at
large indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). All these measures have a positive
impact on the advancement of the Mechanism's work.

China welcomes the measures taken by the
Mechanism to implement resolution 2422 (2018) in
order to take a more prudent approach to addressing
the issue of the early release of persons convicted by
the ICTR. We hope the Mechanism will continue to
take actions to implement the recommendations of the
Office ofInternal Oversight Services in its related audit
reports and evaluation reports with a view to continuing
to improve its work.

China wishes to reiterate that, pursuant to resolution
1966 (2010) on this topic, the Mechanism is a small,
temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and
size will diminish over time. We hope the Mechanism
will continue to act in accordance with resolution 1966
(2010) in this regard.

Last but not least, Iwould like to take this opportunity
to thank Peru, Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs, for their coordination of activities
between the Council and the Mechanism.

