Mr. Denktas (Turkey): The number of conflicts in
the world is on the rise, and they are increasingly of
an intra-State nature. Asymmetrical threats are more
serious than ever and transcend national borders.

The various root causes ofconflict can be adequately
addressed only through a combination of tools. In the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, a strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, is indispensable.
We must do better to strengthen the bonds the United
Nations shares with regional bodies, which requires
strategic, long-term and mutually beneficial efforts.

Turkey fully supports the leading role of the
United Nations, and we are committed to expanding
the partnership of the United Nations with regional
organizations in conflict-prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.

A large portion of the Council's agenda deals with
peace and security challenges in Africa. We are pleased
to note that the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations has been strengthened,
enhanced and deepened, especially in the last decade.
We also welcome the increasing coordination and
coherence between the African Union and subregional
organizations on the continent, whose efforts will
further consolidate African leadership and ownership
in overcoming the challenges that Africa faces.
The United Nations-AU partnership can be further
intensified by strengthening the institutionalization of
this relationship.

Besides the African Union, organizations such
as the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, NATO, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Organization of American
States all have important roles to play in ensuring peace
and stability, together with the United Nations.

There are a number of principles that we deem
important when it comes to the engagement of the
United Nations with regional organizations. First,
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations must be rooted in respect
for regional processes and contexts. Secondly, every
conflict situation has its own circumstances, and no
organization can impose a one-size-fits-all approach to
the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

Thirdly, we can benefit from the experiences of
different regional settings to improve our problem-
solving practices, and lastly, we need more innovative
and flexible partnerships that draw on the strengths of
the respective organizations and also take account of
their comparative advantages.

We see this open debate as a good opportunity
to take stock of what we have achieved so far and
reflect on the way forward. We hope that the ideas
expressed today will be helpful in paving the way
for a strengthened, enhanced and mutually beneficial
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We thank the Cote d'Ivoire presidency
for having organized it.

