Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this important high-level open debate
to reflect on our history and to reaffirm our strong
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The choice of this topic
and the participation of His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of
China, are testiment to the demonstrated commitment of
your country to upholding the principles of our Charter.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing this morning and for his overall achievement at
the helm of the Organization over the past eight years.

We share the views expressed in the concept note
(S/2015/87, annex) that this is indeed the right time and
place to have this debate. We all know that the United
Nations, especially its Security Council, came into
existence 70 years ago, in the aftermath of the Second
World War, to rectify the inefficiencies of the League

of Nations. The United Nations was established in
response to such a magnitude of threat to peace and
security and was another expression of the international
collective determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge ofwar, as recalled in the concept note.

Over the past 70 years, although the world has
fortunately been spared a third world war, there have
been hundreds ofinter- and intra-State conflicts, as well
as foreign military interventions of all sorts, with the
loss of millions of lives. In Africa, for example, nearly
one-third of its countries had active armed conflicts
during the mid-19905. The Middle East has never been
at peace since the establishment of the Organization;
and the ongoing crises in Iraq, Syria and Yemen, as well
as the emergence ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and Levant
in the region, have made the situation worse than ever.

As those few cases highlight, our main source
of frustration today is the continued inability of the
Organization to credibly and accurately predict and
rapidly respond to conflicts that may turn violent, and
even lead to genocide and other mass atrocities, as was
the case in 1994 in Rwanda. While several reasons may
be put forward, the evolving and complex dynamics of
conflicts and, to some extent, the reluctance of many
States to take steps that involve risks and costs, are
some of the issues that prevent the implementation
of the proactive aspects of the Charter of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, the increasing discussions of
this nature raise the hope that a multilateralization of
conflict prevention could reduce the number of missed
opportunities in the future.

In that regard, Rwanda believes in the equal
sovereignty of States. At the same time, we have
welcomed the outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and
embraced the principle of the responsibility to protect
peoples from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. In that context, Rwanda
believes that peacekeeping, which is the main tool ofthe
Organization in maintaining international peace and
security, should be adapted to today's reality and the
evolving nature of conflicts. Indeed, Rwanda believes
that the responsibility to protect and the protection of
civilians should be at the heart of any peacekeeping
operation or any other United Nations-backed military
intervention.

Mr. President, as you rightly put it in the concept
note, we should uphold democracy and the rule of law
in international relations. To achieve this goal, we
should start by renewing our commitment to reform
of the Security Council, which is an undemocratic
organ by dint of its composition, inherited from the
outdated geostrategic reality prevailing at the end of
Second World War. We therefore believe that, in order
to ensure the legitimacy and efficiency of the Security
Council, its composition should be expanded in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories, with the
same rights and privileges.

Furthermore, while the main purposes outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations, arising from the
gunsmoke of the Second World War, were to respond
to wars between and within States, including through
peacekeeping operations, today threats to peace have
become more complex and multidimensional, with
new trends and types that are not found in the Charter.
The spread of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism,
religious radicalization, transnational organized crime,
disease outbreaks like Ebola and, in some cases, extreme
poverty and underdevelopment all have become major
threats to international peace and security in a way
that was never envisaged in the Charter. And those
issues have become regular items on the agenda of the
Security Council and the United Nations in general.

In 1948, the world was more concerned with the
security of States. Today, contemporary threats relate
to the security both of States and of people. In that
regard, we commend the founding Members for making
a link between peace and development in Article 55 of
the Charter, which is the cornerstone of the modern
human security project. We believe, however, that
adjustments are needed in order for the Organization
to deploy mechanisms that address the root causes of
those threats. We call upon the international community
and Member States to allow more room for multilateral
action against those threats that require a multifaceted
and integrated approach.

Conscious of the evolving role of regional and
subregional organizations, including the African
Union, it is our view that, if used effectively and fairly,
the United Nations can provide a proper avenue for such
actions. Due to the evolving nature of the modern threats
to peace, States, regional organizations and the United
Nations have been forging new ways of responding
to them. We believe that shifting their attention to
addressing the underlying causes of conflict, while at
the same time increasing their capacity to streamline
and implement their efforts to intervene when civilians
are endangered, including the ability to recognize
and disseminate the signs of impending or potential
conflicts, would increase the relevance of the United
Nations and lead the Charter of the United Nations to
realize its full purpose.

