Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): At the outset, Sir, let me
congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. My
congratulations go also to the new non-permanent
members: Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and Spain.

Ethiopia is grateful for this opportunity to address
the Council on the issue of children and armed conflict.
My delegation would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2002/l299) as well as for his brief but important
presentation this morning. I also join previous speakers
in thanking Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Carol Bellamy
for the excellent presentations they made and for
pointing out important issues we need to follow up on.

I know that time is short and that there are many
other speakers on the list, so I shall cite only some of
the points I was going to make; copies of my full
statement have been made available.

Today's debate is the fifth open debate the
Security Council has devoted to the protection of
children in armed conflict. That indicates that it is very
serious about this issue and gives it the importance that
it deserves.

We also welcome the continued efforts of the
Secretary-General to put the protection of children in
armed conflict on the peace and security agenda of the
United Nations; in that respect we strongly support his
recommendation to integrate child protection in
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
operations of the United Nations.

There are many who are involved in the work of
making the lives of children more agreeable in all its
aspects. But I will cite only two: the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations
Children's Fund. I commend them for their work and
for their activities on behalf of children.

One can list many things; one can say many
things. I think what needs to be said has been said by
the Secretary-General and by all those who spoke
before me. But I will say that there are two areas
implied in the title of what we are discussing today:
"Children and armed conflict". Under the first, we have
to take all the actions needed to stop those who violate
the rights and the sanctity of the lives of children and
take action against them. Secondly, when we talk of
armed conflict, we have to look at the root causes of
such conflict all over the world.

I would conclude by saying that if the Council
and the international community took a fraction of the
time and resources they are now spending on one
particular area of the world and spent it on this issue of
stopping those who are attacking children, abducting
children and recruiting children, then I am sure within
a short period, even before the end of this year, that
problem would have been dealt with.

