Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2321 (2016). We welcome the leading role
played by the United States and China, as well as the
statement made this morning by the Secretary-General.

In 2016, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has conducted an unprecedented number of
provocations, including two nuclear tests. Today, we
have shown that the international community will
simply not stand for it. We have sent a clear signal to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that the
Security Council steadfastly opposes the reckless
pursuit of nuclear weapons. Today, we redouble our
efforts to bring the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea back into the fold of law-abiding States. Until we
see genuine commitments and actual steps to change
course, United Nations sanctions will remain.

We must continue with renewed vigour to limit the
activities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
entities involved in the nuclear programme, deter the
involvement of any external actors tempted to facilitate
such activity, and constrain the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's ability to raise illicit funds. We are
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United

Nations for the second time this year with regard to
North Korea. That is far from standard practice, but
this unique threat deserves nothing less.

Resolution 2270 (2016), adopted in March, marked
a substantive increase in pressure on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Since then, ships have
been impounded, cargo has been intercepted and bank
accounts have been closed. If implemented fully by
all Member States in the long term, resolution 2270
(2016) can and will greatly reduce the ability of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to evade
sanctions and raise funds. But in the face of Council
action, Pyongyang chose to continue on its course of
confrontation. As a result, we have taken direct action
to build on those landmark sanctions of resolution
2270 (2016). Three concrete steps in the new resolution
illustrate our resolve.

First, the mechanism agreed to cap coal exports
will directly target a sector used by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to raise foreign currency.
Put simply, we have just denied nearly one-quarter of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's foreign
income. That is roughly $700 million that from now
on cannot be put forward towards the next nuclear test
or the next missile launch. This is a powerful message
that will be heard loud and clear in Pyongyang.
There are direct financial consequences to continued
nuclear provocations.

Secondly, the resolution clarifies and further
enhances controls agreed in resolution 2270 (2016),
including on technology imports, shipping, banking
and the abuse by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea of its privileges abroad. Every avenue of illicit
activity must be shut down.

Thirdly, the text makes an explicit political
statement condemning the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's proliferation choices at the expense
of the welfare of its people. Every dollar spent on North
Korea's nuclear weapons programme is a dollar that
could have been spent on improving the lives of its own
citizens, roughly half of whom live in extreme poverty.

The resolution also breaks new ground by calling
for an awareness abroad of Democratic People's
Republic of Korea labourers being exploited. Sadly, this
is a textbook example of modern slavery - something
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
employs both inside and beyond its borders. When
implemented fully, these further measures will create
robust new constraints on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's activity. As with all Security
Council actions, the resolution is not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's civilian population, or to
affect negatively the work of international organizations
or non-governmental organizations carrying out
assistance and relief activities in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

The United Kingdom has diplomatic relations
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
will continue to work towards dialogue and a peaceful
resolution of this crisis. Diplomacy must continue and
be part of the solution. We note that the resolution's
provisions, including the provisions on cargo, are
consistent with the obligations set out in the Vienna
Conventions on diplomatic relations.

Finally, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has a clear choice to make. It can either continue its
destabilizing and dangerous behaviour or follow clear
steps to begin to rebuild a future for its people. Today,
we are united in support for a meaningful change
of course.

