Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
wecome the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for a
period of six months, concluding in October. It has been
13 years since we first established the MINUSTAH
mandate. We welcome the fact that responsibilities will
be transferred to a new mission whose main role will
be strengthening the capacities of national institutions
in Haiti in such a way that the Government will be in a
position to fully shoulder its own responsibilities after
the transition.

Against that backdrop, we voted in favour of the
resolution to express our support for the Government
and people of Haiti and in order to ensure that the
country can continue to make progress towards lasting
peace. We see the country as being ready to make
progress after the various success stories that we have
seen in terms of political stability. We would point in
particular to the presidential elections and the end of
the transitional phase.

On that particular point, we support the
establishment of the future mission, which will be in a
position to support the Government on the basis of the
three responsibilities enshrined in paragraph 6 we just
adopted. The mission will, of course, not assume those
responsibilities directly but support the Government
therein. We therefore supported the resolution because
we believe that the mandate of the upcoming mission
will not undermine the efforts of human rights
organizations of the United Nations working in Hiati.
We welcome the fact that there will be no overlap.
We must always be careful to ensure that the Security
Council's resolutions do not have an adverse impact on
the work of other United Nations agencies and bodies
or the mandates granted by other bodies, such as the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.

Troop-contributing countries (TCCs) are working to
serve the cause of peace and security. We want to make
that point very clear. The capacity of troops needs to be
strengthened, and we need to plug any gaps that might
have an adverse impact on the way they function. Such
steps must be part of triangular cooperation between
the TCCs, the Security Council amd the Secretariat.
All of these aspects must be borne in mind and duly
studied and analysed within the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as well, and not just here.

