Mr. El Khadir (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me thank the Italian presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November, for
convening today's open debate and for its choice of the
theme "Trafficking in persons in conflict situations".

Today's meeting takes place in a context
characterized by mass displacements of people,
particularly refugees. Fleeing wars and natural
disasters, migrants aspire for better futures. Due to
their vulnerability, migrants are exposed to the risk of
trafficking. We are convinced that today's debate and
resolution 2388 (2017), adopted today, will strengthen
the international community's resolve to prevent and
combat all forms of trafficking in persons.

As one of the three elements of Morocco's new
migration policy, adopted in September 2013, the fight
against trafficking in persons is a priority with respect
to upholding human rights and fighting organized
crime. Thanks to our national migration and asylum
policy, Morocco has positioned itself at the forefront of
our region in the fight against trafficking in persons and
smuggling of migrants. The first stage of our policy has
led to the regularization of the status of approximately
25,000 migrants. The second stage will capitalize on
the success and gains realized during the first stage,
and will help to continue to facilitate the integration of
migrants as part of an integrated humane approach to
sheltering migrants from human trafficking networks
and ensuring that the rights of refugees and migrants
are upheld on our territory.

Morocco has adopted a series of measures at the
national level by updating its legal and institutional
frameworks with respect to migration, asylum and
human trafficking. Adopted in 2016, our law against
human trafficking is further testament to the Kingdom's
active commitment. My country has also demonstrated
its commitment at the international level by adhering
to the main human rights conventions related to the
prevention of and fight against human trafficking
and the smuggling of migrants, including the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, which we ratified in April 2011. Furthermore,
at the twenty-sixth session ofthe Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, Morocco presented
its six-month action plan for the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons. We are among the 13 countries
that were strategically selected throughout the world
to develop and implement national plans to fight
smuggling and illicit trafficking in persons.

Extreme poverty, inequality, conflict, political and
economic instability, human rights violations and the
lack of education and prospects create vulnerabilities
that criminals exploit. No country can resolve the
issue of trafficking alone. The solution cannot rely
solely on a security-based approach. It requires a
comprehensive and multisectoral approach and close
cooperation among countries of origin, transit and
destination to tackle the root causes of people falling
victim to trafficking networks. A preventive approach
to trafficking is intrinsically linked to our shared goal
of sustainable development.

In that regard, Morocco reiterates its full
commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals
under the 2030 Agenda. The Kingdom of Morocco
takes this opportunity to emphasize the historic
opportunity represented by the convening of the
international conference on migration to be held on
10 and 11 September 2018 in the Kingdom of Morocco
with a view to contributing to the implementation of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons.

To conclude, I would like to stress the following
points. An effective response to human trafficking
cannot be solely limited to criminal prosecution. There
must be measures in place to prevent people from
falling victim to it. The fight against human trafficking
hinges on the establishment of a stable political context
conducive to an effective campaign against trafficking
in persons through, inter alia, the promotion of and
respect for human rights, democracy, good governance,
the fight against corruption and impunity, a reduction of
social fragility, sustainable development and inclusive
growth. Lastly, we must ensure that people residing
in refugee camps are registered as a way to fight the
threat of human trafficking and to identify instances of
trafficking and potential victims.

