Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Prime Minister and Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, Mr. Edi Rama, for his briefing on the work of the Organization and the issues on its agenda. The Russian Federation has consistently advocated strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the 2006 declaration of the OSCE Permanent Council. We believe that this regional organization should complement global efforts on the European continent. We hope that the current Albanian Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE will clearly follow his organization's mandate, play the role of honest broker in achieving consensus and promoting the collective interests and priorities of OSCE member States, and maintain a neutral approach. Cooperation between the two organizations is, in practice, fairly broad in scope, although there remains room for its further strengthening. For example, the OSCE still has considerable potential to combat transnational threats, in particular those posed by foreign terrorist fighters, the financing of terrorism and the spread of extremist ideology. On counter- terrorism, it is important to adhere strictly to theguidelines on international cooperation developed by the Security Council. We believe that in order to promote non-consensus initiatives, such as the concept of countering violent extremism, which some members of the OSCE are trying to do, is to move in the wrong direction. We support the plan of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the OSCE to organize a conference on the issue of the return of foreign terrorist fighters, on 11 and 12 February in Vienna, and look forward to its success. The time has come to significantly enhance the OSCE's work on combating the drug threat. We welcome the plans of the Chairperson-in-Office to organize an anti-drug conference. Over the past year, the OSCE's work on security in the context of the use of information and communication technologies has gained new momentum. We hope it will maintain a constructive attitude when considering that issue. Priority should be given to ensuring that negotiations on international information security continue, under the auspices of the United Nations, with a view to developing universal agreements on rules of responsible conduct in cyberspace. Such rules should enshrine equal status for all States in their participation in and governance of the Internet. In an era of an ongoing global trend of deteriorating mutual trust, regional organizations, including the OSCE, have a special mission to restore an atmosphere of mutual understanding in order to resolve crisis situations in their regions. The main criterion for effectiveness in that regard is, of course, contributing to conflict resolution. For our part, we are striving to provide every possible assistance to efforts within the framework of the OSCE. As co-Chair of the Minsk Group, we are actively supporting the resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict and working to bring the sides closer together in the Transnistrian settlement process. We welcome the cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE in the Balkans, as well as the fact that the two bodies will co-chair the Geneva discussions on stability in the Caucasus. Naturally, when speaking about country situations on the OSCE agenda, it is impossible not to mention the internal crisis in Ukraine. The OSCE has been playing a very positive role in its settlement and the package of measures under the Minsk agreement is the only path to that end. That fundamental document, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015), calls for direct dialogue among Kyiv, Donetsk and Lugansk, for which the Trilateral Contact Group was formed. The Special Monitoring Mission (SMM), whose work we support, plays a key role in OSCE assistance. The Mission should report as fully and objectively as possible on the situation, including on civilian casualties and the destruction of civilian infrastructure, and have direct contact with local authorities in Donbas. We call on the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office to ensure that the SMM publishes thematic reports on civilian victims of the conflict in Donbas and the destruction of civilian infrastructure over the entire course of the conflict. Unfortunately, despite significant diplomatic efforts, the crisis in Ukraine is still far from being resolved. In that context, we call for an impartial response to the regular statements from Kyiv about its desire to revise the Minsk agreements. By the way, 12 February will mark five years since the agreements were signed. The Security Council expressed its full support for the agreements in resolution 2202 (2015) and confirmed that support in presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June 2018. There are many examples of Kyiv's revisionist approach. One need only quote the representative of Kyiv at the Trilateral Contact Group, Mr. Oleksii Reznikov, who, in an interview on 23 January, said that the position of President Zelenskyy remained unchanged and could be summarized by the fact that the Minsk agreements should be at least partially revised. It would be interesting to hear the views of our French and German colleagues on how such a statement aligns with their vision of the future of the Ukrainian peace process. When will they stop denying the obvious? Over the past five years, Kyiv has not fulfilled a single political commitment, has used every possible excuse to refrain from holding a dialogue with its own citizens and has continued to claim a non-existent Russian aggression without offering any evidence thereof. Unfortunately, we can deduce from the words of our colleagues, including the Permanent Representative of Germany, that they remain prepared to support such claims, despite the fact that they have been refuted by the former Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring Mission, Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, in this very Chamber. Overall, as we have heard from the statements of our Western colleagues, none of them has ever read the Minsk agreements or even intends to read them. It would seem more advantageous to continue to stubbornlypresent Russia as a party to the conflict - which defies all facts and common sense - thereby contributing to the efforts of the Kyiv authorities to shirk responsibility. They are basically giving Kyiv carte blanche for any discriminatory action that it may take against its own Russian-speaking citizens. By the way, from the statements of some of our colleagues here, who make up fantasies about human rights violations in Crimea, some people might get the impression that the region, which has rejoined Russia, is somehow closed off to foreign visitors and that no one is allowed to go in. That is obviously just a fantasy. Crimea is completely open for any kind of visits that are conducted in accordance with Russian law. That can be confirmed by tourists, of whom there were some 7 million last year. I would therefore ask Ms. Pierce to stop inventing things. I invite her to come and visit Crimea to see how people live. Despite the contradictory signals from the Zelenskyy team, we would like to believe that, with the arrival of the new administration in Kyiv, they will finally understand what is obvious - any resolution of the situation in the east of the country will be impossible without the direct participation of the people of those regions. Here in the United Nations, that is known as inclusivity. Guided by that principle, we call on the opposing sides of conflicts everywhere to engage in direct communication - from Afghanistan to Syria and Yemen, from Cyprus to Colombia and Venezuela. Only the population of Donbas is being denied that obvious right. We would like to believe that the OSCE understands the absurdity of the situation and that it is a non-starter. We hope that the new Ukrainian leadership will realize how damaging it is to promote confrontational initiatives that only divide society and restrict the linguistic, educational, religious and cultural rights of the Russian- speaking population and other national minorities. The Kyiv authorities must do the very opposite and try once again to win the trust of people whose interests and vital beliefs were desecrated by the authors of the anti-constitutional Maidan coup d'etat. The goal of the OSCE is to assist way that process in every possible, which is critical to the future of Ukraine, rather than abet the short-sighted and noxious nationalistic relapses still prevalent in Ukrainian society. We believe that the OSCE can and should play a significant role in the establishment of multilateralism as a systematic basis for international relations based on international law, contributing in every way to the construction of asystem of equal, comprehensive system and indivisible security. That is why we are interested in strengthening the role and authority of the OSCE and in expanding its cooperation with the United Nations, as that relationship has tremendous potential. We look forward to seeing the Albanian chairmanship-in-office contribute to that endeavour.
