Mr. Antonio: Let me start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for giving us this opportunity to
address the Council on the situation in Somalia. This is
an opportunity to exchange Views on the recent political
and security situation. As the African Union (AU), we
would also like to focus on an update on the operations
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

I would like to thank Mr. Keating for his very
insightful briefing, as well as for his cooperation on
the ground. I would also especially like to welcome
His Excellency the President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia to the Council.

Since the last briefing by the African Union (see S/PV.7614), Somalia seems firmly set on the path to
polls later this year. I am happy to note that the dynamic
and proactive relationship that has developed among
Somalia's Federal and regional leaders in the context
of the National Leadership Forum is allowing for the
enhancement of synergies, mutual accommodation,
collaboration and the consolidation of a common vision
for Somalia.

Earlier this month, with limited intervention by
international partners, Somali leaders met and signed
off on the practical details of the 2016 electoral model,
as stated by Mr. Keating. They unanimously adopted
a joint declaration spelling out the general principles
and guidelines for the implementation of the electoral
model they agreed upon during the January meeting of
the National Leadership Forum. In that respect, the AU
looks forward to the conduct of elections in Somalia by
August 2016, based on that consensual model.

That is a step in the desired direction, and
collaboration, mutual tolerance and readiness will
continue to define the success of the electoral process
and other political aspects in Somalia in accordance
with Vision 2016. As much as it is still below the
desired threshold of the one person/one vote model,
we commend the introduction of electoral colleges for
the 2016 elections, which will be significantly larger
than the small number of elders who chose the leaders
of the current central Government and members of the
Federal Parliament four years ago. With the present
electoral model, the 2016 process is anticipated to be
more inclusive and representative. We remain ready to
support the Government and the people of Somalia in
that endeavour.
While we welcome those developments, we also
urge the timely nomination of the other electoral organs
and the completion by the technical committee of the
election implementation plan, including its subsequent
ratification by the Federal Parliament. Somalia now
has three emergent states members of the federation,
each with an elected leader presiding over a cabinet
of ministers and an elected assembly. We urge the
Federal Government to continue to push for the timely
conclusion of the process for the establishment of the
final state of the federation, which will bring together
the two regions of Hiraan and Middle Shabelle. The
empowerment and consolidation of those regional
administrations will bring the Government closer
to the people and make the provision of essential
services - including security, law and order, justice,
the sinking of boreholes and the building of schools,
hospitals and roads - much more possible.

In the fulfilment of their mandate, AMISOM
forces have registered significant gains in Somalia.
The ousting of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu and the
liberation of a large number of district capitals and
swathes of territory previously under Al-Shabaab
control have significantly contributed to the creation
of levels of stability that allowed for a viable political
process to unfold and governance to take place in the
country. The ongoing Operation Juba Corridor, coupled
with the recent recovery of more territory and towns and
the air strikes by AMISOM. partners, have contributed
to degrading Al-Shabaab capabilities and eliminating
several of its top leaders.

Despite those gains, the security situation in Somalia
remains fluid. Al-Shaabab has shown resilience and the
capacity to adapt. It still retains considerable initiative
and capacity to gather intelligence and deploy small,
but highly mobile and effective, teams of fighters who
use suicide bombers, grenades and artillery to attack,
impede the movement of people and goods, slow down
AMISOM. activities in the main supply routes, carry
out ambushes and mount complex attacks through
a combined and concomitant use of all those types
of weapons.

In the light of those challenges, the AU has taken
several steps to ensure that AMISOM. operational
efficiency is enhanced. The AU convened a summit of
troop and police-contributing countries on 28 February,
hosted by the Government of Djibouti, to address some
of the immediate challenges confronting AMISOM
operations, especially in relation to resources, command
and control and the generation of additional enablers
and support to the Somali national security forces. The
Heads of State and the troop and police-contributing
countries took important decisions and made far-
reaching commitments on those aspects and signed
the Djibouti Declaration on AMISOM, which set
the foundations for the consolidation of AMISOM's
mission of stabilizing Somalia.

The African Union and the United Nations have
also formally established the joint working group
meeting, which was formally launched in Addis
Ababa on 15 April. The working group is an outcome
of the meeting of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security convened in
New York on 22 March. It is expected to strengthen
AMISOM's operational effectiveness. The working
group is currently meeting in Addis Ababa to discuss
concrete ways to enhance AMISOM's command and
control, including the possibility of a multinational
sector headquarters in AMISOM's area of operations,
as well as to enhance the capacity of the AMISOM
force and Mission headquarters. The working group
will formally submitt its technical recommendations in
due course.

AMISOM's priorities in the third and fourth
quarters of the year are to continue to conduct
defensive, offensive and routine operations in the areas
of its responsibility in Somalia; patrol main supply
routes; escort convoys; and to protect airports, ports,
other critical infrastructure, sensitive sites and very
important persons. The conduct of surprise attacks and
cordon-and-search operations to disrupt enemy plans
and degrade, weaken and destroy its capabilities, and
reduce and eliminate its presence in towns, villages and
remote areas are an essential part of AMISOM's modus
operandi. That will reduce Al-Shabaab's ability to carry
out ambushes and grenade attacks against AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces or to place
improvised explosive devices along the main supply
routes. Moreover, that will ensure that Al-Shabaab does
not succeed in its attempts to disrupt the upcoming
elections in Somalia later this year, and will make it
possible for the elections to take place in an enabling,
safe and secure environment. To that effect, the Federal
Government of Somalia and AMISOM. have set up a
joint committee that has already started to operate.
That will require the enhancement of the effectiveness
of AMISOM. and the Somali security forces.

At this juncture, I would like to reiterate four
critical issues that require the Council's attention in our
collective efforts to enhance AMISOM. operations.

First, there is a clear justification for the renewal
of AMISOM's mandate in the light of the progress
made in the creation of a conducive environment in
the political process, but also the continued security
challenges encountered in Somalia. It is important, as
recommended during the summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the troop- and police-contributing
countries of AMISOM, that the mandate be renewed
and the current authorized AMISOM. force of 22,126
uniformed personnel and 70 civilians be supported.
Those are the minimum essential requirements for the
conduct of renewed AMISOM. offensive operations
in Somalia. The AU Peace and Security Council will
consider the situation in Somalia on 28 April in Addis
Ababa, with a view to recommending that the Security
Council authorize the renewal of AMISOM's mandate.

Secondly, AMISOM's strategy needs to be adapted
to effectively cope with the ongoing and evolving
security challenges. AMISOM. strategy must embrace
more targeted operations involving holding, offensive
and pursuit operations. That approach will complement
the territorial offensive operation aimed at recovering
territories from Al-Shaabab by undertaking more
deliberate intelligence-driven operations to further
degrade the capabilities of that terrorist group. The
African Union Commission has directed the AMISOM
leadership to commence planning for this new
strategy and would welcome the Council's support for
its execution.

Thirdly, the mobilization of resources to ensure
that the salaries of the Somali security forces are paid
in a regular and timely manner and the identification of
funds to fill the gap created by the 20 per cent salary
cut for AMISOM. uniformed personnel are important to
raising their morale and keeping them motivated. The
support and capacitation of the Somali National Army
remains a central priority in terms of both lethal and
non-lethal provisions, within a coordinated framework,
in order to facilitate the take-over of primary security
responsibilities by the respective Somali institutions.
Significant achievements are already being registered.

Fourthly, the deployment of operational enablers
and force multipliers are pivotal for the rejuvenation
of AMISOM. operations. I welcome the pledges of
helicopters made by Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda.
The deployment of those helicopters will ensure that
AMISOM. can conduct targeted operations as well
as achieve greater flexibility and protection. In that
respect, I would like to urge the Council to facilitate
the finalization of letters of assist, bearing in mind that
reimbursement for the helicopters should be at a level
commensurate with the offensive nature of AMISOM
operations in Somalia.

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
troop- and police-contributing countries, whose men
and women are making immense sacrifices. We would
also like to thank our partners for providing support,
including financial as well as in-kind contributions,
in order to assist AMISOM. and the forces of the
Federal Government of Somalia in their efforts to
stabilize Somalia and to create an enabling space for
governance, the distribution of humanitarian assistance
and the building of infrastructure for economic and
social development to take place.

