Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to express the appreciation of the
delegation of Egypt for your presidency of the Council
this month. We are confident that the Council is in the
best of hands, with your well-known wisdom and
statesmanship.

The Security Council is meeting today as the
Palestinian people - indeed the Arab people and the
peoples of the rest of the civilized world - mourn the
children and other innocent Palestinians who fell
victim to the Israeli aggression of 23 July, when an
Israeli air force warplane bombed an apartment
building in the Yarmuk neighbourhood in Gaza, leading
to the death of 15 Palestinians, mostly women and
children, and the injury of 150 others. That barbaric
aggression is but one in the series of war crimes
perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian people.

Some time ago, we witnessed the crime of Jenin,
and today we witness the tragedy of Yarmuk. Those
acts demonstrate before the world's eyes Israel's
contempt for international resolutions, for the norms of
international humanitarian law and for its
responsibilities as an occupying Power. The targeting
of a residential area leaves no room for doubt that the
Israeli occupying forces knew in advance that the
victims would be civilians. The international
community cannot consider the Israeli aggression on
the morning of 23 July to be an act of self-defence, as
Israel claims. No civilized human being can accept that
hollow pretext to justify an act that falls squarely on
the list of war crimes to which the international
community must respond by pursuing and holding
accountable both the planners and the perpetrators.

It is noteworthy that the brutal attack took place
when there were signs of an imminent announcement
of an agreement between the Palestinian Authority and
the Hamas leadership on ending all attacks that might
harm Israeli civilians. It is also noteworthy that the
aggression took place less than a week after the
meeting of the "quartet" in New York. The members of
the "quartet" had expressed their intention to seek a
final settlement with the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State existing side by side with
Israel in peace and security, based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), thus ending the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967. This Israeli
crime most regrettably confirms our belief that the
Israeli Government wishes to dynamite any chance of
peace in the Middle East and that it will not hesitate to
use the most base and brutal means to cripple the
efforts for peace or to suffocate the Palestinian
territories and the livelihood of the Palestinian people.

It is now the duty of the international community
to intervene promptly and effectively to protect the
Palestinian people and to maintain what hope remains
of achieving peace in the Middle East.

The delegation of Egypt calls on the Security
Council to seriously examine and implement the
Secretary-General's proposal for an international
presence in the Palestinian territories to ensure an end
to the violence against the Palestinian people and the
Israeli withdrawal to the borders before 28 September
2000.

We call on Israel to immediately respond to the
efforts of the international community and of the
"quartet" to reach a just and lasting settlement based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
and on the Madrid Conference terms of reference.

