Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to tell you, Sir, that we are very happy to have
you as President for the second time in the course of
this month. I would also like to say how happy we have
been to work with the excellent Colombian presidency
through the month of August, headed by Ambassador
Valdivieso and all his team. I would like to thank
Ambassador Valdivieso for the small note he read out
to us to introduce today's public debate, which seemed
to us to be very useful. There are just a few points
touched upon in that note that I would like to comment
on.

First, is the issue of the transparency and
openness of our work to the whole of the membership
of the United Nations. We believe that the current trend
to greater transparency and more public meetings is a
good trend, and my delegation is entirely in favour of
that. There is a large number of cases in which we have
everything to gain from acting in the most transparent
way possible, including subjects on which political
declarations are awaited on sensitive issues. In that
respect, the public debate we had on the Middle East
under the Colombian presidency was very important.
As several speakers have said already, that issue of the
Middle East remains open, and my delegation also
shares some of the frustrations that have been aired
here about the fact that the Security Council was not
able to take a stand on that important question, which
remains open, as the Council was reminded just now by
the Ambassador of China.

However, within the framework of these public
meetings, we can also have public meetings of the
Security Council with the participation of non-
members of the Council, but on subjects for which it is
possible to have a greater degree of interactivity and a
less formal structure. That kind of meeting, rather like
the kind of meeting held yesterday on the Democratic
Republic of Congo, is very much welcomed by my
delegation: interactive public meetings, as often as
possible. It is a good idea and should be employed
more often.

Secondly, we are also in favour of increasing
relationships between the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries on peacekeeping matters.
We cannot assemble, develop or modify a
peacekeeping operation unless we have full
understanding, consultation and cooperation with the
troop-contributing countries. From this point of view,
my delegation would be entirely in favour of the
implementation of resolution 1353 (2001), as the
Ambassador of the United Kingdom and Ambassador
Ward of Jamaica recently requested.

An interesting case is perhaps that of Timor. In
the near future we will have to examine the evolution
of the United Nations presence, in the context of
independence and of after independence. We should
work much more closely with the troop-contributing
countries.

Thirdly, there was an excellent and very useful
seminar at the Princeton Club on the regional approach,
the regional dimension. I think it was very useful. The
Security Council should more often work in concert
with regional actors, as we have done several times
with Economic Community of West African States for
Sierra Leone and the region; as we have done for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the signatory
countries of the Lusaka Agreement; and, in an
interdependent manner, with the upcoming presidency
of Ireland in October, when we will hold another
meeting between the Security Council and the
signatory countries of the Lusaka Agreement, in order
to give expression to the regional approach we
discussed at the Princeton Club.

I believe it was Ambassador Mahbubani who said
this regional approach could also be valuable for other
regions beyond Africa. Perhaps he was thinking of
Afghanistan, a question on which some countries have
suggested the Security Council might meet the
members of the "Six plus Two" group.

My fourth point relates to the sanctions policy,
which was raised by several delegations who expressed
the hope that the excellent report prepared by
Ambassador Chowdhury might see the light of day and
achieve consensus. We share this concern, expressed by
several delegations.

I would like to comment on a point raised by one
or two delegations, in particular the delegation of
Jamaica, on the groups of friends. We believe that
groups of friends, which include members and non-
members of the Security Council - including, in some
cases, countries contributing troops to a particular
peacekeeping operation - have demonstrated their
usefulness, but we are willing to continue exchanging
views on this subject with delegations that would like
to look further into their functioning.

I will not go on at greater length. I thank you,
Mr. President, for having given us the opportunity to
speak in public today on the subject of the methods of
work of the Council.

