Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): First of all, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing, even if it was a
particularly sombre one.

Dramatic events in the region are quickly changing
the face of the Middle East, presenting its people with
tremendous challenges but also with far-reaching
opportunities. The one and only way to address such
daunting challenges is through dialogue and reform.

Portugal unequivocally condemns the use of force
against peaceful demonstrations. We are concerned by
increasing levels of violence in a number of countries
in the region and deplore the many deaths it has
caused. We urge all parties to exercise the utmost
restraint. We are particularly worried and shocked by
the number of children falling victim to this violence,
as reported by UNICEF, and call upon all parties to
protect children from direct and indirect effects of
violence. Violence and repression can never be the
answer. Only genuine comprehensive and inclusive
dialogue will allow the important issues at stake to be
addressed and solved in a peaceful and sustainable way
that meets the legitimate aspirations expressed by
peoples in several countries.

The winds of change sweeping through the Middle
East render progress on the Arab-Israeli peace process
all the more pressing. The status quo is simply not
sustainable. The absence of a timely comprehensive
settlement will only further undermine confidence,
exacerbate tensions and propitiate more violence.

At the core of this regional conflict is the six-
decade-old Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A comprehensive
peace between Israel and its neighbours will remain
elusive in the absence of an agreement between Israelis
and Palestinians. Decisive action and strong political
will are needed to relaunch negotiations and bring them
to a meaningful conclusion. As the Under-Secretary-
General recalled, violence is yet again on the rise in the
region.

Portugal vehemently condemns the heinous
killing of a settler family in ltamar and the fatal
terrorist attack in East Jerusalem last month. The
perpetrators of such odious crimes must be brought to
justice and held accountable for their acts. We are also
concerned by the rising violence between settlers and
Palestinians. Unjustifiable actions cannot be redeemed
by vindictive retaliation taken against innocent
individuals.

Violence in and around Gaza also continues to
escalate. Only last week, an Italian human rights
activist was brutally murdered. Portugal unequivocally
condemns the indiscriminate firing of mortars and
rockets by militant groups in Gaza and calls for their
immediate halt. The targeting of an obvious civilian
objective such as a school bus merits absolute
condemnation.

We recognize Israel's right to self-defence,
consistent with international law and international
humanitarian law. But we also urge it to use maximum
restraint and ensure that civilians are not endangered.
Attacks on civilians are completely unacceptable in
any circumstances. We appeal to all parties to act
responsibly and avoid further and very dangerous
escalation.

We also note with concern the continued captivity
of Staff Sergeant Shalit and call for his immediate
release. It is unacceptable that he continues to be
detained and denied access in violation of humanitarian
law and practice.

Portugal welcomes the positive steps taken by the
Government of Israel concerning the easing of the
closure of Gaza. Nevertheless, as stated by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee last week,

"more is needed for a fundamental change of the
situation in the Gaza Strip. A lasting recovery
will require a removal of the ban on exports and
private sector imports of investment inputs, as
well as lifting restrictions on the legitimate
passage of people".

Likewise, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
remains one of great concern. We thus reiterate our call
for the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009).
It is in the interest of everyone, and particularly of
Israel, not to reinforce extremism or foster a more
broadly radicalized environment in Gaza.

Once again, we join the international community
in appealing to Israel to cease all settlement activities
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. These
settlement activities, including natural growth, are
illegal under international law. They undermine trust
between the parties, erode the prerequisites for a two-
State solution and constitute an obstacle to peace.

It is thus unacceptable that settlement
construction proceeds unabated and that plans for its
extension continue to be announced regularly. Also,
regrettably, evictions and demolitions continue to
render Palestinians homeless throughout the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, depriving many
families of their livelihoods. Likewise, an increasing
number of Palestinian residents of Jerusalem have been
denied their right to live in the city.

Reuniting the West Bank and Gaza also remains
an important objective. Portugal fully supports the
efforts of President Abbas in favour of Palestinian
reconciliation within the framework of the Palestinian
Authority and the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

Let me reiterate what I have often said here.
Portugal condemns all actions that undermine trust and
opposes all unilateral actions that prejudge the outcome
of negotiations on final status issues, including
Jerusalem. On the contrary, it is by building trust and
building on trust that Israelis and Palestinians will be
able to settle their differences and ensure a lasting and
comprehensive peace.

The foregoing brings me to the crux of our
concern. Peace between Israelis and Palestinians can be
reached only through a direct, genuine and politically
negotiated process leading to the establishment of a
Palestinian State. The dual deadline for reaching an
Israeli-Palestinian agreement on permanent status
issues and completing the Palestinian two-year State-
building plan is fast approaching. Yet, the negotiations
process is at a standstill. The Quartet was due to meet
in March. The April meeting was again postponed.
Portugal wishes for a new meeting to be scheduled as
soon as possible and encourages the active
involvement of the Quartet to bring the negotiations
process forward.

It is essential that the international community
clearly set out the parameters of a peace agreement and
a clear calendar to attain this objective. As underscored
by the four European Union countries in the Security
Council in their explanations of vote on 18 February,
when we voted on the draft resolution on settlements
(see S/PV.6484), direct negotiations should seek to
achieve, first, an agreement on the borders of the two
States based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent
land swaps as may be agreed between the parties;
secondly, security arrangements that respect the
sovereignty of the Palestinians, end the occupation and
protect Israel's security; thirdly, a just solution to the
refugee question; and lastly, the fulfilment of the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem, solving
through negotiations the status of the city as the future
capital of both States. That is also the position of the
European Union, which will be expressed later on in
this debate.

At the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in
Brussels last week, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the United Nations concurred that
the Palestinian Authority is above the threshold for a
functioning State in a number of key sectors, and is
close to reaching the objectives of the State-building
programme. Nevertheless, the Palestinian Authority's
institution-building achievements can be sustainable
only if they are matched with progress in the peace
talks. Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
set for themselves the goal of reaching a framework
agreement on all core issues by September. It is vitally
important that by then the State-building and political
process be brought into alignment. We thus again urge
the parties to resume with the utmost urgency
meaningful direct negotiations.

While we welcome all the measures aimed at
supporting the Palestinian Authority State-building
exercise and the economic development of the
occupied Palestinian territory, those measures are not
to be considered as a substitute for timely negotiations
on all final status issues. Likewise, as events all
throughout the region are showing us, temporary and
interim solutions are simply not an option, either.

The peace we all hope for in the Middle East is a
lasting and comprehensive one that would enable the
full integration of Israel into its regional environment.
A breakthrough in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, would contribute to
appease a region in turmoil. The Israel-Syria and
Israel-Lebanon tracks are equally important and need
to be pursued in tandem.

The region is living through times of change.
Israelis and Palestinians must seize this opportunity to
engage diligently and fruitfully with each other. Now is
the moment for bold and brave leadership to focus on
the only solution that can bring sustainable peace and
prosperity to Israelis and Palestinians alike: an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.

I would like to say a few words on the situation
in Lebanon. Portugal hopes for the formation of a new
Government in keeping with the provisions of the
Constitution. We expect a new Government, once
formed, to fulfil its obligations under all relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004), and to reiterate its
commitment to all international obligations, including
those concerning the Special Tribunal.

We remain concerned by the almost daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty by Israeli
overflights of Lebanon, which exacerbate tensions in
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon area of
operations. Portugal reaffirms its full support for
Lebanon's sovereignty and independence and the need
for its sovereignty to be fully respected in land, sea and
air.

