Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate. I
also wish to thank the Chairmen of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) for their comprehensive briefings today.
We are grateful for their work.
Brazil has long been a supporter of international
efforts on counter-terrorism. Our Constitution
considers terrorism a heinous crime and establishes
cooperation with partners and international
organizations on this issue as a guiding principle of our
foreign policy. Accordingly, Brazil has duly submitted
all the reports requested by the resolutions in question.

In recent years, the Security Council has taken
important decisions to enhance the legitimacy of its
counter-terrorism measures. The most important of
them was the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009),
which aims at enhancing the work of the 1267
Committee. It will certainly strengthen due process and
give more transparency to the Committee's decisions.
The forthcoming appointment of an Ombudsperson, as
well as the new procedures for de-listing, will make it
easier to reconcile the effectiveness of the fight against
terrorism with the protection of human rights.

Brazil also supports the two other important
initiatives under way aimed at improving the work of
the 1267 Committee, namely, the general review of the
consolidated list of sanctions and the preparation of
narrative summaries for each entry on the list. The
combination of those measures will certainly
strengthen the Committee. I take this opportunity to
thank the Monitoring Team for its continuous support
for the activities of the 1267 Committee.

The work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has also undergone important changes. We welcome
the fact that the Committee has improved its dialogue
and cooperation with Member States and, when
requested, has facilitated technical assistance to allow
for better implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

My delegation would also like to commend the
CTC for reaching out to regional and international
organizations. The Chair's recent visit to the African
Union and to the Organization of American States will
certainly spur closer cooperation by those actors with
the Committee. A series of other events and meetings
currently being planned will bring together different
entities and national Governments. We support and
encourage the continuation of that positive trend.

Let me also highlight the practice adopted by the
CTC, of holding periodic open briefings on themes
relevant to the wider membership. We encourage the
continuation of that initiative. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to recognize the work carried out by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, especially the fruitful dialogue it maintains
with Member States during its visits and during the
process of developing and discussing Preliminary
Implementation Assessments.

With regard to the 1540 Committee, important
strides have been made with the adoption of the final
document of the comprehensive review and the
programme of work for 2010. Those documents
highlight the Committee's nature as a forum for
cooperation. By allowing Member States to discuss and
share information among themselves and with other
relevant organizations, it makes a very valuable, and at
the same time discreet, contribution to our common
goal of stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

The Committee has participated in numerous
meetings in various forums, thus strengthening the
partnerships that are crucial to achieving the
Committee's goals. We note in particular the
participation of a member of the Committee in a
meeting of the Organization of American States in
February to discuss cooperation in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

My delegation is pleased with the efforts under
way to coordinate and enhance the dialogue among the
three Committees and between them and the United
Nations system in general. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force of the General Assembly
can greatly contribute to building bridges between the
different Security Council subsidiary bodies and other
agencies. This coordinated action will help us to better
cope with the threats posed by terrorism in all its
dimensions. My delegation reiterates its commitment
to this process.

