President Chiluba: First of all, let me apologize to
you, Madam President, and to Ambassador Holbrooke for
my failure to meet with you last night. I hope that was
not a sign of an undeclared war between Britain and
Zambia, because I was badly attacked in England by flu
only two hours after my arrival. I thought that was not in
retaliation for the death of Dr. Livingstone, who was
killed by malaria in my country.
I wish sincerely to congratulate Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke and the Government of the United States of
America for devoting the United States presidency of the
Security Council to African issues. The Council has held
discussions on HIV/AIDS, on refugees and internally
displaced persons, on the war in Angola and on the
Burundi conflict, as well as the current discussion of the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These are issues that
have direct, immediate and severe consequences for my
country.

By devoting a month to African issues, the Security
Council is acknowledging that Africa is an important part
of the international community, and that any threats to
peace and security on the continent inevitably threaten
international peace and security. The United Nations
stands today both as a monument to humanity's greatest
folly and as an embodiment of our collective wisdom and
commitment to the permanent preservation of
international peace and security. It is thus a fitting tribute
to the foresight of the founding fathers of the United
Nations that the Security Council, the body specifically
entrusted with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, is holding discussions
on important African issues that pose a threat to that
peace.

Our discussion today, and for the rest of this week,
focuses on the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
country with which my country, Zambia, shares its
longest international boundary and close historical and
cultural ties.

In September last year, I had an opportunity to
address both the Security Council and the General

 

Assembly on this same subject. At the time, we had just
managed to secure the remaining signatures to the Ceasefire
Agreement. I appealed to the Security Council in particular,
and to the international community in general, through the
General Assembly, to undertake a number of steps to
ensure the speedy and full implementation of the
Agreement.

According to the calendar for the implementation of
the Ceasefire Agreement, which the parties had agreed
upon, most of the activities should have been completed by
this time, including the inter-Congolese national dialogue,
establishment of new institutions, exchange of prisoners and
disarmament of armed groups. Deployment of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission would long since have begun
and the orderly withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would be in its final
stages of completion.

It is common knowledge that the implementation of
the Ceasefire Agreement is way behind schedule in almost
all respects. The question is: why is this so?

Could it be that our enthusiasm and optimism were
premised on unrealistic expectations? I do not think so. The
calendar was implementable as it was. Could it be that the
parties lacked the political will to follow through on what
they had committed themselves to in the Agreement? I do
not think so either. Why, then, has the Agreement not been
implemented on schedule?

I would be the first to admit that we have encountered
a number of difficulties that have contributed to delays in
implementing the Agreement. Yes, we have had some
violations of the Agreement and, yes, indeed, there have
been problems of accessibility of the United Nations
Organization Mission (MONUC) and Organization of
African Unity (OAU) neutral investigators to some parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, thus making the
work of these important bodies difficult. In addition,
coordination between MONUC, the OAU and the Joint
Military Commission (JMC) took some time to sort out.

I do not, however, subscribe to the notion that these
problems were so big as to become insurmountable. Indeed,
it is to the credit of the parties that, in spite of the
difficulties, they have remained committed to the Ceasefire
Agreement and have, without exception, repeatedly
reaffirmed this commitment. To this effect, the parties have
made every effort, particularly through the JMC, to address
the problems.

When reports of Ceasefire violations were becoming
persistent, the JMC established four regional JMCs inside
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and deployed
OAU investigators to three of these. Arrangements for
deployment to the fourth regional JMC at Kabalo are
being made. When a stand-off between the allied forces
and those of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RDC)
happened at Ikela, the J MC appointed a neutral committee
comprising Zambia as Chairman, MONUC and the OAU
to find an amicable solution.

Another positive development has been the
acknowledgement by the parties themselves that the
calendar needed to be adjusted in View of the delays in
the implementation process. A proposed new calendar has
since been worked out by the JMC and approved in
principle by the Political Committee, which met in Harare
on 17 and 18 January 2000. The parties are working to
ensure that the calendar is finalised as soon as possible.
In addition to all the parties reaffirming their commitment
to the Ceasefire Agreement during the Political
Committee meeting, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo used the opportunity to pledge its
readiness to facilitate access of MONUC and the OAU
investigators to the various areas inside the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Lastly, but by no means the least, on 15 December
1999 the Congolese parties, with the assistance of the
OAU Secretary-General, unanimously selected Sir
Ketumile Masire, former President of Botswana, as the
neutral facilitator for the inter-Congolese negotiations.

One of the major causes of the delay in
implementing the Ceasefire Agreement has been lack of
funds for the Joint Military Commission. In the first
instance, the pledged contributions made by the
international community have not been adequate to meet
all the needs of the JMC. Worse still, most of the pledged
contributions are yet to be made available to the J MC. As
a result, it took time for the JMC to be effectively
established and deployed in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. For some time, therefore, there was a vacuum
in areas where the JMC should have had a presence to
ensure that implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement
was proceeding according to the schedule.

I have felt compelled to highlight some of the
positive developments not so much to deny the existence
of any problems, nor am I suggesting that we, the parties,
cannot bear any responsibility whatsoever for any of the
problems that have affected the implementation of the

 

Agreement. Not at all. Rather, I have made this point in
order to demonstrate that the parties are irrevocably
committed to the Ceasefire Agreement, contrary to the
notion that seems to have gained currency among some
members of the international community that the Lusaka
Agreement is all but dead. It is not.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is very real, and the Ceasefire Agreement is an effort to
deal with this real situation. In the real world there are few,
if any, perfect situations. It goes without saying, therefore,
that an agreement that seeks to resolve a problem as real
and as complex as that obtaining in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot be expected to be perfect.
The difficulties that have arisen during implementation are
to be expected and do not invalidate the Agreement at all.

We are, therefore, very concerned when we hear about
what appear to be preconditions being raised in regard to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The international
community is reluctant to send peacekeepers to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo unless the Lusaka
Agreement registers a perfect score on some performance
chart. To the best of my knowledge, no other ceasefire
agreement anywhere in the world has been subjected to this
test. If such were to be done, I am confident that not a
single one would pass the test at all.

There is no peacekeeping that does not involve some
degree of risk. We are involved in peacekeeping because
peace is an imperative for the survival of humankind: it is
an imperative for which we must be prepared to make the
supreme sacrifice.

We are not here suggesting that the international
community should indulge in reckless adventure in the
name of peacekeeping. Not at all. No. Every loss of life is
a tragedy. It is, therefore, incumbent upon all of us, and in
particular the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, that the peacekeepers are given all
necessary support and protection. After all, it is we, the
parties to the conflict and to the Agreement, who have
requested the peacekeepers. We consider peacekeepers as
allies, not adversaries.

The opportunity that has been provided for the leaders
of the region to discuss the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
truly unique and important one. We hope that the
discussion will not be considered as an end in itself, with
no concrete results at the end.

By coming here, regional leaders have come to
demonstrate their commitment to the Ceasefire Agreement
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and their
determination to implement it. We hope that this
discussion will lead to greater support for the Agreement
from the international community. Specifically, we seek
the following support from the Security Council and from
the international community at large.

Firstly, we would like to see quick action in regard
to the deployment of the United Nations military
observers and peacekeepers. In this respect, we are in
agreement with the general thrust of the arrangements
contained in Secretary-General Annan's report S/2000/30
of 17 January 2000.

Secondly, we would like to appeal to the
international community to make more resources available
to the JMC. To this end, I wish to sincerely commend
those countries which have made contributions or pledges
to the JMC. Unfortunately, most of the pledges have not
been honoured, and I would like to take this opportunity
to make a special plea to the countries concerned to
please speed up payment of their pledges.
Thirdly, we wish to appeal for support for the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir Ketumile
Masire - and it was pleasant to hear you, Madam
Secretary, pledge that. The facilitator urgently needs
resources - human, financial and material - to enable
him undertake necessary preliminary work and to sustain
his important functions during the National Dialogue.

Last but not least, the international community
should provide the necessary and adequate resources to
support the national dialogue.

The resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should not be an "us-versus-them"
action at all. The parties to the conflict, and its immediate
victims, may be African, and the Ceasefire Agreement
may have been signed by Africans, but it is not "their"
conflict or "their" Agreement. The fact that this matter is
today being discussed by the Security Council, the body
that bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is an acknowledgement
of this fact, and we are pleased about this.

All of us who have the privilege of serving on the
Security Council do so in trust and on behalf of all the
States Members of the United Nations. This body is
therefore our Security Council, collectively. The conflict

 

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is thus our
collective responsibility. If the Ceasefire Agreement fails to
be implemented, it will be our failure - that of each and
every Member of the United Nations.

