The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Germany, Iceland, India, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Norway, Pakistan, Senegal, Switzerland and Tunisia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Her Excellency
Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa, President of the
General Assembly, and His Excellency Ambassador
Dalius Cekuolis, President of the Economic and Social
Council.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. I
should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2007/334, containing a letter
dated 6 June 2007 from the Permanent Representative
2
of Belgium addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on natural resources and
conflict.

I shall now make an introductory statement in my
capacity as the representative of Belgium.

I thank participants for coming here and agreeing
to participate in this open debate on natural resources
and conflict, a subject that I hold particularly dear.

Here are, in a few words, the reasons why
Belgium wished to organize this debate. In countries
rich in natural resources, the revenue derived from the
sale of raw materials is essential for growth and
development and thus contributes to peace and
stability. Unfortunately, experience shows us that the
exploitation of these resources can also become a
factor that magnifies conflict, both directly, owing to
armed conflicts relating to the ownership and
distribution of revenue, and indirectly, because in
fragile countries a dependence on natural resources
leads to an increased risk of weak governance and poor
economic performance. All of these factors contribute
to conflict-prone environments.

Natural resources can also be a means for
conflict, allowing armed groups to finance their
activities. These links between natural resources and
conflict have been noted in several crises that have
been in the forefront in the last few years, particularly
in Africa. I myself was made aware of this problem, in
particular, through our diplomatic action in Central
Africa.

The question of the role of natural resources in
armed conflict is not a new one; the Security Council
has been faced with it for several years. The Council
has responded by imposing embargoes on certain
commodities and by requesting sanctions committees
and groups of experts to study this aspect of certain
situations on its agenda. A number of peacekeeping
operations have also incorporated the issue of natural
resources into their work.

However, the debate so far has focused only on
certain countries and been limited to specific aspects of
the question. The Council has not undertaken a
horizontal reflection process on this dimension of its
work. It is time for us to focus on the lessons learned
from its experience and on means of strengthening the
effectiveness of the Council's instruments.
07-39337
Moreover, a number of the countries most
affected by the problem are now emerging from
conflict. Here I am thinking in particular of Liberia,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This raises fresh questions for the international
community and for the Security Council in particular.

There has been a growing awareness of the fact
that in order to avert any relapse into acute conflict, it
must be ensured at an early stage that in the affected
countries natural resources play their rightful role,
which is to serve as a source of wealth and
development rather than of instability.

Various initiatives exist with respect to that
general objective, such as the Kimberley Process for
diamonds. A more recent one, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), which is aimed at
enhancing the transparency of the revenues of
extractive industries, is based on that same logic. Here
let me also mention the International Tropical Timber
Organization, which has programmes to combat illegal
trade. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development has developed guidelines aimed at
increasing the private sector's awareness of its
responsibilities. The World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme are increasingly
taking this issue into account in their activities in
resource-rich countries.

Thus today's debate is an opportunity also to
focus on the linkage between the actions of the
Security Council and the aforementioned efforts of the
international community, in particular in countries
emerging from conflict. We must ensure a smooth
transition from a logic of sanctions, which is
appropriate in periods of acute conflict and which is
dictated by security considerations and managed by the
Council, to a logic of reconstruction, in which the goal
is to help a country recover and make optimal use of its
sovereignty over its natural resources, and where other
actors take over.

I am convinced that we will have a fruitful debate
on this issue.

I now have the honour to give the floor to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, who will speak on behalf of the
Secretary-General.


