Mr. Williamson (United States): I would like to
thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for his briefing today and
to note that we are particularly pleased to formalize the
resolution extending the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for another six
months.

As we all know, the war on terrorism will be a
long one. An earlier arena of that struggle has been and
is in Afghanistan. The United States is committed to
stay until the mission is done, and the United States is
pleased to join with the United Nations to support a
free, stable, durable Afghanistan. In that context, I also
welcome Turkey's commitment to assume the
command of ISAF, and I thank the United Kingdom
once again for ajob well done.

Despite the considerable activity and commitment
on the part of the international community, we all
recognize that there is much that remains to be done in
Afghanistan. Last week, together with Mr. Brahimi, we
held security discussions in Geneva with 45 nations,
including the Afghanistan Interim Authority and
United Nations representatives. Participants used the
meeting to review existing efforts to assist the
Afghanistan Interim Authority with security and to
coordinate continued international efforts. Since we
last met, we have made progress on a number of
initiatives. We continue to believe that capable and
transparent Afghan institutions are the key to long-term
security for the Afghan people.

To that end, United States efforts to begin
training the Afghan national army are well under way.
At the end of April, 140 United States Special Forces
troops, with the mission of training the Afghan army,
arrived in Afghanistan, and they have gotten down to
the business of standing up a national army. A total of
1,800 sets of uniforms from the United States arrived
in Kabul last week and were issued to soldiers
immediately. The first battalion of the Afghan national
army is presently attired and has the personal
equipment necessary to proceed with their training
course. Training of the first contingent of troops has
already begun.

We welcome the arrival of French trainers to
Kabul. The French will train the second battalion
starting on 1 June, as well as one additional battalion
later in the training programme. Beyond the effort of
training the troops, we are working intensively to
ensure that they get paid, and we welcome the
establishment of the United Nations Trust Fund, which
will facilitate salary payments.

I would like to comment, in brief, on one of the
most critical milestones ahead: the loya jirga. As
Under-Secretary-General Prendergast has reviewed for
us this morning, there is forward movement taking
place on the ground in Afghanistan. There have been
isolated problems, but clear and steady progress is
being made. We share the view that a successful and
transparent loya jirga process is critical to the ultimate
success of the Bonn process. I know that Mr. Brahimi's
shop is working very hard to address the enormous
logistical and other challenges that the loya jirga will
bring, both in Kabul and in the nine regional jirga sites.

The United States is contributing funding and
other support for the loya jirga. We are contributing
$3 million for air operations, $500 for Radio Kabul and
public dissemination of Chairman Karzai's message on
the loya jirga, and our funding monitors as part of a
broader, $1.2 million grant to the Asia Foundation. We
also have sent two logisticians to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to offer
logistical support for this enormous effort to move
people around the country.

The loya jirga will not take place in a security
vacuum. Clearly, the situation is still very fluid, and the
United States will remain focused on this issue. To that
end, the United States continues to monitor and to
examine very closely the security situation on the
ground beyond Kabul, and we believe that the United
States and coalition efforts to address the security
imperatives beyond Kabul have been successful to
date. We continue to envision potential security
concerns outside Kabul being addressed as necessary
by coalition and Operation Enduring Freedom forces.

Finally, I would simply like to note the excellent
work being done by Mr. Brahimi and his Deputy,
Mr. Arnault. The truce brokered by Mr. Arnault in the
north between Dostum and Atta is a nice example of
Mr. Brahimi's effectiveness. It also represents the way
forward, one step at a time.

President Bush made a speech recently in which
he outlined our efforts in the war against terrorism. He
said that we expect certain parties to try to undermine
Afghanistan's efforts to build a lasting peace. We know
that not only from intelligence but also from the history
of military conflict in Afghanistan. It has been one of
initial success, followed by long years of floundering
and ultimate failure. We are not going to repeat that
mistake. We will stay until the mission is done.

We know that true peace will be achieved only
when we give the Afghan people the means to achieve
their own aspirations. Peace will be achieved by
helping Afghanistan develop its own stable
Government. Peace will be achieved by helping
Afghanistan train and develop its own national army.
And peace will be achieved through an education
system for boys and girls that works.

We are working hard in Afghanistan - we are
clearing minefields, we are building roads, we are
improving medical care - and we will work to help
Afghanistan to develop an economy that can feed its
people without feeding the world's demand for drugs.
By helping to build an Afghanistan that is free and is a
better place in which to live, we are working in the best
traditions of America and, I hasten to add, in the best
traditions of the United Nations.

