Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We wish to highlight the initiative you have taken,
Mr. President, to convene an open debate to follow-up
on resolution 1318, adopted on 7 September 2000, by
the heads of State and Government of the Security
Council member States. We also wish to emphasize the
initiative you have taken to enable the non-members of
the Security Council to speak this morning so that
Council members could take their proposals into
account in our statements, which is most important for
our future work agenda.

We noted this morning the overall recognition of
the progress made by the Council in recent months in
areas such as the consultations on peacekeeping
operations, attention focused on the causes of conflicts
in Africa and the monitoring of sanctions regimes.

We were also able to see that we are being
urged- and here my delegation fully agrees- to
adopt stronger measures in the Security Council vis-d-
vis the uncontrolled international trade of small
weapons, to observe the appropriate competencies with
regard to other United Nations bodies in connection
with peace-building following conflicts and, finally, to
ensure that decisions adopted by the Council are better
known and have the desired effect on areas of the
world to which they are directed.

It is only natural that the permanent members of
the Security Council should bear a greater
responsibility for improving the effectiveness of this
organ, since many of these measures require a long
time to be consolidated. Of course, non-permanent
members must also assume our share of responsibility
in this task and we shall do so with greater aptitude to
the extent that the Council is sufficiently representative
of the Members of the Organization, with broad
participation and, above all, greater transparency in its
decision-making.

One area that was scarcely mentioned in
September's declaration by the heads of State and
Government, but which is nonetheless the subject of
great attention and discussion in the Council, is that of
the imposition of sanctions.

Under the Charter, sanctions should be used as a
means to help maintain international peace and security
and as an alternative to the use of force. They should
not be thought of, however, as a punitive tool to extract
political concessions. We would prefer them to be used
to encourage greater cooperation, not confrontation, on
the part of state or non-state actors that threaten
international peace and security. Thus, the debates that
have been held within and outside the Council on the
humanitarian consequences of sanctions reflect the
deep concern prevailing in the international
community, and the Council must respond
appropriately to that reality.

Two other aspects that we wish to emphasize
relate to the Security Council's competence with
respect to international peace and security and its
conduct in conflicts in Africa.

Colombia strongly believes in the power
conferred on the Security Council as principal
guarantor of international peace and security. However,
without the establishment of any clear criteria for doing
so, the Council has continued to expand the concept of
threats to international peace and security to include an
interminable series of topics on which it claims
competence. In so doing, it is depriving interested
States that are not members of the Council from
participating in negotiations; it is denying the General
Assembly and other organs and agencies of the United
Nations system the ability to consider items that
naturally fall within their purview; and it is
compromising its own ability to obtain tangible results
in areas where it has no competitive advantage.

The Security Council's attention to Africa is
understandable and Colombia considers the United
Nations presence in that part of the world to be
essential. Africa deserves this dedication in our work.
Nevertheless, I wish to emphasize two elements. First,
we feel that the Council should work more closely with
regional and subregional organizations on the continent
that are entrusted with the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. We recall that the September summit was
presided over by the head of State of Mali and that its
delegation in the Council made important contributions
from the standpoint of the Economic Community of
West African States and its interests.

Secondly, the complexity of conflicts in Africa
requires a strategy of integrating political, economic,
social and humanitarian aspects, which require
responses not only from the Council, but also from the
United Nations as a whole. As to the Council, the
attention it has paid to conflict-prevention strategies is
justified, as are post-conflict peace-building processes.
We believe, however, that much remains to be done in
that field.

In conclusion, it is clear that United Nations
Members as a whole are attentively following
proceedings in the Security Council and expect
satisfactory results from its missions. We feel that a
debate such as this has the merit of generating a greater
degree of commitment and solidarity among all
Members of the Organization, not just among Council
members, with respect to activities in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

