Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate the United States of America
for assuming the presidency of the Council during this
month.

(spoke in English)

We also wish to thank the United States for holding
this open debate and take this opportunity to reaffirm
our support for the work undertaken by the Security
Council to protect children in armed conflict.

(spoke in French)

The horrifying situations in Syria, Nigeria, South
Sudan and Iraq are brutal reminders of the actions
and violations being committed against children and
the need to take additional measures to protect them.
The rights and protection of children are priorities in
Canada's foreign policy and development assistance.
Canada is a party to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its first two Optional Protocols. Canada
recognizes and firmly supports the need to prevent the
recruitment and use of children in conflicts and the
need to work for the rehabilitation of children who have
been recruited and used in hostilities.

Beyond the international framework for protecting
children in armed conflict, it is critical to ensure
the implementation of that protection. That is why
Canada consistently calls for the Security Council
to systematically impose sanctions and adopt
targeted measures to hold perpetrators accountable
for committing their depraved acts. We call on the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative to continue to consider ways to
increase pressure on those individuals who persist in
committing violations and to ensure compliance with
international obligations.

(spoke in English)

One such example is the Security Council's
monitoring and reporting mechanism. In the light of
the mass kidnapping of schoolgirls in Nigeria by Boko
Haram, we encourage the Secretary-General to add
abductions as a formal trigger for the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on children in armed conflict and
for the listing of the armed groups involved.

Canada sees education as essential to security,
stability and development. Education is, in fact,
intertwined with the children and armed conflict
agenda. The military use and targeting of schools
deprives children of access to education, while putting
the lives of students and teachers at risk. It also
impedes the future of the country by preventing the
next generation from developing its full potential. We
deplore in the strongest terms the ongoing use of schools
by armed parties as bases, barracks, weapons caches
and detention centres, or for other military purposes.
In March, Canada co-sponsored resolution 2143 (2014),
which called for increased efforts to protect children
in armed conflict and, among other things, expressed
deep concern at the military use of schools and attacks
on schools.

(spoke in French)

We should also support effective predeployment
training in child protection for personnel involved in
field missions, including military and police personnel.
It is also crucial that such personnel be screened to
prevent individuals who have committed violations
against children from serving with the United Nations.
That goes to the heart of the United Nations mandate.

Canada is convinced that both formal and informal
child protection systems are important. Formal systems
include donor support for civic registration and vital
statistics, with data collection disaggregated by gender,
ethnic origin, wealth quintile and other factors. That, in

turn, would contribute to establishing age-verification
procedures for military recruitment. Informal systems
include active participation by families, communities
and the children themselves in the creation and
fostering of protective environments that contribute to
preventing recruitment and other violations. Capacity-
building is an essential element of the protection of
children. Experience has shown that the protection of
children in conflict situations is complex and requires
the application of diverse and specialized medical,
psychological and social skills and knowledge.

(spoke in English)

We recognize that actions speak louder than words.
Canada has therefore made concrete contributions
to efforts to protect children in situations of armed
conflict. Since 2008, Canada has contributed over
$27 million to initiatives relating to the prevention of
the recruitment and demobilization of child soldiers. In
addition, we recently provided $10 million to UNICEF
to implement the monitoring and reporting mechanism
under resolution 1612 (2005). That project will improve
child protection in countries experiencing armed
conflict, including, among others, Afghanistan, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Sudan, South
Sudan and Syria.

On 24 January, Prime Minister Harper announced
that an additional $50 million in humanitarian funding
will be allocated for education and child-protection
activities that support the No Lost Generation initiative.
With the support of the Government of Canada for that
initiative, it is expected that our partners will be able to
reach 660,000 children with protection and education
interventions to help restore hope to children affected
by the crisis in Syria. Let me assure you, Sir, that
Canada will continue to fight against the unspeakable
violations that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of
girls and boys in situations of armed conflict in every
corner of the world.

