The President: I thank Mr. Salame' for his briefing.

I shall now give a briefing in my capacity as
representative of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution
1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I have the honour
to report to the Security Council on the work of the
Committee established by the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 22 May to 16 July,
during which time the Committee met once in informal
consultations and conducted additional work via the
written silence procedure.

On 7 June the Committee approved the designation
of six individuals as subject to the assets freeze and
travel ban measures, in accordance with paragraph 11
(a) of resolution 2213 (2015). Prior to their listing, the
Committee held informal consultations on 25 May to
discuss the proposal, in which Libya also participated.
As of 26 June, the Committee is considering a proposal
for the designation of another individual against several
designation criteria.

Concerning the arms embargo, the Committee
responded to two requests for guidance, received from
Malta and Malaysia respectively, which touched on
the scope and implementation of that measure. The
response to Malaysia confirmed the publicly available
entries on the sanctions list of the Committee. The
Committee also received additional information from
the Kingdom of the Netherlands regarding previously
exempted items.

With respect to the assets freeze, the Committee
received three notifications from the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, invoking
paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), regarding
the legal expenses of a listed individual, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, and a listed entity, the Libyan Investment
Authority. The Committee also received some
information from Malaysia on its implementation of the
assets-freeze.

With regard to the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum from Libya, the Committee
received information from Libya, as well as from the
Panel of Experts, regarding an attempt by a vessel to
carry out an illicit export of crude oil from Marsa A1
Hariga port in Libya. The Committee dispatched letters
to the reported flag State and to the reported State of a
company allegedly involved in the matter.

During the period under review, the Committee
received communications from the focal point for
de-listing, established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the de-listing requests
from the travel-ban measure of Aisha Al-Qadhafi and
Safia Fakash Al-Barassi. Those requests are currently
under the review stage stipulated in paragraph 5 of the
annex to resolution 1730 (2006). The Committee has
approved a travel ban exemption request from Safia
Farkash Al-Barassi. During the reporting period, the
Committee received, and responded to, a letter from
Libya regarding certain content of the last final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2017/466). The Committee
also referred the matter to the Panel for its follow-up,
as appropriate.

Lastly, on 5 March the Committee agreed to take
follow-up action on six of the eight recommendations
contained in the interim report of the Panel, which in
various ways aimed at improving the implementation of
the arms embargo, the assets-freeze and the measures
in relation to attempts to illicitly export petroleum
from Libya. On three of the six recommendations,
more specifically referring to the arms embargo and
the assets-freeze, the Committee had agreed to task the
Panel with providing additional information. During
the reporting period, the Committee received additional
information from the Panel and is currently considering
any further follow-up action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

