Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2372 (2017), which renews the mandate of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). As
penholder, I thank all members of the Security Council
for their cooperation.

I would like to pay tribute in particular to Fiona
Blyth of my team for holding the pen so commendably
on Somalia, just as she leaves New York to go and work
for the United Nations in Somalia.

AMISOM's continued presence in Somalia is
critical to allow progress to continue, enable President
Farmajo's vision of reform to take root and allow
time for Somalia to build its security capacity. The
challenges ahead are daunting but today, once again,
the Council has recommitted to supporting that vision.
It is a significant turning point for AMISOM. and for
Somalia. For the very first time in AMISOM's 10-
year deployment, the Security Council has begun to
reduce the total number of military personnel deployed
in Somalia.

There are many indicators of Somalia's progress.
Reducing the number of international troops and
beginning the transition of security responsibility to
Somalia itself is surely one of them. That progress would
not have been possible without AMISOM's bravery and
sacrifice in Somalia. The commitment and tenacity
demonstrated by the troop- and police-contributing
countries of AMISOM. against the brutal threat has
provided the space for Somalia to hold successful
electoral processes and to begin the slow task of
State building.

Now, it is time for a new approach to security, to
focus not only on tackling the threat from Al-Shabaab,
but crucially also on beginning the gradual hand-over
of security responsibility to the Somali security forces
themselves. It will take time, but at the London Somalia
conference in May, Somalia and 42 international
partners agreed a security pact for security reform to
enable Somalia to provide that security and protection
that its people so desperately need and deserve. Somalia
wants to step up to that challenge and we all stand ready
to support the country. We look forward to continuing to
support progress and we are grateful for the continued
presence of AMISOM, to allow Somalia to flourish.

