Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I join other
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for calling this
meeting, in welcoming Mr. Vieira de Mello and in
thanking him for his informative briefing.

I have noted the strong emphasis in his statement
on the security situation, especially in West Timor, and
if I do not dwell on it extensively on my part it is
because the matter will be covered in the statement to
be made later in this debate by the representative of
France on behalf of the European Union, to which my
delegation subscribes. Let me just say that we are
dismayed at the latest information we have received on
the so-called crackdown against militia groups in West
Timor. We agree with Mr. Vieira de Mello that Foreign
Minister Shihab's plan of action cannot succeed until
the militias holding the refugees through threats and
misinformation are removed.

Mr. Vieira de Mello has not been here to brief us
for about three months, so it is high time for us to
commend him once again for the tremendous work
done by him and his international staff in rebuilding
East Timor from scratch.

At the same time, the involvement of the East
Timorese remains essential. Is Mr. Vieira de Mello of
the opinion that progress in involving the East
Timorese is satisfactory? Or maybe I should rephrase
this. Is he of the opinion that the East Timorese
themselves feel that this is the case? In other words, is
their sense of ownership growing?

Our common interest in seeing East Timor
develop into a democratic State based on the rule of
law is not confined to civilian institutions, but must
also include its future armed forces. We are therefore
grateful for all the information Mr. Vieira de Mello has
supplied with regard to the future defence force. In the
past, my delegation has repeatedly expressed its
interest in this issue, and I would like to explain briefly
why we consider this so important. The negative
developments in West Timor underscore the need for
East Timor to have the military capacity to defend
itself as far as its resources will allow. At the same
time, appropriate institutional democratic checks and
balances need to be established. Close United Nations
involvement will provide the opportunity to ensure that
an East Timorese force conforms to the standards of
civilian oversight, democratic accountability and
international human rights norms and standards.

We cannot assume that this will happen by itself.
United Nations guidance is needed to foster a culture
of commitment to democracy and the rule of law in the
future armed forces, inter alia, through programmes of
civic and human rights education. Also, the armed
forces should not engage in activities that fall outside
the ambit of their tasks as the defenders of East
Timorese sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The establishment of such a force is necessary
because the international community cannot
indefinitely provide for the security of East Timor.
However, it will be some time - perhaps a few
years- before such a force will be ready. While
everything possible should be done to enable East
Timor to fend for itself as soon as possible, in the
meantime the international community should continue
to provide for its security, in the form of either a
United Nations force or a multilateral force, preferably
with regional participation.

