Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for the timely holding of this open
meeting. We congratulate you on presiding over this
meeting, and we extend our appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius for his
stewardship during the month of January.

Argentina, in line with its commitment to
maintaining international peace and security, is closely
following the situation in the Middle East, which is
extremely grave and deteriorates day by day. The tragic
dimensions of the situation should not, however, cause
us to abandon the necessary quest for a negotiated
settlement to the conflict and for the protection of the
lives and rights of the civilian population. Every
possible effort must be made to ensure that the parties
regain mutual confidence and return to the negotiating
table in line with path traced by the Mitchell
recommendations and the Tenet plan.

It is our View that the security issues are
extremely important. However, it does seem to us that
they cannot be resolved in isolation but must be placed
within a broader context so that we can simultaneously
and comprehensively address the underlying political
questions. We particularly appreciate the recent
statement by the Secretary-General, and we share his
concerns.

We believe that urgent action is necessary and of
great priority in order to put an end to violence and the
disproportionate use of force. The parties, together
with the international community, should extensively
and flexibly study ideas and proposals that would get
the peace process back on track. In this regard, the
proposal of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, as has
been mentioned by a large part of the international
community, offers fresh hope for peace and must be
examined by both parties in a constructive, forward-
looking manner.

Argentina maintains its traditional support for the
process established by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Madrid Conference, the Oslo Accords and
the other agreements and understandings between the
parties. Argentina wishes to reaffirm its support for a
stable and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on
the Palestinian people's inalienable right to self-
determination and to an independent and viable State,
as well as for Israel's right to live in peace with its
neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders. In this context, we add our voice to
the international community's exhortation to maintain
the role properly belonging to the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, as the legitimate
interlocutor for his people.

Until mutual confidence has been restored
between the parties, the international community and
the Security Council must act in concert to find a
solution to the conflict and to help the parties resume
the path of dialogue. The United Nations has a
historical responsibility towards Palestine and a central
role in the urgent efforts to assist the Middle East peace
process.

We urge the parties once again to return to the
negotiating table, encouraged by a political readiness
for compromise and reciprocal concessions, since the
path of peace is the only option for all people living in
the region.

