I would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for her valuable briefing. We also appreciate the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq. The recent progress in Iraq is notable and encouraging. Six months ago, when we discussed this matter, violence continued in Baghdad and several other governorates; the formation of a new Government had been delayed; the final text of the new electoral law had not been published; and approximately 1.8 million people were in acute need. Today, the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/792) and the briefing by the Special Representative present a brighter picture of the country. The Government formation process has been completed with the appointment of all ministerial posts. There have been advances in realizing the Government's commitment to managing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, combating corruption, providing basic services, reforming the economy and strengthening viable and responsive State institutions. Those priorities represent the Government's efforts to meet the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people. Delivery on those commitments would help to stabilize the political situation in the country. We also commend the active engagement of the Iraqi Government with neighbouring countries and beyond. The recent foreign visits by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi are examples of those efforts. However, in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain concerned about the humanitarian situation in Iraq. The number of coronavirus infections has increased dramatically over the past two months. Earlier this week there were more than 200,000 confirmed cases, and the number of deaths related to COVID-19 exceeded 6,400. Millions of people are simultaneously facing poverty, food insecurity and the pandemic. Their well-being depends heavily on international assistance. We look forward to the provision of continued help by international partners to the Iraqi Government in their efforts to improve the living conditions of the people and to cooperate with United Nations teams to tackle humanitarian issues. We would like to express our gratitude to the Special Representative and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their contribution to the progress in Iraq. The efforts of UNAMI are laudable and are supported by both the local authorities and the international community. The role of UNAMI in assisting the people and the Government of Iraq in coping with their challenges remains essential, and we reaffirm our support for the full implementation of the Mission's mandate. We also would like to take this opportunity to commend other United Nations agencies and international donors for their efforts to tackle the multiple difficulties in Iraq. As a result of their hard work, we have witnessed positive developments on the ground. We call for continued and tight-knit collaboration between United Nations teams and the Government towards achieving effective solutions for economic, medical and humanitarian problems. In the long run, we would like to emphasize the fact that Iraq will continue to face tremendous challenges. The situation remains fragile, since the problems facing the country are deep-seated. Viet Nam calls upon the international community to remain strongly committed to providing support to Iraq so that it may alleviate and stabilize the humanitarian situation and further work towards its reconstruction and development goals. Given the complicated situation in the Middle East, it is also important to ensure full respect for the political independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country. We believe that dialogue, solidarity and national harmony are the key factors in stabilizing the country.
