Mr. Kullane (Somalia): Iwould like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.

I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Council, and since this is my only opportunity to do so
ahead of its important discussions of both the situation
in our country and sanctions-related issues, I would like
to briefly address four key points, which are political
progress in Somalia, the military campaign, the
maritime interdiction of charcoal and illegal weapons
and the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group.

Two years ago, the Government of Somalia faced
several complex challenges. Today, with the support
of the Somali people and the engagement of the
international community, Somalia has undergone a
significant transformation. The Government is working
closely with international partners in implementing
the New Deal and its associated reforms. It has made
major progress in public financial management, putting
in place greater accountability measures, controls and
governance structures. Key legislation has been drafted
and budget policy developed, and the capacity of the
Offices of the Accountant General and Auditor General
has been strengthened. An annual budget, developed
against Government-wide work plans, has been
delivered. A new Governor and Board of Directors
have been appointed for the Central Bank of Somalia.
A financial governance committee has been jointly
established between the Federal Government and
international financial institutions in order to provide
greater transparency and oversight.
We are very grateful to the Secretary-General for
hosting a high-level event on Somalia during the general
debate of the General Assembly last month. Vision 2016
is the framework guiding the Government's priorities
of achieving a successful transition to democracy and
credible elections in 2016, and we are looking forward
to the forthcoming United Nations electoral needs
assessment to support that effort.

The three key elements of the Government's
strategy are constitutional review and implementation,
completion of the federal system/state formation, and
democratization. But we must consolidate military
progress if the political road map is to flourish. Our
clear military defeat of Al-Shabaab will be possible
only through the joint efforts of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The Government is committed to ensuring
that the civilian population feels the benefit of being
free from Al-Shabaab, and to that end we are working
with both the United Nations and AMISOM. to ensure
that ordinary Somalis receive basic services when
towns are liberated from Al-Shabaab. I should also like
to take this opportunity to commend the bravery and
sacrifice of the AMISOM. forces working alongside the
Somali forces. We will never forget their contribution
to peace in our country; while progress is being made
against Al-Shabaab, the fight is not over, and Somalia is
very grateful for all the assistance it receives. We hope
that the day when the Somali National Army can secure
the entire territory of Somalia without the support of
other forces will come sooner rather than later.

You will be aware, Madam President, that my
President has written to you and other Security Council
members on the issues of charcoal and illegal weapons,
which continue to fund and supply Al-Shabaab. The
Somali Government hopes that the Council will support
his request for its further assistance in authorizing the
existing international maritime forces to take measures
at sea to prevent the export of charcoal from Somalia
and the delivery of weapons and military equipment
into Somalia, in violation of the arms embargo. We
were encouraged by the remarks at the high-level
event of Mr. David Cameron, Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom, in which he offered to take forward
discussions in the Council. Tackling this trade would
make a real difference to the lives of Somalis in the
fight against Al-Shabaab.

The Government of Somalia is fully committed
to implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions both on sanctions and the Somalia and
Eritrea Monitoring Group. The Somali Government
has always been receptive to them and has welcomed
the reports of the Monitoring Group. We recognize
that the Government must work with the Monitoring
Group, and while we do not necessarily agree with all
of its findings, we will continue to work with it and
strengthen that relationship further during the next
mandate period. We would be pleased to welcome the
Group to Mogadishu on a more frequent basis.

