Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): Let
me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Ambassador Santos for updating the
Council.

The United States deplores the recent attacks on
President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao by the rebel group associated with
dissident Alfredo Reinado. They constituted an
unacceptable assault on the Timorese Government.

We welcome the decision of Australia, in
response to this crisis, to send 200 additional troops to
strengthen the International Security Forces an addition
that has provided a backbone for efforts to restore and
maintain stability in the area. We also thank Australia
for its full medical and military support.

These recent attacks underscore the necessity of
achieving accountability for the 2006 crisis. That is
central to establishing law in Timor-Leste. To meet that
goal, we encourage implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry, including bringing
those responsible for crimes to justice under domestic
law.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
recommendation of a one-year extension of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
as composed at present. UNMIT is playing a vital role
in ensuring and restoring stability in Timor-Leste. We
will depend on UNMIT to continue its support for the
Timorese in developing the capacity of the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), achieving
accountability for the 2006 crisis and strengthening the
justice sector in the coming year.

The recent past underscores the importance of
developing professional and effective police and
military forces under civilian control, in order to
provide the security necessary for political stability and
economic development. In that regard, we appreciate
UNMIT'S ongoing efforts to promote security sector
reform. With a view to long-term stability and growth,
we appreciate UNMIT's efforts to develop the
effectiveness of the Timorese justice system and
encourage additional assessments of justice sector
needs.

Despite recent challenges, it will be important for
UNMIT to retain its welcome focus on the prevention
of gender-based violence and attention to the needs of
victims.

Finally, we join the Secretary-General in calling

for reconciliation among Timorese political leaders and

parties and for coordination in addressing the

challenges facing the country. We express our

appreciation for Special Representative Khare's efforts
to facilitate such a dialogue.

