Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I thank Geir Pedersen and Mark Lowcock for their very comprehensive briefings. We join others in expressing our sympathy to the families, relatives and friends of the two Oxfam humanitarian workers who lost their lives earlier today. Only two weeks ago, we sat in this Council to voice our shared concern about the situation in north-west Syria (see S/PV.8715). We are here again today because the situation has continued to worsen. We echo our previous calls for an immediate and sustained cessation of all hostilities, as this is the only way to put an end to the suffering, which has sadly become a feature of everyday life for many Syrian people. Continuing along the current military path will not end the current conflict. It will not accomplish the objectives of resolution 2254 (2015). It will not end the humanitarian crisis or bring stability to Syria. What it will bring about are the further displacement of civilians into dire conditions where they must fight to survive, the interruption of vital humanitarian aid and the loss of many more lives. For that reason, we once again express our support for the work of Special Envoy Pedersen. We recognize and applaud his recent efforts towards attaining a political solution by engaging in dialogue with the parties. As a staunch advocate for dialogue, we hope that it will lead to a de-escalation and the prevention of a full-scale military confrontation. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes all efforts to broker and uphold a ceasefire in Idlib, including through the Astana format and the United Nations. Indeed, any solution should include all the parties concerned and the United Nations. In that vein, we welcome Special Envoy Pedersen's engagement with the Astana guarantors. We applaud the earnest efforts of the Astana guarantors and support the involvement of the United Nations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines once again emphasizes the need for a credible, balanced and inclusive political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. That is the only viable route to lasting peace and stability. The presence of United Nations-designated terrorist entities in the country presents legitimate local and regional security concerns that have necessitated military operations. However, we must remind parties that those operations do not absolve them of their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Measures aimed at building confidence are also key elements of the success of the political process. As such, the issue of missing and detained persons should be addressed to foster good will. Further, conditions must be created for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons. Syria and its people deserve security in order to live in a state of calm. This conflict has taken too much from them and will continue to take from them if we fail in our responsibility to see to it that the suffering ends here.
