Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Rwanda for having convened
this briefing. We also convey our gratitude to the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil,
and would like to thank his predecessor, Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, for his thorough report today. We also
appreciate the January report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2014/67). This meeting, as well as the
interactive dialogue that we will have this afternoon, are
important stages in preparing for the upcoming review
of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2015, pursuant
to resolution 1645 (2005). We take this opportunity to
underscore the convening of the Commission's first
annual meeting, which took place on 23 June.

The report of the Peacebuilding Commission on
its seventh session describes the progress made and
pending challenges, as well as the Commisssion's value
added in various areas of peacebuilding. The reversals
in the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau
during the reporting period demonstrate the need for
the Commission's ongoing support and the international
community's continuing attention in post-conflict
situations. On the other hand, the developments in
Sierra Leone and Burundi and the support provided by
the Commission have had a positive impact and reflect

its capacity to adapt to changing needs and scenarios. Its
role will continue to be important in future processes.

Peacebuilding is a complex and difficult process
that needs ongoing attention until stability is achieved,
as demonstrated by the cases that I have mentioned
above. That effort also requires the commitment of
the national authorities and the continuous support
of the international community. That has led us to
understand that the entire peacebuilding process is a
multidimensional, specific and individual activity, in
which, inter alia, the rule of law and the existence of
inclusive processes aimed at national reconciliation
should be fundamental aspects.

In order to achieve the required consistency in
such efforts, we underscore the importance of the
Commission maintaining sustained and ongoing
communication and dialogue with senior United
Nations staff and the organizations on the ground,
as well as among the configurations themselves. The
exchange of information and goals, sharing experience,
lessons learned and learning from mistakes should help
to provide a better understanding of and connection
with the policies that we seek to implement. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of the Chairs of
the various configurations holding meetings with the
relevant actors ahead of their visits.

With regard to mobilizing resources, we
acknowledge the Commission's capacity to broaden the
donor base and to ensure donor participation and the
provision of forums for resource mobilization in order
to foster and support the various reform processes with
respect to peacebuilding.

We welcome the cooperation efforts with the
international financial institutions and regional
development banks. We call for the ongoing
consideration of the current mechanism for including
the private sector in those undertakings. As the report
notes, any peacebuilding effort should include the
gender dimension across all areas. The systematic
inclusion of women supports political processes, social
cohesion and long-term economic recovery. Given the
importance of their full and effective participation
in political and post-conflict planning processes, we
recognize and understand their specific needs. We
underscore the importance of maintaining ongoing
contact with the national mechanisms and the groups
and/or non-governmental organizations that are present
in the country. We also call for the effective use of the
15 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund earmarked for
projects geared to meeting the needs of women and
their empowerment.

With regard to the Council, we see the work of the
Commission and the Council as intrinsically linked.
In that regard, the mandates that the Council adopts
should include from the outset peacebuilding tasks that
take into account local interests and the principle of
national ownership.

We therefore call for continuing the practice of
inviting the Chairs of the configurations to participate
in discussions when the Council's agenda includes their
countries. That would improve the mechanisms for
understanding their points of View when the respective
mandates of their countries are under consideration.
The underlying goal would be for the Council to make
more efficient use of the Commission's knowledge and
experience as an intergovernmental advisory body.
Peacebuilding is part and parcel of maintaining peace
and international security. We therefore urge recognition
of that complementarity and greater opportunities for
communication between those two bodies.

