Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea should
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, and his country for organizing this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission. We
are pleased to see His Excellency Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres among us once again, and we
welcome also the presence of His Excellency Mr. Jean-
Claude Kassi Brou, President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States. We
convey to all of them our thanks for their informative
briefings.

Bringing peace to Africa and the comprehensive
development of the continent is one of the main of
objectives of my country's foreign policy under the
leadership of His Excellency President Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo. My delegation therefore welcomes this open
debate given the importance of strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union, which contributes to improving and sustaining
peace and security, not only on the African continent,
but also at the global level.

By holding this debate, we are reinforcing the
message underlying the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, which is important
if we are to meet the goals set by both organizations
with regard to conflict management and prevention.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/678)
indicates, that, despite the security challenges and
obstacles present in regions affected by active conflict,
such as in Libya, the Sahel region, the Horn of Africa,
the Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region, there
has been significant progress thanks to the continued
economic and logistical support that has been received
and to the cooperation among the United Nations,
international partners and the African Union with
the host Governments of peace missions, regional
economic bodies and regional mechanisms, as they
enjoy the advantage of superior knowledge of their own
region, which makes it easier for them not only to act
quickly and prevent conflicts, but also to prevent them
from spilling over into neighbouring regions.

That is all attributable to certain key elements,
including their proximity to conflicts, experience and
cultural similarity. As they are familiar with local
cultures, regional organizations could work more
effectively in the area of early-warning and conflict-
prevention systems. In the area of operations, the
United Nations should provide support in the form of
the technical, financial and institutional assistance
necessary to carry out large-scale peacekeeping
activities.

The African Union has proved to be a key partner for
the United Nations in steadfastly proposing innovative
responses, based on the comparative advantage of
the rapid deployment of peace missions with strong
mandates within the framework of continental
and regional agreements, thereby demonstrating
the flexibility of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and its ability to adapt to constantly
evolving security challenges.

Africa is an important part of ongoing peacekeeping
operations, not only in terms of hosting United
Nations missions, but also, and especially, in terms
of the military contingents and police units that its
countries provide. We therefore believe that funding
should be stepped up, that mechanisms for voluntary
contributions from Member States and other external
as well as African sources should be improved, and
that the United Nations should provide continuous
training to the armies of countries that traditionally
contribute military personnel to peacekeeping missions
and other countries in need of such training, as well as
work closely with missions with regard to promoting
sustainable peacekeeping.

Ultimately, conflict resolution in Africa requires
greater political harmony between and a well-developed
joint vision for the African Union and the United
Nations, including improved coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the development and identification of
cooperation modalities, the promotion ofmutual respect
and the establishment of an operational decision-making
mechanism shared by the two organizations. The
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations in Africa enjoy unique advantages and a
great deal of experience in resolving critical problems
on the continent. The United Nations and other partners
are a necessary factor to ensure greater effectiveness in
the quest for lasting and beneficial solutions.

That very same idea was taken up yesterday by His
Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono Angue, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Equatorial
Guinea (see S/PV.8413), when he spoke of the simple
and clear equation of cooperation. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the signing
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
outlines closer collaboration, more regular exchanges
of information and consultations and coordinated
action to promote lasting peace and security in Africa.

With regard to transparency and respect for human
rights and humanitarian law during peace operations,
we believe that it is important to establish mechanisms
and measures within missions and organizations that
would focus on strengthening policies to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse and step up disciplinary responses
and corrective action in cases of violation ofthe relevant
norms. Equatorial Guinea therefore welcomes the
African Union Peace and Security Council's adoption
of the draft policy on conduct and discipline for peace
support operations and the draft policy for prevention
and response to sexual exploitation and abuse for peace
support operations. On the other hand, although new
mechanisms and strategies for the implementation of
human rights policies are being adopted, it is necessary
to strengthen existing mechanisms so as to ensure
that they are respected in the deployment of personnel
from troop-contributing countries, as well as to ensure
compliance with training standards for African Union
peace support operations.

In order to address the issue of conflict prevention,
especially with regard to those conflicts affecting
the African continent, Equatorial Guinea deems it of
utmost importance to promote economic and social
development in Africa, as the lack of sustainable
economic management, the disparity among various
social classes, gender inequality and extreme poverty are
the main factors exacerbating existing conflicts, such as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. We
also deem important the professionalization of women
in the areas of diplomacy and preventive mediation at
all levels, as well as their consequent integration into all
stages of the peace process, as we see such inclusivity
as critical to achieving sustainable and permanent
peace on the continent.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight resolutions
2320 (2016), of 18 November 2016, and 2378 (2017),
of 20 September 2017, which emphasize the need to
improve the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for African Union-led peace operations
previously authorized by the Security Council, to be
financed by United Nations contributions, based on
strict case-by-case analyses. In that regard, we see
the need for the members of the Council to approve
the draft resolution on financing for African Union
peace support operations, which is expected to be
introduced during the presidency of Cote d'Ivoire.
While we note that that would constructively support
the African initiative mentioned in the latest report of
the Secretary-General, which indicates that the African
Union has moved towards the operationalization of
the African Peace Fund, African States have in fact
contributed $74 million to the Fund so far, an amount
that, it is hoped, will reach $100 million by early
2019. In that regard, we hope that the dynamic of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations will find a platform enabling them to step
up cooperative efforts with a view to achieving stable
and lasting peace in all conflicts throughout the world,
in which regional organizations could play a decisive
role given their knowledge of local circumstances and
their proximity to specific situations on the ground.

