The President: I shall now make a brief statement
in my capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.

I join my colleagues in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Kieran Prendergast for his presentation
this morning. Let me also thank the Secretary-General for
his report on recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.

Indeed, there have been positive developments. The
post-conflict transitional process in Guinea-Bissau, as
envisaged in the Abuja Accord, has come to an end with
the formation of a broad-based Government and the
inauguration of a pluralist parliament in the country.

We are encouraged to note that human rights as well
as the humanitarian situation in Guinea-Bissau continue
to improve. The United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and Mr. Nana-
Sinkam are playing a very useful role in this regard. We
also welcome the focused attention being given to the
issues related to women and children.

Since the challenge now faced by Guinea-Bissau is
to consolidate peace, stability and democracy, the role of

 

the United Nations in that country is also changing. The
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building has been
signified by the revised mandate of UNOGBIS approved by
the Council on 10 March 2000. However, we believe it is
still too early to be complacent. As the report makes clear,
the situation remains precarious. The military maintains a
high public posture. The continuing circulation of small
arms compounds the security situation.

The United Nations and the international community
have to remain vigilant and supportive. We have to watch
out for any moves to offset the process of institutionalizing
democracy in Guinea-Bissau. The supportive role of the
Council is indeed essential in this context.

As the Secretary-General mentioned in his report,
Guinea-Bissau today represents a case in which the United
Nations, with full cooperation from national actors and
support from the international community, has made a
meaningful contribution at a modest cost.

In conclusion, Bangladesh would like to congratulate
the people of Guinea-Bissau on their successful transition
to democracy. We would also like to thank the Economic
Community of West African States and its current
Chairman, President Konare of Mali, as well as the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for their
constructive role in this regard.

I now resume my function as the President of the
Council and give the floor to Mr. Prendergast to make any
comments that he might like to make at this stage.

