Mr. Raubenheimer (South Africa): I wish to
make use of this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January and to express our
appreciation for the convening of this important open
debate on an issue that greatly affects us all. South
Africa also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on small arms (S/2003/1217), which contains
numerous recommendations that warrant our attention.
My delegation notes in particular the recommendations
on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Action, and we acknowledge the
valuable role played by the Security Council in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects.

The United Nations Programme of Action, which
the international community adopted in 2001, set out
important steps on which we, as Member States, should
take action at the national, regional and global levels in
order to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
full and early implementation of the Programme of
Action is crucial if we are to succeed in our collective
efforts to address this illicit trade, which affects us all.

The United Nations First Biennial Meeting of
States to Consider the Implementation of the
Programme of Action - which was held in July 2003
under the able leadership of Ambassador Inoguchi of
Japan - proved that the political will exists to
eradicate this illicit trade, in collaboration with civil
society. The General Assembly, through its recently
adopted resolution 58/241, on the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects, prioritized the
work of and set the small arms agenda for the
international community until 2006, the year in which
the implementation of the Programme of Action will be
reviewed by Member States. In terms of that
resolution, the time frame and venue for the 2006
review conference of the Programme of Action have
been set and an open-ended working group to negotiate
an international instrument on the tracing of illicit
small arms and light weapons has been established. In
addition, further work on the important issue of
brokering has been mandated.

The proliferation and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons continue to pose a threat
to the security and stability of many nations, inhibit
their development and undermine good governance.
The human suffering caused by such weapons needs to
be addressed urgently in a practical and action-oriented
manner, which would provide substance to the many
statements made on this issue in the recent past.

In that regard, South Africa is pleased to note
from the Secretary-General's report that significant
progress has been achieved in the tracing of illicit
small arms and light weapons. We believe that the
negotiations on a tracing instrument, to be undertaken
in the General Assembly's open-ended working group,
will culminate in a practical and effective instrument
that will assist Member States in tracing the origin of
these weapons and the routes used to transfer them.
Such an instrument will also facilitate the effective
implementation of arms embargoes, as mandated under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Cooperation among Member States on the issue of
tracing illicit small arms and light weapons and the
minimum standards for marking and keeping records of
these weapons will make it increasingly difficult to
undertake activities aimed at circumventing such
embargoes.
South Africa concurs with the observation by the
Secretary-General that the issues of end-user
certificates and illicit brokering activities have emerged
as areas where interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly can be enhanced.
We have learned through experience that, if activities
related to fraudulent end-user certificates and illicit
brokering are not curtailed, we will surely fail in our
endeavours to eradicate the scourge of illicit small
arms and light weapons. We hope that the work
envisaged by the General Assembly on illicit brokering
activities will culminate in a better understanding of
that problem and will identify practical steps to
eradicate such activities.

Although no concrete work on the issue of end-
user certificates has yet been mandated by the United
Nations, South Africa believes that the General
Assembly, at its fifty-ninth session, should consider the
possibility of establishing a mechanism to study that
important issue and to provide the Assembly with
recommendations on how to deal with it.

South Africa's policy on small arms has
identified the importance of regional approaches in
addressing the problem of the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. We have learned from our own
experiences that peace and security are conditions for
sustainable development. The inclusion in the New
Partnership for Africa's Development of a peace and
security initiative maps out the commitment of the
African continent to the promotion of long-term
conditions for development and security.

In that regard, South Africa fully supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
initiatives, and we welcome the inclusion of such
measures in Security Council- mandated peace
operations. Involvement and support on the part of
international financial institutions as well as relevant
development agencies - especially in the reintegration
process - cannot be overemphasized, as their
participation will ensure the success of the DDR
process as a whole.

South Africa continues to believe that the
Security Council and the General Assembly have two
complementary, but distinct, roles to play in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.
Therefore, it is important to avoid duplication of
initiatives in areas of common effort by the Council
and the Assembly, as identified in the Secretary-
General's report. Accordingly, we trust that the Council
will remain seized of this matter and will continue to
take effective and practical steps in support of the
implementation of the Programme of Action.

