Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway welcomes
endeavours to increase the involvement of the Security
Council in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
A strong commitment by the Security Council is
needed to ensure a coordinated and comprehensive
involvement of the international community in
preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa.

We support the role the regional organizations
play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. The
African Union has already been shouldering a heavy
burden with regards to peace and security on the
African continent. We are encouraged by the fact that
African countries themselves are taking a leading role
in the settlement of African disputes by peaceful means
and in the promotion of preventive action in response
to threats to regional peace and security. To strengthen
these important regional efforts, we support close
cooperation between the United Nations and other
partners. We welcome the commitment of the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as agreed at Addis Ababa on 16 June, to
cooperate more closely in the areas of conflict
prevention and resolution.

Norway also attaches great value to increasing
women's role in decision-making with regard to
conflict prevention and resolution. The United Nations
and the African Union must work together to ensure
increased representation of women at all decision-
making levels in national, regional and international
institutions and mechanisms for the prevention and
resolution of conflict.

When deployed, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will

be a big step forward in international peace operations.
The ability of UNAMID to fulfil its mandate to provide
security, prevent threats and attacks against civilians
and protect humanitarian operations will influence
future cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations. An immediate challenge confronting
the two bodies is their common effort to negotiate a
peace deal in Darfur. Norway strongly supports this
cooperation. We are willing to contribute both
financially and with human resources to the joint
negotiation secretariat for the upcoming peace talks.
We hope that the United Nations will work in close
contact with its partners and ask for support when
needed during this important process.

The peace negotiations present the United
Nations with many challenges. In the Sudan, the
United Nations is now actively involved in the security
sector, the humanitarian sector, the development sector
and now also in the peace negotiations. To add to the
complexity, the United Nations is involved in two
different security operations in different parts of the
country. To succeed, it is absolutely necessary that the
United Nations is perceived as a single unified actor
and that it is able to act as one.

It is a sad fact that more than half of all conflicts
that are solved through negotiations relapse into
conflict within a few years. There is an urgent need to
improve our ability to support post-conflict countries
and strengthen their ability to meet expectations. A
more effective United Nations working closely with its
regional partners will make an important contribution
in this regard. It is also fundamental that we continue
to learn from experience in order to develop better
mechanisms and responses.

The Peacebuilding Commission, together with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, has the potential to be a powerful tool to meet
these challenges in a more coordinated and
comprehensive manner.

The challenges are daunting. If we do not manage
to contribute meaningfully to sustainable peace in
Burundi and Sierra Leone, it would not only be at huge
costs for the people in both countries, but also for
Commission and the credibility of the United Nations.
I have been honoured to chair the Burundi-specific
format of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi was endorsed
by the Commission in June as an instrument of
engagement and dialogue among Burundi, the
Commission and other stakeholders. The document
defines the crucial peacebuilding priorities faced by
Burundi. It will provide a helpful guide for reaching
peacebuilding objectives and mobilizing the necessary
financial and political support.

Preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa
presents us with enormous challenges. A better
coordinated and more comprehensive approach by the
United Nations will strengthen regional efforts by the
African Union to safeguard peace and security in
Africa.

