Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on
this important subject. Ireland aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. I would also, at the outset,
like to thank the speakers who have provided here first-
hand testimony of the persecution they have suffered
for their beliefs.

Ireland's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Charles
Flanagan, in his address to the General Assembly last
September (see A/69/PV.18), condemned all forms
of persecution or discrimination based on religion or
belief and specifically highlighted the persecution of
religious minorities in the Middle East, as well as the
rise of anti-Semitic attacks in European countries.
However, as we have heard today, attacks on
individuals and communities for their religious beliefs
or ethnic background have become a tragically regular
occurrence. While the phenomenon is seen across the
globe, it has taken a particularly virulent and deadly
form in a number of countries in the Middle East.
The breakdown of established State and community
structures and the emergence of radical groups with
seemingly unfettered access to arms, have significantly
increased the vulnerability of minorities across the
region.

The Middle East, birthplace of many of the world's
most significant religions, remains the homeland of
many diverse religious communities. However the
descent of Syria, Iraq and Libya into violence and
disarray has left numerous religious communities
exposed to violence. Recent sectarian atrocities include
the despicable murder of 21 Egyptian Copts in Libya,
the kidnapping of more than 150 Assyrian Christians
in eastern Syria, the massacre of Shiite worshippers
at mosques in Sana'a, as well as the ongoing abuse
of Yazidi women at the hands of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Such acts are entirely abhorrent.
Those and other actions jeopardize the survival of
the multi-ethnic and multi-religious character of the
Middle East and the prospect for inclusive stability in
the long-term. The fact that many of the perpetrators of
the violence claim to do so in the name of religion only
exacerbates the situation.

While many countries, especially in the
neighbourhood, have provided refuge for individuals
and groups, the relocation of entire communities is
not the answer. It is essential to preserve communities
where they have survived, in many cases since antiquity.
It is where they belong and where they have a right to
belong. The protection of the fundamental rights of
all communities, including the very many Muslims
victimized by religious persecution and terrorism
across the wider Middle East, is a fundamental duty of
all States in the region.

As the observer of the European Union said earlier,
respect for human rights, promotion of inclusive and
democratic societies and support to vibrant civil societies
is the only way to guarantee full security and full
stability for all people in the region. The international
community must also bear its responsibility. The United
Nations must utilize all tools at its disposal to protect
vulnerable communities and to ensure that those who
have the capacity fulfil their obligations.

We must also pay special attention to the role of
women, not only as victims of extremism but also as
agents of transformative change. Just two weeks ago
in New York, Ireland partnered with El Karama, a
platform of women's organizations from the Middle
East and North African region, in highlighting the
need to expand the influence of Arab women as
leaders. Inspiring women from Syria, Libya and Sudan
spoke to rooms filled to capacity and brought a very
clear message with them: women must be included
at the highest levels, from peace and reconciliation
negotiations, to post-conflict decision-making, to
representation in the formation of new Constitutions.
We must now act on their message.

Ireland is committed to defending the right to
freedom of religion or belief and seeks to ensure that
focussed attention is given to this issue, including
through our current membership of the Human Rights
Council.

Finally, as we continue work on the post-2015
development agenda, we must recognize the strong
linkages between peace, development and respect for
human rights. And while we work to counter the current
series of attacks and abuses, the longer-term challenge
to us all is in giving effect to a development agenda in
a manner that systematically tackles the root causes of
such attacks.

