Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefing by
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov
and for the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2018/80).

The settings in which terrorism operates today
have transcended local and regional dimensions to
become a global problem. The threat of terrorism
and violent extremism is one of the largest, most
complex and constantly evolving challenges facing
the international community, particularly because
terrorist groups and organizations have developed their
capacities for financing their activities and recruiting
people remotely by various means and with different
narratives. This evolving threat now has a diverse group
of recruits, especially notable for the large numbers
of women and young people of diverse ages, social
groups, educational profiles, professions and countries,
to which we must add the growing phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, who continue to represent a
particular threat to international peace and security. In
that regard, we want to highlight the work of the new
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, which
has been collaborating with various Member States
to combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism.
We believe that its efforts to combat terrorism and
promote the capacity-building of Member States
should continue.

We should also be aware that terrorist organizations
and groups are using the new communication
technologies and the Internet, as well as social networks,
as platforms for spreading their radical ideology and
disinformation in order to recruit fighters and become
a global threat. According to the Office of Counter-
Terrorism, at least 40,000 foreign terrorist fighters
from more than 110 countries may have travelled
to join terrorist groups in the Syrian Arab Republic
and Iraq. According to the Office's study Enhancing
the Understanding of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon in Syria, the most influential factors in
attracting foreign terrorist fighters may be related
to the socioeconomic situation, including promises
of material and personal benefits, and ideological
or religious claims. Nevertheless, we should insist
that terrorism cannot and must not be linked to any
particular religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. Such characteristics should not be used to
justify measures to combat or prevent terrorism, in
accordance with resolution 2354 (2017) on narratives
to combat terrorism.

While the threat from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) is still there, it has lessened, and the
situation today differs from that in previous months,
thanks to the ongoing defeats that ISIL has suffered
in Iraq and Syria. According to the twentieth report
(S/2017/573) of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, submitted in August 2017,
the number of fighters returning to their countries of
origin or moving from conflict zones to other countries
may be increasing. We are concerned that in the short-
or medium-term this situation could produce a kind of
reorganization or emergence of new terrorist groups
in third countries with weak governance or in regions
dealing with political and institutional instability. To
that end, coordination between the various committees
and subsidiary organs ofthe Council with the Office of
Counter-Terrorism is crucial to preventing the spread
of this threat to other parts of the world.

We believe that the various initiatives of
Governments and agencies, along with the relevant
Council resolutions, aimed at freezing assets linked to
financial transactions related to economic resources and
income-generating activities that benefit individuals,
groups, companies and entities included on the list of
sanctions against ISIL and Al-Qaida, are important
measures in the quest to put an end to this human
scourge. We should also point out that they often obtain
assets through money-laundering and so-called tax
havens, where regulations are reduced or non-existent,
especially when it comes to investment in the tertiary
sector. In that regard, we believe that it is the lack of
adequate mechanisms for exchanging information
that is hampering countries' efforts to address this
threat. The international community should therefore
focus its efforts on encouraging a fluid and effective
exchange of information about such individuals both
between States and international organizations such as
INTERPOL, as well as through judicial cooperation
and exchange of information.

We also believe that there is a pressing need to
implement programmes with a comprehensive approach
to gender and children's issues in order to fight against
terrorism and to counter foreign terrorist fighters who
are returning to or travelling to other countries. In
that regard, part of the challenge will be to implement
clear and targeted rules that enable us to deal with
minors who return to their countries of origin, as well
as rehabilitation and reintegration initiatives based on
inter-institutional and multidisciplinary models.

In conclusion, many speakers in this Chamber have
indicated that it is important to tackle the structural
causes of the rise of terrorism and in particular of
groups such as Da'esh. Those causes unquestionably
include the imposition of regime-change policies,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States. The situations in Iraq and Libya are
clear testimony to the fact that such actions and policies
are causes of terrorism.

