The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's report of 18 October 2001
(S/2001/983).

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in East Timor and to the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for their efforts in developing
detailed plans for the future United Nations
presence in East Timor.

"The Security Council welcomes the
political progress achieved to date towards
establishing an independent East Timorese State
and endorses the recommendation by the
Constituent Assembly that independence be
declared on 20 May 2002.

"The Security Council recalls resolutions
1272 (1999) of 25 October 1999 and 1338 (2001)
of 31 January 2001 and other relevant resolutions.
It agrees with the Secretary-General's assessment
that premature withdrawal of the international
presence could have a destabilizing effect in a
number of crucial areas. It further agrees with the
Secretary-General's assessment that the United
Nations should remain engaged in East Timor to
protect the major achievements so far realized by
UNTAET, to build upon those achievements in
cooperation with other actors, and to assist the
East Timorese Government in ensuring security
and stability.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Secretary-General's observation that the mandate
of UNTAET should be extended until
independence and endorses his plans for adjusting
the size and configuration of UNTAET in the
months prior to independence.

"The Security Council endorses the
Secretary-General's recommendations for a
continued and appropriately reduced United
Nations integrated mission in the post-
independence period, and requests the Secretary-
General to continue planning and preparation for
this mission, in consultation with the East
Timorese people, and to submit further and more
detailed recommendations to the Council. The
Council agrees that the successor mission would
be headed by a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and comprise a military
component, a civilian police component and a
civilian component, including experts who would
provide crucial assistance to the emergent East
Timorese administration. The Council notes that a
core number of civilian positions will be critical
to the stability of the independent East Timorese
Government and agrees that these limited
positions will require assessed funding for a
period of between six months and two years after
independence. The Council agrees that the new
mission should be based on the premise that
operational responsibilities should be devolved to
the East Timorese authorities as soon as this is
feasible, and it supports a continuing process of
assessment and downsizing over a period of two
years, starting from independence. In this regard,
the Council recognizes the essential role of the
General Assembly in peace-building and
expresses its intention to continue planning for
peace-building in close cooperation with the
General Assembly. The Council acknowledges
the importance of a strong focus on justice and
human rights in the successor mission and, where
appropriate, in other assistance provided to East
Timor.

"The Security Council agrees with the
Secretary-General's assessment that it will be
vital that the United Nations contribution is
supplemented by multilateral and bilateral
arrangements. The Council looks forward to
receiving information on the financial

implications of the follow-on mission and a This statement will he issued as a document of the
detailed assessment of shared responsibilities Security Council underthe symbol S/PRST/2001/32.

among the principal interacting players, i.e. the
United Nations system, international financial
institutions, regional mechanisms and national

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
donors in their efforts to assist East Timor in its The meeting rose at 6.05 pm.
unprecedented transition to seif-govemment."
