Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

We are witnessing a rapid deterioration in an
already devastating situation in Syria, where at least
70,000 Syrians have been killed and millions displaced.
The Syrian people continue to face deplorable attacks
and massacres by regime forces, including the use of
heavy weapons, aircraft and ballistic missiles.

We are outraged by horrific reports that hundreds of
Syrians were killed over the weekend in the Damascus
suburb of Jdeidet Al-Fadel. Those actions dramatize the
Al-Assad regime's complete disregard for the lives of
Syria's citizens, including its children. There must be
full accountability for those crimes, and we urge the
Syrian authorities to permit free and unfettered access
to the commission of inquiry to investigate atrocities,
as called for by the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council.

The exponential surge in the number of refugees
is among the clearest signs of this dire situation. More
than 400,000 Syrians have fled in the last seven weeks
alone, and Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and United Nations
humanitarian agencies are approaching a saturation
point. We applaud the generosity of the Governments
and peoples that are hosting that exploding number
of refugees. We count on all of Syria's neighbours to
continue to keep their borders open so that those fleeing
the conflict can find safety. We call on all countries to
fulfil their commitments to the United Nations Syria
appeals and to consider what more they can do as the
United Nations prepares to launch a new appeal next
month.

We are deeply grateful to the Government of
Kuwait for having fulfilled its generous contribution
of $300 million to United Nations agencies and other
international organizations.

The United States is providing more than
$409 million in humanitarian assistance to meet health,
water, sanitation and hygiene needs. We are also
providing food aid, including enough wheat to provide
a four-month supply of flour to more than 1 million
people.

We commend the Syrian opposition coalition for its
bold declaration of principles in Istanbul last weekend
highlighting its commitment to protect the rights and
interests ofminorities, reject extremism, seek a political
solution to the conflict, prevent the use or transfer of
chemical weapons and preserve State institutions.

Secretary of State Kerry underscored the firm
support of the United States for the coalition's
commitment to a political solution of an inclusive,
tolerant vision for Syria by announcing the doubling
of our non-lethal support to the Syrian opposition to
$250 million, to assist local opposition councils in
building the capacity of civilian activists and link
Syrian citizens with the Syrian opposition coalition and
local coordinating councils.

We continue to support a negotiated solution to the
conflict based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). We remain in close consultation with a number
of countries to consider what more we can do to change
Al-Assad's calculus and facilitate an orderly end to the
conflict. We urge Member States to press the Al-Assad
regime to commit to credible negotiations based on the
framework agreed in Geneva, which calls for Al-Assad
to transfer his full executive authority to a transitional
governing body.

The presence of violent extremists in Syria,
including the al-Nusra Front, and the dangers posed by
chemical weapons are very real and deeply concerning.
The Syrian people recognize the threat that Al-Qaida-
linked extremists pose to their revolution, a revolution
that otherwise stands for dignity and respect for human
rights. They have been clear that foreign extremist
ideology is not compatible with the democratic and
inclusive vision for Syria for which many brave Syrians
are fighting and dying.

We support the Secretary-General's efforts to
investigate any and all credible allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. Having explicitly requested
a United Nations investigation, the Syrian authorities
should give the team that the Secretary-General has
assembled full and unfettered access so as to enable it
to conduct its work comprehensively.

As the Council has long recognized, the conflict
in Syria threatens the stability of its neighbours,
particularly Lebanon, as demonstrated by the recent
attacks in Hermel and Al-Qasr. Hizbullah not only
continues to undermine Lebanon from within by
violating the Government's policy of disassociation, but
actively enables Al-Assad to wage war on the Syrian
people by providing money, weapons and expertise to
the regime, in close coordination with Iran.

The United States strongly supports Lebanon's
sovereignty, independence and stability. We appreciate
President Michel Sleiman's leadership during this
turbulent period. We congratulate Tamam Salam as
Lebanon's Prime Minister-designate. That nomination
is a positive first step towards forming a new
Government, a process that must remain Lebanese-led.
We encourage Lebanon's leaders to adhere to the
legal and constitutional framework for holding timely
parliamentary elections.

Turning to Middle East peace, President Obama's
trip to the region has led to a series of constructive talks
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders. The United States
remains committed to trying to bring both sides back to
direct negotiations, and our conversations have focused
on crating the necessary climate.

The parties have agreed to engage in new efforts
to promote economic development for the Palestinian
people by removing some of the barriers to commerce
in the West Bank and expanding private-sector
investment in the West Bank. That is no substitute for
serious negotiations, but we hope that those measures
will increase the chances for successful talks.

The United States will work closely with both Israeli
and Palestinian officials and Quartet representative
Tony Blair to help move the process forward.

As President Obama said in Jerusalem, despite
the evident challenges, "Peace is necessary, peace is
just, and peace is possible". The United States will
continue to support the Palestinian people and their
efforts to build the foundations of a future State. We
have recently provided $695.7 million in assistance,
including $200 million in budget support to the
Palestinian Authority. The United States remains the
largest bilateral donor to United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
providing more than $233 million in fiscal year 2012
and $113 million thus far in fiscal year 2013.

We continue to support Palestinian aspirations to
the establishment of a viable, independent Palestinian
State. We look to the Palestinian Authority to sustain
its work, revitalize the Palestinian economy and reform
institutions to better serve the Palestinian people.

We must all reinvigorate our common pursuit
of a two-State solution and comprehensive peace,
recognizing that, of course, challenges remain. Rockets
launched by extremists from Gaza and the Sinai into
Israel continue to undermine those efforts and threaten
the safety and security of ordinary Israeli citizens. As
President Obama made very clear in his recent remarks
to both Israelis and Palestinians, we all know how
tensions and provocations on the ground can escalate
and damage efforts to achieve a two-State solution.
We urge leaders to refrain from provocations that
complicate the resumption of peace negotiations and
Israeli-Palestinian cooperation.

Progress towards peace is urgently needed, not only
for Israelis and Palestinians but across the region and
the world. That goal remains at the core of our efforts.

