Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting today. I
would also like to thank Mr. Le Roy and the force
commanders for their useful briefings. Our thanks go
to Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal, Lieutenant
General Babacar Gaye, Major General Moses Bisong
Obi, Major General Robert Mood and Major General
Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz. I also welcome the
presence of Lieutenant General Chikadibia Isaac
Obiakor, Military Adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Japan takes this opportunity to extend its
wholehearted appreciation to and respect for the Force
Commanders and all the peacekeepers in each mission
who are tirelessly doing the invaluable work of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

One of the most important issues facing United
Nations peacekeeping is to fill the gaps between
mission mandates and implementation. In this regard,
today's exercise, in which the Council is listening
directly to the voices of the field commanders, is quite
beneficial, since it reduces the distance between the
Security Council and the field and facilitates the
sharing of best practices among missions. Japan
welcomes this practice and hopes that it will be
continued in the future.

From a practical perspective, Japan has
comments and questions on three points: strengthening
cooperation between the Council and the field,
implementing peacekeeping operation mandates, and
strengthening the integration of missions.

I should like to begin by pointing out that each
United Nations peacekeeping mission faces different
circumstances and that each mandate is the result of the
discussions formed by the different positions of

Council members. Thus, each Security Council
resolution tends to contain different language for the
same mandate, although these may sometimes be
merely nuanced differences. Japan emphasizes the
importance for the intentions of each resolution to be
clear, understandable and reflected in the concept of
operations and other means of communication during
implementation. At the same time, it should be noted
that the Council needs to listen to the voices from
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
those of field commanders, and reflect these views in
the establishment of clear and achievable mandates.

However, the current situation is not always
satisfactory in this regard. Although the Council
undertakes such endeavours as briefings by the
Secretariat before and after technical assessment
missions and holds private meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries before its consultations,
this is not enough to achieve mutual understanding
between the Council and the peacekeeping operations
in the field. Therefore, in order to further enhance such
understanding, I should like to propose that the
Security Council conduct future dialogues similar to
today's initiative.

Secondly, I should like to touch upon issues
regarding the implementation of mandates, such as
information-gathering and capability gaps. In order to
effectively implement complex mandates, especially
with respect to the protection of civilians, timely and
accurate local information and its analysis are crucial.
However, many peacekeeping missions lack this
ability. There is no silver bullet for resolving this
problem, but sufficient discussions should be held
among the Council's members, as well as through
meetings with force commanders and in the General
Assembly.

Japan would like to see further discussion of the
United Nations information collection and analysis
capabilities, in accordance with basic principles of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, such as
impartiality and respect for the ownership of the host
country. Japan should also like to see this expertise
developed in the mid- to long terms. In the short term,
comprehensive endeavours should be made to make
full use of existing capabilities and resources -
similar to what has been done in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which
strengthened its communications with the local
populace regarding the protection of civilians and joint
mission analysis centres - in each mission. In this

context, I should like to ask about what kind of
discussion took place in yesterday's meeting of the
Force Commander to that end.

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Japan has chaired since last year, has been
discussing the broader issue of the capability gap over
the past half-year. Its interim report, which summarizes
these discussions, lays out the Working Group's
intention to hold meetings later this year in order to
consider ways to use the gap list more effectively,
including with respect to the shortage of utility
helicopters. The gap list has already been circulated to
all Member States. I should like to hear from the
Commanders about what part of their mandates they
find most difficult and challenging to implement with
regard to the gap list.

Last but not least, with regard to the protection of
civilians and humanitarian support, Japan would like to
point out the importance of civilian-military
cooperation, such as that of MONUSCO's joint
protection team, and of strengthening coordination
between military and civilian components while
preserving the impartiality of humanitarian
organizations. At the same time, it is important to
enhance coordination between military and police,
especially formed police units, such as for the
internally displaced persons camps and their
surroundings in Darfur. Japan would like to ask about
what kind of discussion took place in this regard in
yesterday's meeting and what the Secretariat thinks are
the challenges to strengthening the integration of the
missions.

