Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like on behalf of the Indonesian delegation to express our
sincere appreciation to the sponsors of the draft resolution.
We are particularly grateful that the sponsors have
responded to various suggestions and proposals submitted
by a number of delegations, including the Caucus of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The draft resolution addresses many of the important
issues raised by the Secretary-General in his report and his
letter of 9 June 1995. We deeply appreciate the
Secretary-General's comprehensive analysis of the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and his presentation of a
set of options regarding its future role. The Council's
consideration of these options and of concrete proposals to
reinforce UNPROFOR evolved from these options, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's letter did not, of course,
take place in isolation from recent developments in the
field. In this regard, my delegation is pleased to note that
the draft resolution seeks to address both the long-
established shortcomings of the peace-keeping missions and
those which have been brought to the fore by recent
developments.

The steady deterioration of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has served to bring into greater focus the
many unacceptable facets of the conflict: obstruction of
deliveries of humanitarian assistance, hostage taking,
intensified and unprovoked attacks on safe areas and
civilian population, as well as those on UNPROFOR
personnel and, of course, the abhorrent policy of "ethnic
cleansing". The Council has on many occasions pronounced
its condemnation of these acts in unmistakable terms, which
are exemplified in the draft resolution.

The draft, however, goes beyond expressions of
condemnation and concern. Its basic thrust is to provide
UNPROFOR with the necessary means more effectively to
implement its mandate. This is a paramount objective which
my delegation fully endorses. The establishment of the
rapid reaction force is an important step in giving
UNPROFOR increased tactical and operational flexibility in
the field that will enable it more effectively to protect safe
areas and civilian populations, protect UNPROFOR
personnel, ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance, in particular in the safe areas, and perform other
duties in accordance with its mandate. Furthermore, we
attach special significance to the fact that the rapid
reaction force will be an integral part of the United
Nations peace-keeping operation.

In this context, the Council must do its utmost to
ensure that the decision it is about to take today will
make significant and positive contributions towards
altering the unacceptable status quo. We realize that the
support and cooperation of the parties concerned is a
prerequisite for any peace-keeping operation. However,
throughout UNPROFOR's presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, this requirement has been manipulated by
the Bosnian Serbs, thereby incrementally eroding the
authority of the Force. Such brazen tactics should not be
continuously responded to either by inaction or by
appeasement; rather, they should be addressed with
decisiveness to ensure the effective implementation of
Security Council resolutions. This is indispensable if
UNPROFOR is to maintain its credibility.

One of the most important tasks of UNPROFOR is
to protect safe areas from armed attacks or any other
hostile acts. Lately, we have witnessed incessant and
indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population by the
Bosnian Serbs, particularly in Sarajevo, which have
resulted in civilian casualties. Consequently, it has
become increasingly obvious that the safe areas have
become unsafe areas. For this reason, the deployment of
a rapid reaction force should address, in particular, the
issue of enhancing UNPROFOR'S capability in insuring
the security of the civilian population.

We are cognizant of the calls for the demilitarization
of safe areas as a means to enhance the protection of the
civilian population therein. My delegation believes,
however, that demilitarization which is confined to the
safe areas is inherently unjust, since it is tantamount to
depriving the victims of the necessary means to protect
themselves while leaving the aggressors free to continue
and intensify their wanton attacks from the surrounding
areas and thereby strengthening the military advantage of
the Bosnian Serbs. This will provide the aggressors with
the incentive to further encroach upon the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and renew their
campaign of "ethnic cleansing". It is in this context that
the Non-Aligned Movement Caucus has proposed that
demilitarization based on mutual agreements should apply
not only to the safe areas, but also to their immediate
surroundings. My delegation is pleased to note that the
sponsors have agreed to this proposal, as reflected in the
draft resolution.

 

In this connection, it is essential to emphasize that
agreement on demilitarization of safe areas and their
immediate surroundings should be arrived at with due
regard for the need to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, including its right to defend itself, as
alluded to in the draft resolution.

Finally, my delegation would like to stress that, while
we support a more robust UNPROFOR, it is imperative that
a search for a political settlement be vigorously pursued, as
emphasized in the draft resolution. In this context, we
support the demand that the Bosnian Serb party accept the
peace plan proposed by the Five-Nation Contact Group.

My delegation expresses the hope that the adoption of
the draft resolution will create a climate conducive to
reaching agreement on a cease-fire and a complete
cessation of hostilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
would facilitate the efforts to reach a comprehensive
political settlement.

In this light, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

