Mr. Torsella (United States of America): As
the leading voice on United Nations peacekeeping
operations and a long-standing troop-contributing
country, Morocco is ideally placed to organize this
debate. We are grateful that you have taken this initiative
during your presidency, Sir. We also appreciate the
participation of top troop- and police-contributing
countries in this debate today.

The successes of peacekeeping rely on the
contributions and sacrifices of peacekeepers, to whom
the United States takes this opportunity to express
our gratitude. We thank Under-Secretaries-General
Ladsous and Haq for their briefings and for the tireless
efforts of their departments.

Turning to the subject before us, the United States
supports greater inter-mission cooperation for three
main reasons.

First, in some cases, the only way for the United
Nations to respond rapidly to an unexpected crisis or
to establish a critical new mission is by drawing on
resources from another existing mission. It is untenable
to wait several months to generate fresh forces and
procure essential equipment if thousands of lives and
the credibility of the United Nations may hang in the
balance.

Secondly, there are certain threats that affect more
than one mission in a subregion. It therefore stands to
reason that they should cooperate to tackle that common
threat.

Thirdly, it simply does not make sense for each
mission to create its own administrative and logistics
support structure if economies of scale and efficiencies
can be achieved through common services across
several missions.

For all these reasons, the United States is convinced
of the need for greater inter-mission cooperation. But
this is on the understanding that much work remains to
be done to ensure that we do not help one mission by
hurting another, we do not commit troop-contributing
countries to one task when they had signed up for
another, and we do not allow stop-gap measures to
become substitutes for long-term planning and
preparedness.

Fortunately, there are positive examples to build
on, but also hard lessons to be learned. The United
Nations peacekeeping missions in West Africa have
been among its most successful in recent memory. Part
ofthat success stems from the cooperation among them.
The missions in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone
have undertaken joint patrols and shared information to
address common threats posed by rebel groups freely
crossing borders. These missions have reinforced each
other in times of crisis.

For example, as we have heard, because of rapid
reinforcements drawn from the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire was able to respond to the extremely precarious
security situation that arose following the first round of
Cote d'Ivoire's 2010 presidential elections. The United
Nations has made headway in countering the threat
posed by the Lord's Resistance Army because the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
are working together to address this threat that plagues
the entire Great Lakes region. These missions would
have made far less progress if they had worked in
isolation.

The scope and benefits of inter-mission cooperation
are plainly evident, but the system is far from perfect, as
we saw earlier in this year. UNMISS would not have been
able to get to the remote areas of Jonglei, where security
was rapidly deteriorating, if not for a reinforcement of
helicopters obtained from MONUSCO. But many of
those helicopters arrived only after the worst phases of
the crisis had passed. The ad hoc nature of the system
was not equipped to respond rapidly enough.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's intention to
take a more strategic and predictable approach through
the provision of common administrative and logistic
support to missions through his global field support
strategy. The strategy has already dramatically improved
the effective and efficient sharing of scarce assets,
such as aircraft, and has standardized and streamlined
routine administrative functions across missions. We
therefore look forward to the full implementation of all
aspects of the strategy in coming years.

In closing, as inter-mission cooperation becomes
an increasingly important tool for United Nations field
operations, we strongly urge the Secretariat to explore
lessons learned and develop standard practices to
enhance the speed of response, improve performance,
account for costs in advance and capture efficiencies.
Of course, inter-mission cooperation is neither a
substitute for ensuring that each and every mission has
the resources it needs to carry out its own mandates, nor
a solution for addressing long-standing capacity gaps.
Indeed, while the United States views inter-mission
cooperation as an important mechanism to address
the challenges faced by United Nations missions, the
Council has a continuing responsibility to ensure that
each mission can stand fully on its own. Our challenge
then is to uphold that responsibility while also accruing
benefits from the types of inter-mission cooperation
highlighted here today.

