The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my national capacity.

First, I should like to express our gratitude to
Mr. Morris for his extremely clear, precise and
interesting briefing on a very important subject. I take
this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts of Mr.
Morris and the World Food Programme.

I have two questions to ask of Mr. Morris. The
first concerns access to populations and the related
issue of the security of humanitarian personnel. That,
as we know, is a crucial issue. Jan Egeland, when he
addressed the Council on 21 June, recalled his
concerns regarding the subject. In particular, he called
for a strengthening of the mandate of peacekeeping
operations, referring to the creation of security zones
or security corridors, which would be related to
humanitarian priorities. I would be interested to know
Mr. Morris's point of View on that issue in the light of
his experiences on the ground.

My second comment: Mr. Morris gave a
horrifying description of the nutritional situation of
children, particularly in southern Africa. We are aware
of his work to promote a global initiative to fight child
hunger. Perhaps it would be useful for Mr. Morris to
tell us what he expects of the international community
and how the initiative might be coordinated with
UNICEF and World Bank activities in the region.

Finally, we listened carefully to Mr. Morris's
report on his visit to Southern Africa. We have taken
note of his information on the situation there, and in
particular on the situation in Zimbabwe, where he said
that 4 million people were at risk. France is concerned
about the food situation in Zimbabwe, and we hope
that the efforts of the international community,
including those of the World Food Programme, will
succeed in sustainably improving the lives of the
people of that country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call once again on Mr. Morris and invite him to
respond to the questions and comments of Council
members.

