Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak
this afternoon.

Canada continues to mourn the terrible loss of life
aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was
shot down on 17 July 2014 while flying over an area
controlled by the pro-Russian forces in the east of the
Ukraine. It is important for the Security Council to
take decisive action to ensure that those responsible
for the attack against Flight MH-17 answer for their
actions and to send a clear message that attacks against
civilian aircraft will not be tolerated. Canada hasjoined
other States in mourning to co-sponsor draft resolution
S/2015/562. Canada urges all States to cooperate in
making sure that those who committed this heinous
crime are held accountable for their actions. The
international community owes it to the families and
friends ofthe 283 passengers and 15 crew members who
lost their lives that a full and impartial investigation into
the crime is conducted and the perpetrators brought to
justice.

(spoke in English)

Canada reiterates its support for resolution 2166
(2014) of 21 July 2014, in which the Security Council
urged concerned States and organizations to undertake
an independent international investigation. We are
grateful to those who have supported the identification
of victims, their recovery and repatriation, as well
as the independent technical investigation. Canada
has greatly appreciated the work done by the joint
investigation team, comprising prosecution authorities
from Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands
and Ukraine, in conducting the criminal investigation.
We have been cognizant of the importance of ensuring
that the independent criminal investigation be followed
without delay by an equally independent and impartial
prosecution of the perpetrators. As such, we believed it
wholly appropriate that steps be taken now to establish
an international tribunal for this purpose because efforts
to further obstruct the investigation or prosecution
of this crime or to protect or support the perpetrators
simply cannot be tolerated.

Canada is profoundly disappointed by the outcome
of today's Security Council vote on the creation of
an international criminal tribunal to prosecute those
responsible for downing Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-
17 on 17 July 2014 over territory controlled by pro-
Russian forces in eastern Ukraine. Canada very much
regrets that due to Russia's obstruction, the families
and friends of the 283 passengers and 15 crew members
who lost their lives will not see those responsible for
this heinous crime brought to justice by an international
tribunal immediately.

