Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): It is a very special
privilege to address the Security Council under the
presidency of Colombia. Our gratitude also goes to the
Secretary-General and to Under-Secretary-General
Oshima for the excellent preparations for our highly
important deliberations in the Security Council.

I am speaking in Austria's capacity as current
Chair of the Human Security Network, an interregional
group of countries also comprising Canada; Chile;
Greece; Ireland; Jordan; Mali; the Netherlands;
Norway; Slovenia; South Africa, as an observer;
Switzerland; and Thailand.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict lies very much at the core of the Network's
efforts to ensure the security and the rights of the
individual. Our aim is to take concrete actions to make
our world a place where all people can live in security
and dignity, free from fear and want, with equal
opportunities to fully develop their human potential.
Those efforts relate directly to the Secretary-General's
emphasis on what he defined as our humanitarian
imperative: the very essence of United Nations work to
establish human security where it is under threat,
where it is no longer present or where it never existed.

Armed conflicts still affect millions of civilians
around the world who are deprived of their basic
necessities, vulnerable to violations of their rights and
to physical exploitation, and often displaced from their
homes and separated from their families. The
phenomenon of civilians becoming the deliberate
targets of warfare, in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian and human rights law, remains alarmingly
frequent. Too often, the principal victims of armed
conflict are women and children, on whose shoulders
lies the future of our societies.

The Security Council's debates on this issue -
such as the one that is taking place today, on
International Human Rights Day - increase
recognition of the need to develop a culture of
protection within and beyond the United Nations. The
reports of the Secretary-General are an essential
contribution to that aim. The Network welcomes the
Security Council's continued commitment to that
critical issue. We see the agenda for the protection of
civilians as a framework for action.

The protection of civilians is central, not
peripheral, to the Council's mandate of ensuring
international peace and security. We welcome the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1300),
which, like those that he has previously prepared for
the Council, is aimed at identifying practical strategies
for promoting a culture of protection. We urge the
Council to sustain the momentum created behind that
agenda, and we call on the Secretary-General to
continue to update the Council on developments in that
field on a regular basis.

In the context of the protection of civilians, I
should like to highlight several issues, which are also
contained in the reports of the Secretary-General, from
the point of view of the Human Security Network.
Discussions on the particular protection needs of
women and children are an important part of that
rubric, and I should like to refer to Human Security
Network statements made during the respective
Security Council debates.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict rests with Governments. In
situations of armed conflict, however, non-State actors
can also have direct responsibility for ensuring the
basic needs and the protection of civilian populations.
An essential element of that responsibility is for all
parties to a conflict to allow unimpeded humanitarian
access to vulnerable populations. However, as the
report rightly points out, very few non-State actors
recognize their responsibilities in that regard.
Therefore, we consider the development of measures to
raise the awareness of all parties to a conflict -
including non-State actors - of their responsibilities
and of the relevant provisions under international
humanitarian, human rights, refugee and criminal law
to be of paramount importance. We recall the Security
Council's commitment, in resolution 1265 (1999), to
respond to situations of armed conflict in which
civilians are being directly targeted or humanitarian
assistance to civilians is being deliberately obstructed.

While there has been considerable progress in
recent years with regard to strengthening the normative
and institutional frameworks for the protection of
internally displaced persons, their situation in many
countries remains extremely worrisome. Wherever
there is conflict, in all likelihood there is also
displacement. Displacement continues to be a
by-product of current conflicts and too often is a
deliberate aim of combatants. The General Assembly
and the Commission on Human Rights have repeatedly
outlined their recommendations in support of
protection and assistance for internally displaced
persons. Two of the members of the Human Security
Network, Austria and Norway, regularly put forward
resolutions on that issue in those forums. Building on
the work of the Representative of the Secretary-
General on Internally Displaced Persons, an increasing
number of conflict-affected countries are using the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement as a
standard and a framework for dealing with situations
related to internally displaced persons. We therefore
propose that the Security Council encourage States
with internal displacement situations to utilize the
Guiding Principles as well as to find durable solutions
for internally displaced persons, including their
voluntary return in safety and dignity.

The achievement of a sustainable peace depends
on the establishment of an effective and fair
administration of justice, of institutions that ensure
accountability for past atrocities and for grave human
rights violations, and of credible truth-and-
reconciliation mechanisms. In that context, we
welcome the entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which marks an
important contribution to ending impunity. Both justice
and reconciliation mechanisms should ensure the
involvement of women and should foresee special
procedures for children. We agree with the report of the
Secretary-General that reconciliation efforts need to be
undertaken in a culturally sensitive way and that
education shall provide a window of opportunity for
building tolerance and social justice in communities
both during and after conflict. I should like to add that
human rights education is particularly pertinent in that
regard. The Human Security Network is currently in a
process of elaborating a declaration of principles on
human rights education and is producing a manual on
that subject that can be adapted to various regional
situations.

The widespread use of small arms, light weapons
and anti-personnel landmines has a significant impact
on the scope and the level of the violence that affects
civilian populations during and after armed conflict, as
pointed out by the Secretary-General in his first report
to the Security Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/1999/957). One week ago, we
commemorated the fifth anniversary of the signing of
the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction. It was that initiative
that originally led to the establishment of the Human
Security Network. At its ministerial meeting in
September this year, the Network passed a declaration
calling for the universal ratification of that important
treaty - a call that I should like to reiterate on this
occasion.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
addressing a number of highly topical issues in his
most recent report, namely, the separation of armed
elements from displaced civilians; the safety of
humanitarian personnel; sexual exploitation and
gender-based violence in humanitarian crisis and
conflict situations; the commercial exploitation of
conflicts and the plundering of resources; and the
involvement and the role of terrorist organizations in
armed conflict.

In order for this agenda to succeed, all States and
other relevant actors must commit to improving the
legal and physical protection of civilians. An important
element of this is the integration of the Secretary-
General's recommendations into the realities in all
regions. The Network therefore welcomes the regional
seminars, which have been initiated by OCHA, and
urges all Governments to participate in them.

In conclusion, I would like to assure you, Madam
President, of the dedication of the members of the
Human Security Network to fully supporting and
promoting the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as an indispensable foundation for peace, security and
stability.

