Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Sir, to congratulate you on your work as President
of the Security Council for the month of November.
My delegation appreciates the convening of this debate
on strengthening collective security through general
regulation and reduction of armaments. The presence
of Nobel Peace laureate President Oscar Arias Senchez
and his authoritative statement this morning add
special pertinence and significance to the proposed
discussion.

For Colombia, the close link that exists between
security and development is clear. The democratic
security policy implemented by the Government of
President Alvaro Uribe is based on offering equal
protection to all citizens and on creating the conditions
in which they can enjoy their rights and liberties. That
policy has produced a virtuous cycle in which the
strengthening of the rule of law creates conditions for
the promotion of development and economic
prosperity, which in turn contributes to stronger civic
participation and democracy.

While it has borne fruit, the democratic security
policy has demanded great efforts, including military
spending, which has been adapted to the challenges
required to achieve the projected goals. During that
process, Colombia has had a clear standpoint - we
conceive military spending fundamentally as a vital
investment in protecting our citizens' lives and well-
being.

My country shares the concerns over the need to
reallocate funds for military spending to development
programmes without detriment to the security and
defence needs of States, bearing in mind the specific
needs of each. In that regard, we uphold our
commitment to disarmament, development and the
implementation of the General Assembly's resolutions
on that issue.

Colombia's participation as a United Nations
Member State is guided by the irrevocable commitment
to multilateralism and the rule of law. We share the
principles and values enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. We highlight the visionary nature of Article
26, which provides for the competence of the Security
Council to formulate plans to establish a system for the
regulation of armaments. The goal of promoting the
establishment and maintenance of international peace
and security, with the least diversion for armaments of
human and economic resources remains fully valid.

Moreover, Colombia believes that any new
initiative concerning the control and regulation of
armaments must be discussed and agreed within the
United Nations General Assembly. A successful
outcome in that area can be achieved only with the
commitment of all States Members of the Organization.

Today, the issue of security has a
multidimensional reach. In the contemporary world,
there are factors that transcend the traditional threats to
security. In that regard, we concur with the position set
out in the concept paper circulated by Costa Rica
(S/2008/697) with regard to the important role that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations plays in preserving collective security.

In that regard, I would like to highlight the work
and orientation of the Organization of American States
(OAS) in building reciprocal confidence measures
among the countries of our region. That has occurred
through many initiatives, including, among others,
promoting transparency, such as the publication of
defence books on national policies in that area.

In addition, the OAS promotes the eradication of
anti-personnel mines and monitors observance of
commitments under the Treaty of Tlatelolco and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
By virtue of those treaties, the first nuclear-weapon-
free zone in a densely populated area was established
in Latin America and the Caribbean. The OAS also
promotes cooperation in our region through
multilateral peace efforts and the joint fight against
international terrorism.

The uncontrolled spread and inappropriate use of
small arms and light weapons cause great harm, both in
terms of human lives and in their negative impact on
security and development conditions. The illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects
monopolizes significant resources that could be
invested in development. Advancing the establishment
of effective controls to stop that illicit trade must
therefore be a priority for the international community.
Colombia attaches great importance to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. It is a fundamental global
instrument and a reference point for the adoption of
measures to combat that phenomenon.

Colombia considers it necessary to continue
working in this area within the multilateral framework
and advancing towards the adoption of new
commitments and the implementation of those already
in place with the aim of concluding legally binding
instruments in the field. The broad participation of
States in the implementation of the Programme of
Action is an essential requirement for that endeavour.

My delegation actively participates at all levels in
initiatives that contribute to coordinated and effective
action against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. More concrete progress in
that area would be a fundamental contribution to
collective security.

The strengthening of collective security through
general regulation and reduction of armaments, as well
as other initiatives proposed to that end, merit careful
consideration by the United Nations and its principal
organs.

The changes that have taken place in the world
since the 1990s have generated conditions for a new
consensus in the area of security. It is therefore
necessary, from that perspective, to step up our efforts
and will for joint action as the only way to save future
generations from the scourges that threaten peace,
security and development.

