Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to begin with words of gratitude to Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their important briefings on recent developments in Yemen. We wish to reiterate our support for all efforts aimed at arriving at a comprehensive political settlement to end the crisis currently plaguing Yemen and the suffering of the fraternal Yemeni people through a solution that safeguards the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the country. The years of conflict have unleashed an acute humanitarian tragedy and resulted in the collapse of infrastructure, the deterioration of the socioeconomic situation and a worsening of the living conditions of the Yemeni people - all of which has had negative consequences for peace, security and stability in the region. Tunisia welcomes the prisoner exchange agreement, which is an important step forward towards implementing the Stockholm Agreement. However, we emphatically condemn the military escalation at the port of Al-Hudaydah, which has led to the loss of many civilian lives, including women children. It has also compounded the humanitarian crisis and led to a worsening of human rights violations and breaches of international humanitarian law. In that regard, Tunisia reaffirms the fact that a military solution is no solution at all and that the solution to this crisis, which has been ongoing for many years in Yemen, can be achieved only through a political process based on dialogue and peace negotiations. Any political settlement must embrace of the overriding interests of the Yemeni people and place their interests above any other considerations, in fulfilment of the agreed benchmarks, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 2216 (2015). Tunisia wishes to reiterate its support for the efforts undertaken by the Special Envoy to advance the political settlement process. We are in agreement with the Special Envoy: the longer the crisis lasts, the more complicated it is and the more difficult it will be to reach a settlement, and the worse off the Yemeni people will be. We therefore wish to reiterate our call for the stakeholders in Yemen to respond favourably to the proposals under the joint declaration, so as to begin a new stage in the negotiations that paves a path towards a comprehensive transition agreement to guarantee political stability and improve conditions in the country. We wish to reiterate the importance of compliance with the ceasefire and of bringing an end to all hostile acts. We also reaffirm the importance of political negotiations to incorporate all stakeholder groups within Yemeni society, especially to ensure the meaningful participation of both women and civil society representatives. We are very concerned by the unprecedented humanitarian crisis in the country, especially in the light of the suspension of the delivery of humanitarian goods and of the obstacles that continue to stymie the provision of humanitarian assistance. This bodes ill with regard to the further deterioration of the situation and greater risk to the lives of Yemenis, especially given the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. We call for a redoubling of international efforts to alleviate the suffering of the people as a result of the humanitarian crisis. This is an urgent priority, hence the need to continue to mobilize the necessary funds to finance the humanitarian response aimed at ending the suffering of the fraternal Yemeni people. In that vein, we commend those countries that have honoured their commitments, in particular such countries as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The FSO SAFER oil tanker situation requires an immediate intervention to carry out the necessary and urgent repairs to the vessel and avert a very dangerous and serious humanitarian, environmental and economic disaster. We call upon the Houthis to grant the United Nations experts access to inspect the tanker and take the necessary measures. In conclusion, the Tunisian delegation is of the view that the Yemeni crisis has lasted for far too long and that the Yemeni people have therefore suffered for far too long. This is intolerable. Enough is enough, as Mr. Lowcock said. We also believe that the Security Council today is duty-bound to redouble its efforts in support of the Special Envoy so as to ensure that all parties genuinely and meaningfully respect the choice for peace and negotiations.
