Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her comprehensive
briefing. We reiterate our gratitude to her and her entire
team for their ongoing efforts in Syria. They are always
ready and willing to provide assistance, regardless of
the difficult conditions on the ground.

Regrettably, despite those efforts, aid distribution
has become increasingly sporadic, thereby preventing
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
from being able to carry out the duties entrusted to it.
The ongoing fighting, security issues or - even more
incomprehensibly - the lack of authorization by and
the bureaucracy imposed by the Syrian Government all
prevent humanitarian assistance from being provided to
those who need it most. As we have noted on previous
occasions, that is in no way the fault of OCHA but
rather of the Security Council and the member States
with influence over the parties to the conflict. To date,
we have not been able to wield that influence effectively
to ensure that all parties to the Syrian conflict grant
unimpeded access to the humanitarian aid convoys.

For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in
Syria, Yemen and in any other conflict is our top
priority. Thus far, all conflicting parties in Syria have
continued to ignore and violate that basic principle of
international law. As often occurs in all such conflicts,
the most vulnerable - including women, children
and the elderly * have been and continue to be those
most affected. That is why Uruguay has endorsed
the establishment of an international impartial and
independent mechanism to investigate serious violations
of human rights law and international humanitarian law
committed in Syria, including those that are considered
to be war crimes, such as the use of chemical weapons
on civilians.

Seeking justice for the hundreds of thousands
of innocent victims of the conflict will be crucial to
achieving lasting peace in Syria and to ensuring that
the country and its entire population can overcome
the horrors of this protracted war. It will also have a
compelling effect on the future of the country. In the
same vein, we support the request of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres that events occurring in Syria be
referred to the International Criminal Court.
For several months now, the priorities in Syria
have been clearly defined. The Council is duty-bound
to produce results in order to give hope to the Syrian
people that the war is ending; those who have committed
atrocities since 2011 will be held accountable and that
a new kind of political climate will emerge in order
to rectify the effects of many years of divisions and
clashes that have left a trail of death and destruction for
the country and its people. Until it has been achieved,
the primary goal is and should continue to be a political
solution that would put an end to the crisis and lead
to a peaceful transition in Syria, negotiated by all
Syrians, mediated by the United Nations and supported
by the entire international community. We trust in the
good offices of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in
his efforts to translate into concrete steps the road map
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) in order to achieve
that goal.

The second goal must be to reduce the levels of
violence and allow for the cessation of hostilities
throughout the majority of the country. The Astana
process, which is playing a very positive role,
complements the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva and has
already achieved considerable progress. We are also
pleased that the United States, Russia and Jordan have
been able to broker an agreement on a ceasefire in south-
western Syria, which has seen a spike in violence over
the past few months. We support the efforts of the three
guarantor countries and encourage them to continue
working to finalize the details of the implementation of
the ceasefire in the four safe zones and in other parts of
the country that may be added subsequently.

Nonetheless, for the third consecutive month, we
must voice our concern about the continued lack of
information on the implementation of the memorandum
signed on 4 May, in particular given the fact that, to
date, neither the United Nations nor humanitarian aid
has been granted unhindered access to those areas. That,
however, would give some assurance that the essential
principles of international humanitarian law are being
respected, such as humanitarian access, the prohibition
of forced displacement, and freedom of movement so
that people can freely enter and leave those areas.

The third goal, which is as equally important as
the political transition process and the cessation of
hostilities, is clearly humanitarian access. We would
like to receive more encouraging news but it is clear
that we remain far from any promising outcome that
would ease the suffering of the millions of Syrian
civilians who depend on that aid to survive each day.
We will continue therefore to call for the immediate,
sustained and unhindered access of humanitarian aid to
all besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Nonetheless, the
top priority must be to lift all unjustifiable sieges.

We must mention that is has been over a year since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), and yet attacks
on hospitals and health centres in Syria continue. In
June alone, four incidents at such centres were reported.
It is shocking that the parties continue to ignore the
provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), thereby depriving
millions of people of their right to medical attention,
leaving hundreds of victims among medical and health-
care personnel. Such acts constitute serious violations
of international humanitarian law and war crimes.
Clashes and indiscriminate attacks continue to cause
damage to civilian infrastructure, which is on the brink
of collapse after years of bombing. We condemn such
attacks in Syria, Yemen and wherever they occur.

In conclusion, Uruguay asserts that the full
and effective implementation of measures such as
the consolidation of the cessation of hostilities, the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and
administrative procedures that allow for humanitarian
access to be granted could all make a major difference
in the lives of the Syrian people, who, month after
month, demand that the Council take concrete and
effective action on the ground.

With regard to the de-escalation zones that would
allow for the temporary cessation of attacks, Uruguay
maintains that it is very important for those zones to
be temporary so as to preserve the unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. As we have
previously mentioned, it is therefore imperative, as
soon as possible, to honour commitments that place
emphasis on the humanitarian situation. We trust that
the Security Council can overcome its differences and
shoulder its responsibilities in the area of international
peace and security.

