Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank you for convening
this meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I further thank
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his valuable briefing on
this topic.

I am pleased at the outset to begin my statement
on an optimistic note by congratulating the Palestinian
delegation on having been selected by acclamation, at
the ministerial meeting ofthe Group of 77 in September,
to preside over the Group. In addition, the Palestinian
delegation was granted the necessary authorization by
the General Assembly to represent the Group and speak
on its behalf. We hope that that action is a positive
omen for the creation of a Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem, as its capital within 4 June 1967 borders,

living side by side with Israel in peace, harmony
and coexistence.
However, successive events, tensions and upheavals
in the Middle East undermine our optimism. The dire
circumstances facing the Palestinian question paint
a grim picture. The situation in occupied Palestine is
deteriorating day by day because of the Judaization,
settlement and repression policies practiced
systematically against the Palestinian people by the
occupying Power. That will lead to an implosion and
to the exacerbation of tye situation. In addition, those
actions pose an obstacle to easing the tension and
relaunching the peace process, which has been stalled
for four years.

The use of force against unarmed civilians has
never led to peace, and the sustained settlement policy,
in violation of United Nations resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), has never led
to a resumption of the political process. On the contrary,
it has been a source of provocation for Palestinians
and the international community. Moreover, the lack
of decent living conditions has never helped to create
an atmosphere of trust or an environment conducive to
relaunching the peace process.

Undermining the recognized legal and historical
status of Jerusalem will only push the Palestinian
question into the labyrinth of religious conflict.
Jerusalem has a special place not only for the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but also for believers of the three
monotheistic religions. Jerusalem is the first Qibla and
the third holy place for more than 1.5 billion Muslims.
The city's legal status is inviolable and cannot be
modified by any means, pursuant to Security Council
resolutions and the international legitimacy.

That is why the Kingdom of Morocco, whose
King Mohammed VI is the President of the
Al-Quds Committee, underscores the importance of
safeguarding the historic, legal and political status of
Jerusalem, while reminding the permanent members of
the Security Council and the Quartet of their obligation
to assume their responsibilities fully in order to prevent
any action that could undermine the status of the city
or block international efforts aimed settling the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

His Majesty has therefore, on several occasions,
called for the avoidance of any action that could
modify the political status of Jerusalem, in particular
because it is a final-status issue. The international
community must shoulder its full responsibilities and
encourage the parties to return to the negotiating table
and relaunch the peace process based on the two-State
solution. Otherwise, that solution will remain empty
words that can only lead to the spread of violence and
hatred. That is what His Majesty said in his message
to the participants in the fifth International Conference
on Jerusalem, hosted in Rabat from 26 to 28 June
under the theme "The Palestinian question after 50
years of occupation and 25 years of Oslo Accord". His
Majesty said:

"The international community must make
every effort to pool efforts in order to ensure
that the fair and just settlement of the Palestinian
question stays at the negotiation table in line with
a realistic vision and a clear timetable, based on
the existing terms of reference and where the two
parties will seriously engage in it and shoulder
their responsibilities.

Our support for the Palestinian question is
unconditional and ongoing. That was also underlined
by His Majesty in his message:

"We reiterate our commitment to the Palestinian
question. Our support is continuous and absolute.
It shows solidarity and an irreversible commitment
until the Palestinian people are able to recover all
their inalienable rights, because those rights are
legitimate under international law, where land and
history bear witness to that."

To conclude, the position of the Kingdom of
Morocco on this conflict remains unchanged. It is based
on the Arab Peace Initiative and on the principles and
terms of reference with regard to achieving peace on
the basis of creating an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, within the 4 June
1967 borders, living side by side with Israel in peace,
security and harmony.

