Ms. Bangura: I would like to thank you, Madam,
for extending an invitation to me to brief the Security
Council. However, before beginning, I wish to express
my solidarity with the survivors and families of all those
who have lost loved ones in the horrific attacks in Paris,
Beirut, Tunis, Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere. These
depraved acts of terror must reinforce our collective
resolve.

In my previous briefings to the Council, I have
detailed the nature, trends and patterns of conflict-
related sexual violence in Syria. Women and girls in
the theatres of this conflict find themselves under
assault every day and at every point of their lives,
whether at border crossings or checkpoints, during
house searches, or in detention centres, in areas under
Government control or areas where the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and a plethora of armed
groups operate. They have been affected in a unique
and systematic manner as a result of numerous factors,
including the extraordinary scale of the displacement
and humanitarian situation so well described by my
colleagues Stephen O'Brien, the sophistication and
strategies of the key players, including extremist
groups, as well as the regional nature of the conflict
and the cross-border dimensions. Sexual violence has
been a characteristic of the Syrian conflict and has
been perpetrated by most of the belligerent parties as
a tactic of war.

I am pleased, therefore, that the Council has now also
expressed through resolution 2242 (2015) our evolving
understanding of how sexual violence is being used as
a tactic of terrorism to advance fundamental strategic
objectives of extremist groups in Syria and elsewhere.
It is critical that we unpack this concept further, and
in the process take the protection and empowerment
of women and girls from the periphery to the centre
of our global, regional and national counterterrorism
strategies.

Today, I would like to focus my remarks primarily
on how we can respond. Since returning from my
scoping Visit to the region this May, I have focused
considerable energy on raising the level of awareness
and understanding of the sexual violence crimes that
are occurring. At the same time, we have been working
to formulate a response strategy.

Our response has to go beyond security and
military considerations. It must encompass legislative
and service delivery dimensions, and accountability
must be a central consideration. At the same time, we
have to deepen the political commitment of leaders,
particularly at the regional, national and local levels.
We must deepen the base of information and analysis.
Because of its cross-border dimensions, our strategy
also requires a concerted regional response, including
improved information-sharing across countries.
Addressing conflict-related sexual violence in Syria
and the region requires a unified, comprehensive and
multisectoral approach. The strategy that is being
developed under the auspices of my Office, the team
of experts and UN Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict, has seven areas under which a range of
interventions will be required.

First, we must continue to mobilize political
commitment, support and resources. This political
commitment must come at all levels, starting in the
conflict-affected countries themselves. Unfortunately,
since my visit we have still not been able to agree on
specific commitments and measures with authorities
in Syria or Iraq. However, at the regional level, I am
pleased to report that we are concluding a framework of
cooperation with the League of Arab States that could
catalyse some of the critical legislative reforms and
protection policies that are required.

Secondly, as I have already emphasized, we must
ensure that the protection and empowerment of women
is consistently included as a central consideration in
all efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter
terrorism, including the Secretary-General's plan of
action on preventing violent extremism.

Thirdly, we must undertake legislative and other
measures to enhance protection, early warning and
risk mitigation. This includes programmes to support
civil society, local communities and women's groups,
which are the front line. Legislative frameworks have
to be strengthened to protect and mitigate risks for
refugees and internally displaced persons, a majority
of whom are women and girls, and to secure the status
of thousands of children, who risk becoming a stateless
generation.

Fourthly, we have to strengthen support for and
services to survivors of sexual violence. There is an
acute lack of health care and other critical services
for survivors within Syria as well as in neighbouring
countries, and these services should extend to livelihood-
support and poverty-alleviation programmes.

Fifthly, no meaningful actions can be taken in
the absence of knowledge. Therefore, we must invest
in deepening information-gathering, analysis and
documentation on the issue of sexual violence as a basis
for advocacy and action at all levels.

Sixthly, we must be relentless in our pursuit
of accountability through the investigation and
prosecution of sexual violence crimes. Combating
impunity is a key aspect of deterrence and, ultimately,
prevention. This will primarily entail support for
national institutions. At the global and regional levels,
it will require new approaches and frameworks to
deal with the unprecedented jurisdictional and other
challenges associated with thousands of combatants
from more than 100 different countries.

Finally, we must live up to our frequent declarations
and ensure women's participation in peace and mediation
processes and the explicit inclusion of conflict-related
sexual violence concerns in these discussions. Women
and girls are disproportionately affected, and they must
have a seat at the table. As women themselves have
stated, "Nothing about us without us".

The strategy envisions targeted initiatives under
these seven priority areas. These initiatives are intended
to be catalytic in nature, filling critical gaps and
strengthening the overall response. In my capacity as
Chair of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which brings together 13 United Nations
entities, I will encourage the network to propose and
take the lead on specific initiatives, in accordance with
their respective mandates, expertise and comparative
advantages. The strategy should articulate a shared
vision of priorities, and, in so doing, enhance overall
coordination.

The political and financial support of the Council,
and that of other Member States and donors, will be
absolutely crucial. I look forward in the coming weeks
and months to sharing more details about the strategy
and will rely on the Council's steadfast commitment.

Last week I was in Amman to attend a meeting
organized by the Office of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect, with 25 religious leaders and representatives
of faith-based organizations from the Middle East and
North Africa. The discussions reinforced my conviction
that the role of community, religious and traditional
leaders is critical to breaking the prevailing silence
around the issue of conflict-related sexual violence and
ensure that survivors are embraced by their families
and communities rather than stigmatized and shunned.

The role of religious and traditional leaders is
essential to develop and sustain a counter-narrative to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
extremist groups, which pervert the inherent message
of peace, tolerance and respect for women that is at
the heart of Islam. It is essential that we engage and
empower them as one of the crucial vanguards in this
battle. It will not be enough to defeat ISIL militarily;
we must also defeat the ideology it is propagating.

I would like to conclude by flagging one of our
greatest challenges of this agenda, for Syria and
the Middle East, and beyond. How do we enforce
compliance on the part of non-State actors, which are
the main perpetrators around the world? This will also
require new approaches and tools. Obviously, it will
not be possible to engage with terrorist groups such as
ISIL and other extremists of their kind. However, we
will need to make calculated and strategic decisions
regarding engagement with non-State actors, so as to
ensure that they know that the light ofjustice will shine
on them and that they must take specific measures to
prevent and punish sexual violence.

