Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The following countries align
themselves with this statement: the Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association country members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and Norway.

The European Union fully supports the draft
resolution which was put before the Council today. It
continues to attach great importance to the role of the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) as a stabilizing and peace-promoting
element in the geopolitical context of the region.
UNPREDEP is the first preventive deployment force of
the United Nations and, as such - and this is the

 

generally accepted View - a great success. It can serve as
a model for future such deployments. The European Union
sees the value of UNPREDEP not only in its military
component and its border monitoring, but also in its civilian
efforts to promote understanding among the different ethnic
groups in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The European Union considers that there exists a real
danger of a spillover of the Kosovo crisis into neighbouring
countries. The Rambouillet meeting has established a
framework for a solution of the crisis, but has not yet
brought the parties to full agreement.

The European Union therefore deeply regrets that
China decided to veto the draft resolution on the extension
of the mandate for another six months. At this crucial
moment in the efforts to bring peace to Kosovo, the
withdrawal of UNPREDEP should not be contemplated. We
earnestly hope that an arrangement can be found within the
next few days to prevent this from happening.

The EU points out that the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for international peace and security
and that it carries out its duties on behalf of the United
Nations membership as a whole. UNPREDEP has been
mandated by the Security Council with precisely this
responsibility in mind and, in particular, to serve the
international interest in stability in the region to which the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia belongs.

The European Union sincerely hopes that all
Governments concerned, both in the Security Council and
in the region, will make every effort to maintain the United
Nations current stabilizing presence in the region.

