Judge Pocar (spoke in French): I should like at
the outset to thank the Security Council and its
members for the comments that they have been kind
enough to make on the report of the Tribunal and for
the support that they have shown with regard to the
Tribunal.

I have duly noted all the comments that have
been made regarding suggestions made and the efforts
we are making to implement the completion strategy
within the time frame that - we must acknowledge -
was indicated by the Tribunal itself seven years ago
and accepted by the Security Council. But, of course,
seven years ago, those indications were given by the
Tribunal on the basis of factual data that at the time
were far from being clearly established or predictable.

Nevertheless, I wish to indicate that the
provisional timetable for ongoing and future trials,
which is annexed to the report, was annexed to ensure
the full transparency necessary for the process and for
the relations between the Security Council and the
Tribunal. I wish to assure the Council that we are
constantly working to improve the timetable and to
further reduce the time in order to comply as much as
possible with the indications and deadlines of the
completion strategy. With regard to the two dates, 2008
and 2010, the fact that, as was indicated, a number of
trials should continue during 2009 does not mean that
we will not try to accelerate the appeals process in
order to meet, as far as possible, the 2010 deadline.

(spoke in English)

As for specific questions raised, 1 should like to
refer in particular to what the representative of Qatar
said about the message that should come from the
Tribunal. I do not know how the interpreter rendered
my statement. What 1 indicated was that it was urgent
that the Council send a strong message to the fugitives
that they will not be allowed to wait out international
justice. From all the interventions that have been made
here in the Security Council, I take it that that message
is being sent by the Council. So that was the premise of
my suggestion and indication.

As to the impact of the plan that has been adopted
by the Security Council on Kosovo with regard to the
judicial activities of the Tribunal, 1 would prefer not to
give any specific comment. We have a couple of cases
before us concerning events in Kosovo, and I take it
that those cases are under way and will continue. As
members will certainly appreciate, I, as a
representative of the Tribunal, cannot say more than
that.

I would like to stress one last point. I have taken
note that most representatives have pointed to the need
for cooperation by national authorities in the region. I
can only agree with that. I must assure the Council that
we are working in that direction. The judges of the
Tribunal participate in meetings of the judiciaries in
the region in order to help the jurisdictions in the
region to cooperate with them and with the Tribunal
itself. So we are working to set up certain partnerships
with local jurisdictions so that they can continue to
work on cases after the Tribunal has had to close its
doors.

I shall conclude by reaffirming the Tribunal's
commitment to the completion strategy.

