Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset, as previous speakers have done,
I would like to express my appreciation for the
initiative taken to convene this debate, and to thank
Mr. Fernandez Amunategui, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing on the
work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). My statement will address the
political and security situations, the humanitarian
sphere and the rebuilding of Haiti.

On the political front, my country is pleased with
the successful conduct of the democratic elections in
Haiti, which led to the election of President Michel
Joseph Martelly on 20 March. In that regard, we salute
the maturity of the Haitian people as well as the
support of MINUSTAH and other international partners
to them.

My delegation also pays tribute to the recent
constitutional amendments and the nomination of the
President of the Supreme Court. Nevertheless, we
encourage all political actors in the country to continue
to work together in order to accelerate the
establishment of the Government and the putting in
place of the institutional reforms necessary to restore
the rule of law and a calm political and social climate.
The establishment of the Government will also lead to
the resolution of security issues.

Turning now to the security situation, we
welcome the essential role played by MINUSTAH's
military and police personnel in stabilizing Haiti.
Those individuals have also contributed significantly to
establishing an efficient handover process to tackle the
numerous security challenges, including organized
crime, rape, attacks and kidnappings. Along those
lines, my delegation continues to be deeply concerned
by the number of kidnappings and attacks on
MINUSTAH staff. We therefore stand ready to support
MINUSTAH at its current levels of military and police
personnel in guaranteeing support to the Haitian
National Police, in order to ensure their ability to
protect internally displaced persons and vulnerable
groups.

My country believes that it is also necessary, in
the transfer of security responsibilities, to strengthen
the training and capacities of police personnel in the
various areas of border management and electoral
security. We support the implementation of a zero-
toIerance policy in all cases of sexual violence. We also
support the adoption of the three-year strategic action
plan aimed at fighting that scourge.

Turning now to the humanitarian situation, we
remain concerned by the persistence of the cholera
epidemic in spite of the laudable efforts made to reduce
the epidemic's scale. Moreover, the situation of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the camps
remains a great concern for my delegation. In that
context, Gabon welcomes President Martelly's
launching of a project to relocate internally displace
persons from the six main IDP camps in Port-au-
Prince.

With respect to rebuilding, many projects have
been undertaken since the earthquake. My delegation
welcomes the infrastructure and equipment projects
under way, as well as programmes being implemented
jointly by MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team, in cooperation with the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund. Economic recovery for which we call on the
participation of all of Haiti's development partners -
will help to generate employment opportunities, which
will not only improve the lives and living conditions of
Haitians but will also result in a reduced crime rate.

 

In conclusion, Gabon fully supports the
authorized reduction in military and police personnel
as a step in the progressive transfer of responsibilities
to Haitian authorities. We also support the renewal of
the MINUSTAH mandate as recommended by the
Secretary-General. For its part, Gabon will continue to
support the efforts of the international community in
Haiti in order to help the country restore peace,
prosperity and stability.

