The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
hosting this debate today. The elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) is one of
the most important obligations entrusted to the
international community. We can take some comfort
from our success in preventing the spread of weapons
of mass destruction. The multilateral infrastructure,
including the load-bearing pillars of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) and instruments including
resolution 1540 (2004), is robust and tested.

However, at a time when we face greater dangers
than ever, the disarmament agenda has stalled in several
areas. I call on all States to focus on one overriding
truth - the only sure way to prevent the human,
environmental and existential destruction that these
weapons can cause is by eradicating them once and for
all. To attain that shared dream, we, the international
community, must ensure that the disarmament and
non-proliferation framework is universally and
completed implemented, and is resilient and versatile
enough to grapple with a changing environment.

The elimanation of weapons of mass destruction is
one of the founding principles of the United Nations. It
was the subject ofthe first General Assembly resolution.
It has been a top priority for me. In 2008, just one year
into my tenure as Secretary-General, I released my
five-point proposal to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons in the hope that it would spur further action by
the international community. Eight years have passed,
but the need for urgent action has not diminished.

The Council has also played its part. In 2009,
it convened a historic summit on non-proliferation
(see S/PV.6l9l). In adopting resolution 1887 (2009),
Council members emphasized the Council's primary
responsibility to address nuclear threats and its
willingness to take action.

But we are all aware that challenges to the
disarmament and non-proliferation architectures are
growing. The global strategic context is more fluid and
dangerous than ever. Technological advances have made
the means of production and methods of delivery of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials
cheaper, easier and more accessible. Vicious non-State
actors that target civilians for carnage are actively
seeking chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. It
is therefore particularly disappointing that progress
on eliminating nuclear weapons has descended into
fractious deadlock. We see the reappearance of some
of the discredited arguments that were used to justify
nuclear weapons during the Cold War. Those arguments
were morally, politically and practically wrong 30 years
ago, and they are wrong now.

In this environment, the global community expects
the Council to demonstrate the same leadership as it
did in 2009. To build on resolution 1887 (2009) and to
develop further initiatives to bring about a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. It is time to refocus
seriously on nuclear disarmament. The outcome of
the Open-ended Working Group on Taking Forward
Multilateral Nuclear Disarmament Negotiations
demonstrated that there are many possible approaches
to this task.

While more needs to be done to bridge the divide
within the international community, I am encouraged
that all States agree that our collective efforts must
complement and strengthen the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, including the NPT. The
next review cycle of the NPT - the only treaty-based
commitment to nuclear disarmament - will begin
in May 2017. For nearly five decades, the Treaty has
been a bulwark against nuclear proliferation. I call
on all to address the issues that plagued the 2015
Review Conference in a spirit of compromise, with
full respect for agreed objectives, common values and
core principles.

Moving on to biological weapons, in the wake of
the very serious outbreaks of Ebola, MERS and yellow
fever, I am extremely concerned that the international
community is not adequately prepared to prevent
or respond to a biological attack. The impact and
consequences of a biological attack on a civilian target
could far exceed those of a chemical or radiological
attack, but investment in the international architecture
dealing with these different types of WMDs is not
commensurate with their possible effects. For example,
there is no multilateral prevention and verification
agency for biological weapons, as there is for nuclear
and chemical threats and risks. States parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention have an opportunity
to discuss how to enhance preparedness at the BWC
Review Conference in November.

I also call on the Council to consider how to
strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) to ensure that
non-State actors cannot acquire these horrific weapons.
For 12 years, the resolution has tried to provide a barrier
to the threat and risk of WMDs being use by non-State
actors, which is a very real threat. The comprehensive
review mandated by resolution 1977 (2011) provides
an opportunity to fine-tune resolution 1540 (2004). I
urge the Council to use today's meeting to be proactive
in ensuring that the resolution continues to be fit
for purpose.

I will now say a few words about new global threats
emerging from the misuse of science and technology,
and the power of globalization. Information and
communication technologies, artificial intelligence,
3-D printing and synthetic biology will bring profound
changes to our everyday lives and benefits to millions of
people. However, their potential for misuse could also
bring destruction. The nexus between these emerging
technologies and WMDs needs close examination and
action. As a starting point, the international community
must step up to expand common ground for the peaceful
use of cyberspace, and particularly the intersection
between cyberspace and critical infrastructure. People
now live a significant portion of their lives online.
They must be protected from online attacks, just as
effectively as they are protected from physical attacks.

Disarmament and non-proliferation instruments
are only as successful as Member States' capacity to
implement them. I encourage Council members to
use this debate to devise effective solutions so that
all States can fully implement their disarmament and
non-proliferation commitments.

Throughout my tenure as Secretary-General,
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction has
been an urgent priority. I urge all Member States to
recommit themselves to taking action. The stakes are
simply too high too ignore. I wish the Security Council
a fruitful debate.

