I would like to start by thanking Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General Stephanie Williams for what may be her final briefing to the Council in that capacity. Her expert leadership of the dedicated team of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and her exceptional personal efforts have facilitated significant progress towards peace in Libya, perhaps more than we thought was possible earlier this year. We thank her for all she has done. The United Kingdom welcomes the agreement reached a few days ago by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum on a political road map, including for elections to be held in December 2021. Libyans now have a shared sense of political direction for the first time in years. I want to pay tribute to the important role played by women participants in the Forum. We welcome the courage of the Libyan parties in agreeing to a nationwide ceasefire and the early progress made in implementing the agreement, particularly the sense of common endeavour that members of the Joint Military Commission have created and the momentum that they have maintained, including through their most recent meeting. As Ms. Williams highlighted, though, much remains to be done. The ceasefire agreement between the Libyan parties specifies that within a period of three months of the agreement being signed, all mercenaries and foreign fighters shall depart from the Libyan territories, land, air and sea, and that until anew unified Government assumes its functions, military agreements on training inside Libya must be suspended and training crews must depart. I very much hope that we will hear today from all Council members that they support and endorse that position of the Libyan parties. The message is clear. Libyans want a rapid end to foreign military interference in their country and an end to violations of the arms embargo. The Joint Military Commission agreed last week that foreign forces should, as a first step, move at least five kilometres back from the front line. That must now happen, and quickly. Where members of the international community continue to flagrantly flout international law and block progress being made by the Libyans and the United Nations, we must be ready to take firm action, including by imposing sanctions. On the political track, we should all support UNSMIL in convening further rounds of the Political Dialogue Forum and building towards Libyan agreement on a new, inclusive interim Government and a firm constitutional basis for those new arrangements. Again, we must be ready to respond clearly and quickly to those who seek to spoil, derail or indefinitely delay progress towards the political solution that the Libyan people want and deserve. I would also like to welcome the spirit of compromise that has led to a resumption of oil production and exports across Libya. It is now vital that the international community unite around the efforts of UNSMIL to ensure that the revenues generated by those exports are managed fairly and transparently for the benefit of people across Libya. We welcome the discussions on new security arrangements at oil installations. It is clear that those arrangements must remain firmly in Libyan hands. The United Kingdom is concerned about the continuing deterioration of the human rights situation in Libya this year, alongside the worsening outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We strongly condemn the shocking killing of the lawyer Hanan Al-Barassi in Benghazi on 10 November, a sombre reminder of the need to protect the freedom of expression and the rights of women. We call for that killing and the disappearance in July 2019 of parliamentarian Seham Sergiwa to be investigated properly, expeditiously and transparently. It seems that not a week goes by without the discovery of a new mass grave site in Tarhunah. We are also concerned about the reports of increasing numbers of deaths of migrants at sea and the conditions in detention centres. We are committed to accountability, and we call on the authorities throughout Libya to give their full cooperation to the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya. The recent ceasefire and the progress made on the political track, both brokered by the United Nations, are truly significant. The Libyan parties have demonstrated a readiness to compromise and move forward. I do not want to underestimate the challenges they face, but my message is clear. The Libyans have shown us the direction in which they want to proceed: a political road map, elections and a permanent nationwide end to the conflict that has blighted their lives. They want an end to foreign interference. Now is the time for us, the members of the international community, to live up to our obligations and play our role in helping them get there. And for some, it is time to get out of Libya.
