The fact that the Libyan question is being discussed, Mr. President, at the very beginning of your presidency of the Council is eloquent proof, if need be, of your country's commitment to finding a political solution to the multifaceted crisis in that country. Six months ago, the conference on Libya was held in Berlin, your beautiful capital, and so opportunely brought together, around Chancellor Angela Merkel, the representatives of countries and organizations equally interested in finding a solution to the Libyan crisis. I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for the briefing he has just given us and for his continued commitment to the search for a political formula to end the crisis in Libya. I would also like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for the work she is doing in a particularly difficult context. The presence of several ministers at today's meeting is proof of the international community's interest in resolving this crisis. Six months after the Berlin meeting, what could be more normal than this meeting of the Security Council, which endorsed the conclusions of this important conference, in order to assess the progress made since then. Indeed, the Berlin Conference was undoubtedly a meeting where several cardinal principles were laid down. From the reaffirmation of Libya's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and the fight against terrorist groups to the achievement of a complete ceasefire, which is a condition for the return to an inter- Libyan political process, and respect for the arms embargo, the various facets of the situation in Libya were addressed by the participants. Six months after the Berlin meeting, I may add, it is regrettable to note that the situation in Libya has deteriorated, instead of the improvement that one could legitimately expect, particularly in view of the commitments made by the various participants at the conference. Respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity continues to be severely tested by external interference, which fuels tensions between the warring parties and seriously undermines the international community's efforts to restore a political process driven by the Libyans themselves. Such interference, which is now known to be accompanied by massive transfers of weapons of war and mercenaries, is a flagrant violation of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 2292 (2016). Allow me to recall that for nearly 10 years, the five States of the Group of Five for the Sahel have been suffering from growing instability, which is partly rooted in the deplorable situation in Libya. In that regard, the situation in Mali, where the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is operating in a fragile context, illustrates with great acuity the problems posed by the situation in Libya, a neighbouring and sisterly country. In that regard, we call on all participants in the Berlin process to honour their commitments by refraining from interfering in Libya's internal affairs and by giving a chance to the creation of the conditions for a general ceasefire that will allow, as the Secretary-General so rightly requested, for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, which has become crucial at this time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It cannot be said enough that Libya does not need weapons; it does not need mercenaries; nor does it need to be a theatre for the expression of the will to power of certain international actors. Today it needs reconciliation, peace and prosperity, and it can count on the immense potential of its subsoil to that end. At this juncture, my delegation would like to reiterate the importance of the role that the Security Council, the African Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union and all other relevant actors must continue to play in order to halt the current trend and help Libya to once again become a country of peace, stability and prosperity. This is also the place to recall the urgent need for the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who, by bringing together all the initiatives, will be able to relaunch the peace and reconciliation dynamic that I mentioned earlier. It is now up to the Council to act to fill this vacancy, which has existed for too long. The Niger also supports the work of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, established by the African Union, and expresses the hope that the inter-Libyan reconciliation conference will be organized very soon under the aegis of the African Union. We must all convince ourselves that no political solution to the Libyan crisis can be found without the full and complete participation of all the daughters and sons of Libya. The time has come for us to show courage and imagination in order to find a definitive and lasting solution to the serious Libyan crisis. A final and lasting peace, which we all seek, cannot be achieved without addressing the serious human rights violations suffered by the Libyan people, the majority of which are against are women and children. In this period of the COVID-19 pandemic, nothing can explain the attacks against hospitals and other civilian infrastructure, which constitute flagrant violations of international humanitarian law and may amount to war crimes. In such a context, particular attention must be paid to the situation of African migrants in detention camps, who are often used as combatants or human shields by the various armed groups in that country. I commend the role of the International Organization for Migration, which continues to provide valuable assistance to these vulnerable people in that context. In that regard, I would like to congratulate the European Union on having set up the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI operation, in accordance with resolution 2292 (2016). It is our hope that this operation will continue to limit the flow of arms into Libya, including through land borders, by working closely with the Libyans themselves, neighbouring countries and the African Union with a view to ensuring compliance with the arms embargo and the fight against organized crime while monitoring the trafficking of migrants and the illegal export of Libyan oil. I would like to call upon the members of the Quartet on Libya to work with the International Follow-Up Committee, which is responsible for the implementation of the commitments made in Berlin. The sustainability of the Berlin decisions depends on their implementation. Clearly, all the conditions for a long-lasting conflict, with its attendant violence, loss of human life and destruction, are in place. External interference will only exacerbate the crisis, thus further delaying a political solution, which is the only path for enabling the Libyans to take control of their country's destiny. Only resolute action by the Council, aimed at establishing responsibilities and identifying the real culprits, will be able to stop the consequences of the unacceptable inertia of the international community in that country.
