Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all warmly to thank Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ambassador Umarov for their very enlightening
presentations on the issue that brings us together today,

that is, the return of foreign terrorist fighters, which is
one of France's major priorities. I shall make three key
points today.

The first concerns the evolution of the terrorist
threat and the main challenges we face today.
The commitment of the international community,
particularly through the action of the coalition, has
made it possible to push back Da'esh and deprive it of
its main refuges in Iraq and Syria. The fall of Raqqa,
the city from which terrorist attacks against various
capitals were planned, including Paris, has a particular
symbolic value in that respect.

However, we know that the fight against Da'esh is
not over. The fighters who a few years ago moved to
Iraq and Syria are now leaving the conflict zone either
to return to their countries of origin or to move to other
countries. In the case of France, there are currently
688 French nationals or residents in Syria and Iraq, of
whom 295 are women and 28 are minors over the age
of 15. In addition to those individuals, there are some
500 minors under the age of 15 who were taken to the
area by their parents or who were born locally; over
half of them are under five years old. With regard to
returnees, since 2013 244 adults and 59 minors have
returned to France.

The diversity of profiles, especially the large
number of women and children, the highly variable level
of radicalization among those people and the continued
attraction of the barbaric ideology of Da'esh - still too
widely spread on the Internet - are all major challenges
that we must meet.

My second remark concerns France's response
to the evolving threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
French legislation has been constantly updated since
2014, following the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
to strengthen our system with new security and
prevention measures, in accordance with international
law, human rights and fundamental freedoms. Since
2014, France has been developing an action plan against
radicalization and terrorism, which was updated for the
first time in May 2016 after the wave of attacks that we
experienced, and will be updated again soon. The plan
aims, among other things, to dismantle recruitment
channels, prevent displacement that could pose a
terrorist threat and cooperate more effectively at the
international level. It also contains a preventive and
family-support component.

With regard to the care and reintegration of minors
returning from Iraq and Syria, France created a
mechanism last March specifically to mobilize all State
services. It provides targeted support tailored to the age
and individual situation of each child, as well as medical
and psychological monitoring, and it raises awareness
of those specific problems among the professionals who
are responsible for monitoring such minors.

Finally, we believe that the United Nations has a
central role to play. In France's opinion, the United
Nations has two particular essential missions to fulfil
regarding the issue that brings us together today.

The first mission is to oversee and strengthen
international cooperation in the face of the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. Three years ago, resolution
2178 (2014) laid the foundations for international
cooperation at a time when individuals were traveling
in droves to Iraq and Syria to fight alongside Da'esh.
That led many States, including France, to adapt their
laws and mechanisms. Today, faced with the evolution
of the threat and the risk posed by returnees, we need to
update that framework. France is ready to work with its
partners to develop a strong and united Security Council
response. Further efforts are needed, particularly in the
areas of information-sharing, including the need for a
better use of INTERPOL tools; border management;
cooperation with the private sector to prevent the use
of the Internet by terrorists; the prosecution of foreign
terrorist fighters, taking into account the central issue
of evidence gathering; and reintegration measures.

The second essential mission of the United Nations
is to support States in implementing their obligations
under the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy of the
General Assembly and relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that respect, close coordination between,
on the one hand, the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which are responsible for analysing the
threat and assessing the measures taken by States; and,
on the other, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which is
responsible for supporting States in implementing their
obligations, is absolutely essential. I am pleased that
the representatives of those three entities highlighted
that key coordination in their interventions.

No State can act alone when faced with a threat of
this magnitude. Only close international cooperation,
within the United Nations and the relevant regional
organizations, that involves civil society, and in
particular major online players, will enable us to act
effectively. The Council can be assured ofthe continued
and resolute commitment of France in that regard.

