Mr. Christian (Ghana): On behalf of the
delegation of Ghana, I wish to congratulate Japan on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April and on having organized this debate. I
also congratulate Gabon on having ably presided over
the affairs of the Council in March. We appreciate the
statement made by the Secretary-General this morning.

When, in April 2005, the Governments of Ghana
and Denmark jointly organized a workshop on
peacebuilding in Accra to mobilize support for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), many participants had no doubt in their minds
that peacebuilding pre-dated the PBC. Nonetheless,
they were quite convinced that the notion of
peacebuilding - as variously articulated in the reports
of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for
Peace" (S/24111) and "In Larger Freedom"
(A/59/2005) - was that it should enable the United
Nations to add value by filling an institutional gap and
ensuring that peacebuilding efforts became sustainable
and effective. In the ongoing review exercise, the
added value of the PBC must be kept in mind.
The goal of attaining sustainable peace is not an
event, but a process requiring the sustained attention of
the international community. To be sustainable,
peacebuilding processes should aim at deepening the
culture of peace, democracy and respect for the rule of
law, justice, human rights and international legality.

The PBC is a conflict-prevention mechanism to
the extent that it is mandated to mobilize resources and
seek the support of the international community to
prevent post-conflict countries from suffering relapses.
Thus, in the course of the ongoing review exercise,
attention should be given to the need to strengthen the
PBC as an early warning mechanism, relying on
lessons learned not only for the benefit of countries on
its agenda that stand the risk of relapsing into violent
conflicts, but also for pre-conflict countries.

This perspective may be better appreciated when
one considers that, in some cases, the international
community has failed to respond in a timely manner
when danger has loomed in some countries in post-
conflict situations, as the peace they had once enjoyed
was taken for granted. The PBC should be able to
advise the Security Council on situations on the
Council's agenda, taking advantage of the lessons
learned in cases where there is credible information
pointing to the possibility of a violent conflict
occurring while giving due deference to national
sensitivities. In doing so, the PBC would fulfil the
objective of filling an institutional gap within the
conflict-prevention apparatus of the United Nations in
a more holistic and comprehensive manner.

The PBC must pay equal, if not more, attention to
the need to mobilize not only the international
community but also national stakeholders for
sustainable peace, as a nation cannot have peace
without the active engagement of its homegrown
peacebuilders. Thus, although Ghana is not a country
in a post-conflict situation, it is now implementing a
peacebuilding framework, the National Architecture for
Peace in Ghana. The broad policy objective is to
facilitate the development of mechanisms for
cooperation among all the relevant stakeholders in
peacebuilding in Ghana by institutionalizing responses
to conflicts aimed at achieving social, political and
religious reconciliation and transformative dialogues.
The National Architecture also includes the
introduction of the culture of peace into the curriculum
of schools in Ghana and building the capacity of
national and local institutions to manage grievances in
a democratic environment anchored in the rule of law
and access to justice. A key component of this
architecture is the promotion of free and independent
media to create a space for public debates on issues
before the nation in a manner that allows all voices to
be heard without fear.

The National Architecture for Peace in Ghana
obviously takes inspiration from the national
Constitution, which provides for an independent
judiciary, an independent media free from all
governmental control, and an independent electoral
commission, as well as the directive principles of State
policy, which call for equitable national development
and social inclusiveness and non-discrimination.

Education should play a key role in almost all the
national dimensions of peacebuilding identified in the
concept paper for this debate (S/2010/167), whether
they be security sector reform, the reintegration of
soldiers, alleviating poverty and unemployment,
avoiding discrimination against women or ensuring
gender balance. For example, a society cannot
effectively integrate its former child soldiers or help
them to obtain decent jobs without first giving them
books instead of bullets. High unemployment among
women and girls can be mitigated by ending
discrimination against women in many societies in the
areas of access to education and social life. In
recognition of the value of education, Ghana's national
Constitution provides for free, compulsory universal
basic education targeting girls and boys in equal
measure. To this end, Ghana welcomes the efforts by
the PBC and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon aimed at
mainstreaming women in peacebuilding.

Ghana also welcomes the emphasis placed on
national ownership. In the context of ensuring
sustainable peace in post-conflict countries, the
principle of respect for national ownership or
sovereignty should accommodate the principle of
solidarity. Ghana will therefore urge the PBC to
continue to explore appropriate strategies to engage
regional and subregional organizations in order to
enhance coordination and coherence through an
integrated approach to the delivery of their respective
peacebuilding mandates, in collaboration with civil
society and donors.

The promotion of coordination and cooperation
among various stakeholders interested in assisting
countries on the PBC agenda will help minimize or
avoid situations in which national authorities are
compelled to choose between conflicting priorities that
might be set by competing stakeholders in such a way
that competition to claim exclusive peacebuilding
credit becomes the enemy of cooperation.

Ghana acknowledges the efforts made by
successive Presidents of the PBC and Chairpersons of
the country-specific configurations to reach out to the
African Union (AU) in order to dialogue on
peacebuilding issues. However, more needs to be done
to achieve an effective triangulation of efforts among
the United Nations, the AU or the regional organization
concerned, and the countries on the PBC's agenda in
order to more effectively deliver as one. It is the Ghana
delegation's view that, to this end, the convening of a
joint session of the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council to review the peacebuilding strategy
for the countries on the PBC's agenda would be a step
in the right direction.

In the area of capacity-building, the mere
existence of the Peacebuilding Commission should not
lead to a misleading assumption that the United
Nations is adequately equipped with the requisite range
of tools - be they human and material resources,
information or other - to carry out peacebuilding
tasks, let alone to assist countries on its agenda to
improve their capacity for post-conflict peace
consolidation. The test of any effective peacebuilding
capacity should be to pose the question "the capacity to
do what?" and to put in place the appropriate
monitoring or evaluation mechanisms to ensure the
effectiveness of capacity-building for peacebuilding.

The adoption of the African Union Framework
for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
speaks to the necessity to look at development in a
broad sense in terms of its contribution to peace
consolidation, thereby moving beyond the question,
often asked, of whether the PBC is designed to handle
development. Moreover, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping should not be seen as mutually exclusive.
The question that must be addressed is how to employ
the entire available and legitimate range of tools and
resources in order to prevent a country in a post-
conflict situation from relapsing into violent conflict
and to ensure that it is in a position to achieve
sustainable peace, including by addressing the root
causes.
We hope that Ghana's statement will contribute to
the search for ways to move the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda forward.

