We thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for his updates on the humanitarian situation in Syria. With over 11 million people already in need of humanitarian assistance, my delegation is deeply concerned about the increased suffering of the Syrian people due to the economic fragility and the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, particularly with various hostilities in some areas of the country, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/813). My delegation also remains alarmed by the growing number of people in Syria who are food insecure. A targeted and sustained humanitarian response is key to addressing these challenges. We are pleased that, despite difficult circumstances, the United Nations continues to provide humanitarian assistance throughout Syria. It is important that the aid meet the priority needs of the people. Allow me to highlight the following points. First, with regard to the importance of prompt, rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access, we urge all the relevant parties to take all appropriate steps to promptly facilitate safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance for all civilians in need. My delegation takes note of the report of the Secretary-General regarding the first cross-border aid delivery under resolution 2533 (2020), of which the operations have become more costly, less timely and higher risk. Indonesia appreciates the ongoing efforts to ensure that these operations continue with minimal impact on the Syrian people and looks forward to receiving more details and information on this issue. We wish to also encourage key parties, particularly the Syrian authorities and the United Nations agencies, to continue and strengthen their coordination in order to increase the cross-line deliveries. Secondly, with regard to the Allouk water station, my delegation wishes to specifically address this issue since the water station, which provides a water supply to almost half a million civilians, has been disrupted many times. People in Hasakah governorate, including people in the Al-Hol camp, are continuously facing a crucial water crisis. The severe water shortages faced by those vulnerable communities, against the background of the threat of a COVID-19 outbreak, is indeed disturbing. We commend the United Nations and its partners for their efforts to address this issue and scale up water trucking. However, it is crucial to ensure a sustainable and a long-term solution to this problem. Indonesia encourages the United Nations to continue advocating for a sustainable agreement among all the relevant parties on the facilitation of access to water as a basic service, in accordance with international humanitarian law. Thirdly, my delegation urges all parties to the conflict to immediately cease all forms of violence. We have stressed this over and over again. All parties to the conflict must respect the ceasefire agreement and do everything in their power to protect civilians. The fragile humanitarian conditions in Syria should not be met with additional hostilities. The international community must secure all efforts to assist the Syrian people and prevent another humanitarian tragedy. Millions of Syrian people cannot bear more devastation or distress. Before concluding, on the Constitutional Committee, my delegation is pleased to note that the third session of the Committee in Geneva is resuming. We wish to extend our support to all the Committee members and Special Envoy Pedersen, and we wish them all the very best in moving the discussion forward.
