Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali extends its condolences to the people
of Tunisia in connection with the death of President
Bourguiba and associates itself fully with the tribute that
you, Sir, paid to him at the beginning of this meeting. I
would like also to express my delegation's satisfaction at
seeing you preside over this meeting of the Security
Council to consider the situation in Afghanistan.

Let me thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and detailed report. I am grateful also to
Ambassador Listre for the report he presented in his
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee, and to
Mr. Renninger for updating the information provided by
the Secretariat.

 

I should like first of all to express our serious concern
over the continuing conflict in Afghanistan, which is
bringing such terrible suffering to the civilian population of
that country and which poses a serious and growing threat
to regional and international peace and security. We
condemn the new offensives by the Taliban and are
disturbed by reports that arms and other war materiel are
continuing to enter Afghanistan, thereby allowing the two
parties to prepare their spring offensive. Given the situation,
we believe that the Council should demand that the fighting
be halted. The parties must be convinced to hold talks with
a view to a verifiable and lasting ceasefire.

My second comment relates to the quest for a solution
to the conflict. The Afghan parties must understand that
there is no military solution to the Afghan conflict. Only a
negotiated political settlement aimed at the establishment of
a multi-ethnic and fully representative government
acceptable to all Afghans will lead to peace and national
reconciliation. Accordingly, we support the efforts of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to bring the Afghan
parties together at Jeddah, and we encourage the "six plus
two" group in its efforts to revitalize that process. We
believe also that peace initiatives by the non-belligerent
Afghan parties, such as the Rome, Cyprus and Tokyo
processes, should also be supported. In this context, the
United Nations must continue to play a central and
impartial role.

My third comment relates to the critical humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. It is difficult to get assistance
delivered; the critical situation of many civilians is
intensifying; the number of displaced persons has increased;
there is food insecurity for the majority of Afghans; and
many people are in a very precarious situation. It is thus
imperative that the Afghan parties, particularly the Taliban,
take the necessary measures to ensure the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian supplies to all those in need, and
they must stop interfering with the activities of the United
Nations and other international humanitarian organizations.
We welcome the efforts of neighbouring countries for the
freely-agreed-to repatriation of Afghans who are currently
in their territory, and we encourage them to continue
providing aid and protection when necessary.

Fourthly, with respect to the human rights situation in
Afghanistan, we deem unacceptable the forced displacement
of civilians, summary executions, arbitrary detention and
forced labour, restrictions on the mobility of women and
girls, the recruitment of child soldiers and all violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law.

Fifthly, Mali strongly supports the resolve of the
Security Council to combat terrorism.

My sixth and last comment relates to illicit drug
production and trafficking in general and within the
context of Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General stressed
in his report, we believe this question should be dealt
with in a coordinated manner to put an end to the illicit
production of drugs in Afghanistan and their illicit
trafficking from Afghan territory through the
implementation of a detailed and balanced regional plan
of action. In this respect, we welcome the major role
played by the United Nations Office on Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, and we commend the invaluable work
of the "six plus two" group in that connection.

The presidential statement we will be adopting at the
end of this meeting covers all of these aspects and
contains a strong, clear and consistent message, which my
delegation fully endorses.

In conclusion, I should like to commend
Mr. Vendrell of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan and the international humanitarian
organizations for their efforts.

