Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak in Austria's capacity as Chair-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I am grateful for the opportunity to address
the Council on the situation in Kosovo following the
elections on 28 October.

Permit me at the outset to thank Mr. Kouchner for
his inspiring presentation and for his untiring efforts
over the past 16 months. When evaluating the
performance of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), we have
to take into account that the Mission is doing its work
under difficult conditions, both material and political.
It faces understaffing and a lack of funds. The
operation is unique in the history of the United
Nations. We very much admire the dedication of Mr.
Kouchner and his staff.

With regard to the elections to which Mr.
Kouchner referred in his presentation, I have the
honour to convey to him the sincere appreciation ofthe
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, the Austrian Foreign
Minister, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, for the excellent
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE.
The OSCE mission in Kosovo is an important
component of UNMIK, and it is ready to continue
playing that role.

Considering the circumstances, the organization
of the first-ever municipal elections in Kosovo was an
extremely difficult task that required the close and
reliable cooperation of all international actors.
Everything had to be prepared from scratch, and a great
deal was at stake. Eruption of violence, low voter
turnout and problems in the voting procedure all could
have jeopardized the democratization process and the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). Instead, the elections were exemplary. There
was a high turnout of almost 80 per cent, a very low
percentage of invalid ballots, no major instances of
fraud or manipulation and no incidents of violence. By
their conduct, the Kosovars have truly demonstrated a
clear and unconditional commitment to democracy.
Similarly, by accepting the election results, the
political parties have shown an encouraging democratic
maturity.

Let me stress that Austria, as Chair-in-Office of
the OSCE, is very satisfied with the conduct of the
elections. The impressive victory of Ibrahim Rugova's
Democratic League of Kosovo demonstrates the
support of Kosovo Albanians for a moderate political
course. Considering the positive democratic changes in
Belgrade, that decision could lead to a new and fruitful
dialogue between Pristina and the new authorities in
Belgrade.

Regarding the democratic representation of
minorities in Kosovo, the OSCE supports Mr.
Kouchner's co-opting of minority representatives into
municipal councils. That is an important means of
ensuring a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. In the pre-
election phase, the OSCE and UNMIK tried to
convince the Kosovo Serbs and the Kosovo Turks to
participate in the registration process and in the local
elections. Clearly, there was strong reluctance to
cooperate. Now, however, the democratic changes in
Belgrade have resulted in a new orientation among the
Kosovo Serbs, who have begun to approach the OSCE
mission in Kosovo. They seem to be thinking about an
eventual readiness to register and to participate in by-
elections.

These are promising signs for the future. Much
will depend on the functioning of the municipal
assemblies, especially with regard to their dealings
with minorities.

As far as minorities in general are concerned, the
security situation clearly needs to be improved.
Freedom of movement must be guaranteed. Refugees
and internally displaced persons must be able to return
home.

Clearly, the future of Kosovo is far from resolved.
The positive developments in the region and the
success of the democratic elections, however,
constitute a milestone in the search for a lasting
solution.

