Mr. Licharz (Germany): I thank our two briefers
for their comprehensive and substantive briefings.
I would also like to welcome the Minister of Justice
of Serbia, Ms. Kuburovie, and the State Secretary
for Political Affairs of Croatia, who will both speak
to us later. Their presence shows the importance that
they attach to this meeting. I would also like to thank
President Theodor Meron for his excellent service to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals and wish the new President, Judge Carmel
Agius, all the best in his work. We are confident that
President Agius will guide the Mechanism well through
the upcoming tasks with his tremendous experience
and expertise.

We welcome the main priorities that President
Agius just outlined to us, in particular, first, concluding
proceedings in an efficient and timely manner while
ensuring the principles of due process and fair trial
standards; secondly, a unified work culture, better
inter-branch coordination and the harmonization
of practices and procedures; and, thirdly, fostering
a productive work environment. We appreciate the
further development of the Mechanism's legal and
regulatory framework and the continuous efforts to
implement the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.

The work ofthe Tribunals is based on the conviction
that there is no peace without justice. Therefore, we want
to remind the international community of the work that
still needs to be done. Based on its own past, Germany
can testify to the crucial importance of the prosecution
of core international crimes: genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of aggression. A
country or region paralysed by those horrifying crimes
can only start the important reconciliation process and
rebuild the fabric of its society based on the knowledge
thatjustice will prevail.

We support the Mechanism's efforts to find the
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. Their whereabouts remain
unknown to the Mechanism. We call on the States in
which fugitives may reside to intensify the activities
of their law enforcement authorities in order to arrest
and surrender all remaining fugitives. Germany
sincerely hopes that all States specifically called upon
by the Prosecutor in his most recent report (S/2019/417, annex II) will follow the requests of the Mechanism to
assist in the apprehension of fugitives for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. We very much appreciate
hearing that South Africa is actively working to that
end in a concrete case, and we encourage all to reach its
speedy conclusion.

We express concern about the lack of progress and
efficiency of the trials under way at the national level in
the countries of the former Republic of Yugoslavia, and
we urge the States of the region to take the necessary
measures to ensure fair and speedy trials. Germany
condemns the glorification of convicted war criminals,
as well as the denial of the fact that war crimes were
committed within the former Republic of Yugoslavia.
In view of last week's twenty-fourth anniversary of the
genocide committed in Srebrenica, Germany appeals
to the Government institutions in all countries in the
region to actively fight against that bias.

Five persons convicted by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remain at the United
Nations detention unit in The Hague, awaiting transfer
to enforcement States. Germany decided to lead by
example and has accepted four out of the 18 persons
convicted, and we encourage other Member States to
join us and accept the transfer of ICTY convicts into
their penal systems.

Finally, as we mark the Day of International
Criminal Justice, let me express our appreciation
and gratitude to all those who dedicate their work to
carrying out international criminal justice and reassure
them of Germany's full support for all international
criminal tribunals and mechanisms that serve the
purpose ofinternational criminal justice.

