Mr. Elgannas (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
the members of your delegation, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
am also grateful to you for having organized this
meeting, which is devoted to a subject of great
importance, especially for Africa: the relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union, with a View to
maintaining international peace and security. This is
testimony to your great skill in guiding our work.

This meeting is in keeping with the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, which reaffirmed the
importance of strengthening the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the Charter. We fully agree that, as stated in this and
earlier meetings, there is a need to strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly as it
relates to conflict prevention and management and to
peace consolidation.

We believe that if regional organizations played a
greater role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, there would be two main outcomes. First,
there would be a reduced burden on the Security
Council in the carrying out of its mission, namely,
maintaining international peace and security. Secondly,
the legitimacy of the Council's missions would be
increased if regional organizations participated in the
decision-making process and in deliberations.

If such cooperation was carried out on an
institutional basis, it would lead to greater interaction
among the various entities and to a sharing of efforts
and experience, which would yield positive results in
areas of conflict and tension. Such cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
must be based on the harmonization of objectives and a
complementarity of efforts if we are to confront the
major challenges to peace and security in conflict
areas. There can be no question of eliminating the
regional role so as to replace it with an international
role. That, at least, is how we understand the
cooperation agreement signed last November between
9

the African Union and the United Nations at Addis
Ababa.

We have great hopes for the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union with a View
to resolving the problem of Darfur in a way that takes
account of local and regional elements of the problem
and the principles of the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries,
while avoiding unilateral positions.

We support cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in this respect.
However, we reaffirm that such cooperation should not
be based solely on the distribution of resources and the
granting of executive capacity to regional
organizations. It must also take into account national
and regional visions, cultural and religious elements,
local experience and the history and geography of the
region concerned. All of that is essential if we are to be
able to restore and maintain peace and security. In this
respect, we reaffirm the importance of United Nations
support for national and regional initiatives and efforts,
which are an essential element when dealing with such
conflicts.

We would also like to underline the importance of
the summit held in Tripoli last month, which brought
together Mr. Omar Hassan Al-Bashir, President of the
Sudan, and Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, President of Chad, at
the initiative of brotherly Muammar Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Isaias Afwerki, President of Eritrea. That meeting
clearly showed the true determination of the leaders to
find a peaceful solution to conflicts in the region.

In this respect, I would also like to say that an
advisory meeting will be organized on 28 April in
order to find a peaceful solution to the problem of
Darfur. We have invited Mr. Lam Akol Ajawin,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, and
Mr. Allam-Mi Ahmat, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chad, to participate in it, together with Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan; Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim,
African Union Special Envoy for the Darfur Talks;
Mr. Andrew Natsios, United States Special Envoy for
Darfur; and Mr. Pekka Haavisto, European Union
Special Representative for the Sudan. We hope that that
meeting will have a fruitful outcome.

We would also like to draw attention to another
element among the promising aspects for cooperation
that have been agreed to with regard to the

consolidation of peace in countries emerging from
conflict. These include support by the Peacebuilding
Commission for Sierra Leone and Burundi after the
two missions in those countries came to an end. We
hope that the Peacebuilding Commission will continue
to consider other cases that will make it possible to
show effective partnership at various levels - local,
regional and international.

My country supports the involvement of regional
organizations in the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission and also believes that their participation
should be enhanced in meetings relating to a particular
country.

The main challenge of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is to identify
practical and balanced arrangements for such
cooperation. We also need to find an institutional
methodology that avoids arbitrary actions, thereby
leading to better cooperation on a more regular basis in
response to the needs of regional organizations so that
they and the United Nations can play their role in
implementing their joint responsibility for maintaining
peace and preventing armed conflict.

