Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank all the briefers for their valuable contributions
to today's discussion. It is very much appreciated,
especially given the very short notice for the meeting.

Poland strongly condemns Russia's decision to
provide expedited Russian citizenship to the Ukrainian
citizens living in Russian-controlled areas ofthe Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine. We should underline
that with this step Russia is trying to escalate tensions
in Ukraine only days after the presidential elections. In
that regard, we welcome the consolidated response from
Ukraine's political forces. This is a highly provocative
element of the Russian Federation's ongoing aggressive
campaign to undermine Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Russia is continuing its policy
of flagrant disregard for fundamental principles of
international law with respect to Ukraine, including
by violating the prohibition on interfering in matters
within the domestic jurisdiction of another State.

It should also be emphasized that international law
does not permit the widespread naturalization by a State
of nationals of another State residing in the latter State's
territory. This is a clearly illegal act of coercion against
Ukraine and should be viewed as yet another measure
designed to escalate the Ukrainian-Russian conflict.
Furthermore, as several previous speakers mentioned,
it undermines the peace process and in particular the
Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015, which define the
modalities for a permanent ceasefire and provide for
the reintegration of the temporarily occupied territories
back into Ukraine. It follows other hostile steps by
Russia towards Ukraine, including illegal elections in
non-Government-controlled areas of Ukraine in 2018,
an issue that the Security Council met to discuss last
year (see S/PV.8386); an attack on Ukrainian ships in
the Kerch Strait, as other delegations also mentioned;
the introduction of a rouble zone; and the official
recognition of documents issued by illegal military
bodies in certain parts of Donbas.

We would like to emphasize that it is not the
first time Russia has applied such illegal practices to
countries in the region. So-called passportization
is a well-known component of Russia's strategy of
creeping annexation of Georgia's breakaway regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russia's continued
fuelling of tensions in Donbas continues to be a
direct challenge to international security, with grave
implications for the international legal order that
protects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all
States, two of the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.

In conclusion, the international community should
therefore not accept or recognize such a flood of
disregard for the fundamental principles of international
law and should respond to Russia's unacceptable and
illegal behaviour accordingly.

