Mr. Serry: Allow me, Madam President, to
convey to you and your Government my sorrow and
condolences at the passing of one of your distinguished
predecessors in the position of Permanent
Representative to the United Nations, Richard
Holbrooke. His distinguished career as a tireless
peacemaker and diplomat is, I think, well-known to all
of us, and will always remain a personal inspiration to
me. We mourn his passing.

At the outset, let me also express once again my
sympathy and that of the Secretary-General to Israel,
following the death of 43 people in a fire on Mount
Carmel two weeks ago. That tragedy was one of the
worst natural disasters in the country's history.
Assistance came from the region, including from the
Palestinian Authority, Egypt, Jordan and Turkey, as
well as from further afield. Prime Minister Netanyahu
has expressed Israel's gratitude for the solidarity and
material support.

In September, Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas pledged to seek a framework
agreement on permanent status within a year. While
that goal remains in place, the process for achieving it
has suffered a serious setback. In particular, the
Secretary-General regrets Israel's failure to institute a
renewed settlement freeze. On 8 December, American
efforts to create an environment conducive to the
resumption of direct talks, through the renewal of a
settlement freeze, were brought to a close. Palestinian
President Abbas has reaffirmed that he will not return
to direct negotiations unless Israel freezes settlement
activity.
During the reporting period in East Jerusalem,
Israeli authorities approved 130 new homes in the
settlement of Gilo and the construction of 625 new units
was announced in the Pisgat Ze'ev settlement. In the
remainder of the West Bank, according to various reports,
there has been a significant increase in construction since
the moratorium expired on 26 September. According to
the Israeli non-govemmental organization Peace Now,
construction for 1,600 settlement units has started. By
way of comparison, approximately 1920 units were
commenced during 2009.

We would like to make clear that the United
Nations will continue to emphasize that settlement
activity is contrary to international law, the Road Map
and the position of the Quartet. We reiterate the united
position of the international community that Israel
should meet its obligations to freeze all settlement
activity and dismantle outposts erected since March
2001.

Here in New York. on 10 December Quartet
envoys met with United States Envoy Mitchell in
advance of his trip to the region, and United States
Secretary of State Clinton gave a speech in
Washington, D.C., on the same day. The need to shift
strategy is evident. We understand that the United
States will now engage both sides in indirect talks on
all the final status issues, and the Secretary-General
expects the parties to engage seriously. We also note
that the United States intends to be a proactive
participant, offering ideas and bridging proposals when
appropriate. We believe it is clear that a substantive
third-party role in mediation is now required. The goal
must be a two-State solution based on an end to the
1967 occupation and a resolution of all core issues.

United States Envoy Mitchell is currently in the
region and saw Prime Minister Netanyahu yesterday
and President Abbas today, before President Abbas'
departure for a meeting of the League of Arab States
Follow-Up Committee tomorrow in Cairo. We expect
close consultation within the Quartet on the effort in
the period ahead. Quartet envoys are preparing a
meeting of Quartet principals, which we expect to take
place soon in the new year. The Secretariat will
continue to keep the Security Council apprised of
developments through the monthly briefings.

In response to requests from President Abbas,
Brazil and Argentina recognized the independent State
of Palestine, within borders that conform to the
10-69159
ceasefire lines of 1967, on 3 and 6 December,
respectively. Yesterday, the European Union Council of
Ministers reiterated its readiness, when appropriate, to
recognize a Palestinian State.

Quartet envoys also discussed the urgent need to
further enable the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority. A number of Israeli steps have
been under consideration for some time, among them
the further easing of restrictions on movement and
access, a reduction of Israeli incursions, measures to
enable the Palestinian Authority's efforts to extend into
Area C of the West Bank, and the release of prisoners.
Such measures are now timely and essential. Israel
needs to roll back measures of occupation as the
Palestinian Authority rolls out the basis for statehood.
Quartet Representative Blair's efforts are important in
this regard.

The World Bank reports that, in the third quarter
of 2010, the Palestinian Authority made steady
progress on implementing its reform programme,
maintaining financial discipline and achieving its
budget targets for expenditures. Public financial
management systems were further strengthened, while
a pension reform plan was adopted to improve
efficiency and sustainability.

Palestinian security forces continue to make
commendable efforts to maintain security in areas
currently under their control in the West Bank. As the
Secretary-General noted in his message on the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, it is indisputable that a reliable security partner
has emerged. According to estimates, the number of
Israeli troops operating in the occupied West Bank is at
its lowest level since 2005.

However, tensions persist. Israeli security forces,
citing security concerns, conducted 193 incursions into
Area A in the reporting period, resulting in
21 Palestinians injured and 98 arrested, among them a
Palestinian Legislative Council member from the
Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform bloc. On
23 November, Israeli security forces discovered seven
pipe bombs in a Palestinian vehicle at a checkpoint
near Tulkarem and subsequently seized arms and
ammunition in a raid. Violent clashes continued
between Israeli security forces and anti-barrier
demonstrators, and on 6 December an Israeli military
tribunal extended the detention of anti-barrier activist
Abdallah Abu Rahmah beyond his scheduled release.
10-69159

We note reports that the number of arrests and
interrogations of children have increased significantly,
in particular in the Silwan district of East Jerusalem, in
recent months. There were eight attacks by Israeli
settlers against Palestinians or their property, injuring
two Palestinians, while three attacks by Palestinians
resulted in one Israeli settler injured.

The number of obstacles to access and movement
in the West Bank currently stands at 513. I believe that
these can and should be meaningfully reduced in
quantity and quality in a manner consistent with
maintaining security.

The parties should show discipline and
responsibility in refraining from provocative actions.
In this regard, I am worried that there has been a rise in
demolitions of Palestinian-owned structures in the
reporting period, with 14 structures demolished in Area
C and 12 demolished in East Jerusalem, displacing 53
people. I have also expressed publicly my concern that,
on 8 December, a Palestinian Legislative Council
member of the Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform
bloc was forcibly transferred from Jerusalem to
Ramallah following an Israeli court order. This case
and that of three other lawmakers currently facing
court proceedings continue to raise serious human
rights concerns regarding Palestinian residency rights
in East Jerusalem.

I am concerned that a study prepared under the
auspices of the Palestinian Authority Ministry of
Information denied the religious significance of the
Western Wall to Jews. I note that this regrettable study
has been removed from the Authority's website. I stress
the need for figures of political and religious authority
on both sides to refrain from denial or denigration of
the other's heritage, rights and dignity.

We continue to follow with concern indications
by the Israeli authorities that more restrictive
procedures will be applied for crossing points between
East Jerusalem and the remainder of the West Bank.
While we are cognizant of security concerns, proposed
changes must not add new impediments to the United
Nations and other international operations, which will
be to the detriment of beneficiaries. We are engaging
the Israeli authorities on the matter both in New York
and on the ground.

The humanitarian Consolidated Appeals Process
(CAP) was launched on 30 November, totalling $575
million and comprising 213 projects. The CAP
3
articulates a humanitarian strategy for critical needs in
Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. It
aims at addressing humanitarian needs, focusing
particularly on areas where the Palestinian Authority
has limited control and where needs are not fully met
by the Government of Israel. United Nations agencies
are increasingly facing difficulties in obtaining the
required funds from the international community. I ask
donors to fully support the 2011 CAP to prevent further
deterioration in living conditions.

This brings me to Gaza, where we are concerned
at recent volatility as well as ongoing closure
measures. However, there have also been positive
developments. On 8 December, Israel decided to allow
exports from Gaza, consistent with security conditions.
The resumption of exports is key to reviving Gaza's
economy and its legitimate business sector. We
welcome this measure and hope that it will include all
commercial goods, subject to security considerations,
and that crossing capacity will be enhanced as
necessary to meet demands. The implementation of this
decision will be closely monitored. I appreciate the
continued engagement of Quartet Representative Blair
on this issue. The United Nations continues to seek the
end of closure of the Gaza Strip within the framework
of resolution 1860 (2009).

The weekly number of truckloads entering the
Gaza Strip decreased slightly to 997 from 1,026 during
the most recent reporting period and 566 in June 2010
before the announcement of the revised Israeli Gaza
policy. A weekly average of 2,800 trucks entered Gaza
in June 2007.

United Nations agencies have received approval
to complete construction projects in Gaza totalling
$110 million. This is a positive step, but further
progress is critical. I have discussed with the Israeli
authorities the need for approval and implementation
procedures to move faster and urged them to allow the
provision of construction material to the private sector
in Gaza and to expedite further approvals of United
Nations projects, including more United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) schools before the end of the year. I
remind the Council that, with very few exceptions, the
1.5 million people of Gaza are unable to leave the Strip
for the normal purposes that most of us take for
granted, and freer movement of people must also be a
priority.
It is essential that calm be maintained. The de
facto authorities have publicly repeated their desire to
maintain calm, although militant groups fired 5 rockets
and 20 mortar shells from Gaza into Israel. A mortar
wounded an Israeli on 8 December in the western
Negev, while a rocket hit a civilian house on the same
day. On the previous day, a rocket, for which the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed
responsibility, struck in the south of Ashkelon.

I condemn indiscriminate rocket fire at Israel.
Allegations continue to be made of weapons-
smuggling into the Gaza Strip. During the reporting
period, Israeli security forces conducted 4 air strikes
and 12 incursions into Gaza. In total, four Palestinian
militants were killed and one was injured, while 23
Palestinian civilians were also injured. I stress the
importance of maximum Israeli restraint. I also
underscore the need for all parties to protect civilians
and respect international humanitarian law.

I reiterate the calls by the United Nations for the
immediate release of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit and for
humanitarian access to be granted to him. I commend
President Abbas's call on Shalit's captors to release him.
It is deeply regrettable that a prisoner exchange deal has
not yet been concluded. I also note that an international
Arab conference stressing concern for Palestinian
prisoners was hosted by Algeria on 5 and 6 December.

I am concerned that the de facto authorities in
Gaza issued a temporary closure order to the offices of
the Sharek Youth Forum, an important
non-governmental organization partner of the United
Nations and other international agencies. I call for
Sharek to be permitted to continue its work in Gaza
without further delay or undue hindrance. I stress the
importance of full respect for the work of legitimate
civil society organizations in Gaza and the need to
uphold fundamental freedoms of association and
expression.

There has been no progress in efforts to restore
Palestinian unity within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority and Palestinian
Liberation Organization commitments. On the ground,
I am concerned by signs of tensions. My Office
continues to urge an end to any challenges to the
legitimate Palestinian Authority, and to call for respect
for human rights by all security forces in Gaza or the
West Bank. Palestinian Authority security forces
arrested members of a Hamas cell in the West Bank,
10-69159
allegedly preparing attacks against Palestinian and
Israeli targets, and Hamas security forces detained a
number of Fatah members throughout the Gaza Strip.
Internal calm is needed, if reconciliation is to progress.

We are also concerned at the continuing lack of
progress in the effort to promote peace negotiations
between Israel and Syria and at public expressions of
lack of confidence in the prospects for progress. While
the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has
remained stable, despite continued settlement activity,
the resolution of the conflict between the two countries
on the basis of Security Council resolutions is
important in its own right and critical for regional
stability, and is an essential part of realizing the vision
of the Arab Peace Initiative.

I note that contacts by diplomatic actors continue
with a view to exploring possibilities for progress.
Recalling also that Turkey has in the past been an
important facilitator of efforts on the regional track, we
hope that recent contacts between Israel and Turkey in
the aftermath of Turkey's provision of assistance to
fight the Carmel fire can help the two countries
overcome past tensions.

I now turn to Lebanon, where political activity
continues to be dominated by speculation concerning
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Differences between
opposing political camps brought about the suspension
of cabinet meetings from 10 November until a meeting
now scheduled for tomorrow, 15 December. Lebanese
parties continue to express their support for efforts by
countries in the region, particularly Syria and Saudi
Arabia, to promote stability in Lebanon. In his meetings
with representatives from a broad range of political
parties in Lebanon, Special Coordinator for Lebanon
Michael Williams has continued to encourage all parties
to resolve any disagreement through dialogue and
through the regular institutions of the State.

The reconstruction effort in the Palestinian
refugee camp of Nahr al-Bared continues to face
challenges. With the return of the first 2,000 refugees
to the camp expected by January 2011, I urge donors to
continue to provide vital financial assistance for the
reconstruction of Nahr al-Bared and to the UNRWA
General Fund.
10-69159

Over the last month, the overall situation in the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has been generally quiet. Air
violations have continued to take place on an almost
daily basis. During the reporting period, Special
Coordinator Williams and UNIFIL Force Commander
General Asarta Cuevas held consultations with the
parties to discuss details related to the 17 November
decision of the Israeli Security Cabinet to accept, in
principle, the United Nations proposal for a withdrawal
of the Israeli Defence Forces from the northern part of
the village of al-Ghajar.

In conclusion, I cannot overemphasize the
importance of the period we are now entering. The
parties have set for themselves important timelines,
which have received strong international endorsement,
and 2011 is the year in which they are to be met. It is
vital that both parties now be fully forthcoming on
substance in talks with the United States and that
further measures be taken on the ground without delay
to strengthen and enable the agenda of Palestinian
State building. We must also continue to focus on
improving conditions in Gaza, while calm must be
maintained.

We must focus with urgency on the essential
elements of a negotiated two-State endgame, for the
benefit of both peoples. We urge leaders on both sides
to do so, and we also believe that an active third-party
role on substance is essential if that is to be done.
Close consultation within the Quartet is important in
that regard. In the year ahead, the credibility of the
political process and its sponsors, including the
Quartet, will also be at stake. The Secretary-General
will continue to work with the parties, the Quartet and
regional and international partners in pursuit of a
lasting two-State solution and comprehensive peace in
the region.

