Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council in this important meeting
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I want to
start by emphasizing the importance of the monthly
briefing by the Secretariat, which remains one the most
important tools to assess the situation in the Middle
East and to enhance our collective efforts aimed at
advancing the peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.

We express our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his briefing this morning and
welcome the presence of Palestinian Foreign Minister
Riad Al-Malki at this meeting.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
briefing should focus not just on describing the
situation on the ground, but also on assessing the
reality with regard to the fulfilment by each side -
particularly Israel, the occupying Power - of its
2
responsibilities and compliance with international law
and Security Council resolutions.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that more
efforts and action are required from the Security
Council at this critical stage for the Middle East
region. The deteriorated situation in the region as a
result of the ongoing unlawful Israeli occupation of
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories since 1967
continues to be a matter of serious concern not only for
the region, but also for the entire international
community.

The Non-Aligned Movement regrets once again
the lack of progress made, despite increased efforts to
achieve a just and lasting solution to the question of
Palestine and a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East through the achievement of the two-State solution.
Regrettably, no progress has been made due to Israel's
continued defiance of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law.

The international community must not waver in
its calls upon Israel to cease all of its flagrant
violations, including its collective punishment of the
Palestinian people, particularly in the Gaza Strip, and
its illegal settlement activities, and to return to
negotiations in good faith. Peace clearly cannot be
achieved in circumstances where international law and
human rights continue to be trampled.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its grave
concern about the findings of the investigation carried
out by the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict, as contained in the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/ 12/48), as well as the conclusions reached by
the Secretary-General's Board of Inquiry and the
conclusions of the Arab League's fact-finding mission.

The Movement calls for serious follow-up action
on the recommendations set forth in those reports
towards bringing an end to the flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law, and in pursuit of accountability
and justice. All organs of the United Nations must
assume their responsibilities in this regard, and all
appropriate and available legal remedies should be
applied to end human rights violations and grave
breaches by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory.

The Movement reiterates its firm conviction that
respect for and compliance with international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
09-55901
law, and United Nations resolutions and decisions will
have a positive influence on and are necessary to
advance efforts to achieve a just and peaceful political
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The Non-Aligned Movement urges that due
priority continue to be given to promoting respect for
and observance by all Member States of their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
particularly those under the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

In this regard, the Movement takes into account
the magnitude and persistence of the violations and
breaches of international law, including international
humanitarian law, being committed by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The Movement urges the
Security Council to prevent impunity and apply
accountability for the war crimes committed by Israel
against the Palestinian civilian population during its
military aggression on the Gaza Strip.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its strong
condemnation of the death and destruction caused by
the Israeli military aggression on Gaza, as well as of
Israel's ongoing unlawful closures and blockades,
which have resulted in the virtual imprisonment of the
entire Palestinian civilian population by obstructing
their freedom of movement, including the movement of
essential goods, humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction materials. The ongoing negative
consequences of the Israeli aggression on Gaza have
exacerbated the humanitarian crisis on the ground,
continue to fuel instability and the cycle of violence,
threaten international peace and security and hamper
the efforts to resume the peace process between the
two sides.

The Non-Aligned Movement urges the Security
Council to seriously consider and act upon the
recommendations directed to it by the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission in accordance with the request
by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which was supported
by the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Group of Arab States.
Immediate measures by the Security Council are
required in this regard, in accordance with its Charter
responsibility to address matters affecting international
peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its call for the immediate implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions and for
09-55901
measures to be taken immediately to address the grave
humanitarian situation resulting from the Israeli
military aggression on Gaza, as confirmed in the
report.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on
Israel to end the collective punitive measures it has
imposed on the civilian population in Gaza. In this
regard, the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission finds
that Israel has imposed a blockade amounting to
collective punishment and has carried out a systematic
policy of progressive isolation and deprivation of the
Gaza Strip. Further, the Fact-Finding Mission states
that the Israeli military operation was directed at the
people of Gaza as a whole, in furtherance of an overall
and continuing policy aimed at punishing the Gaza
population and in a deliberate policy of
disproportionate force aimed at the civilian population.

Such alarming findings clearly require the
attention of the Security Council. Serious measures
must be taken to end impunity and ensure
accountability. Immediate measures are also required
to address the pressing humanitarian and economic
needs of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip,
including by the sustained and permanent opening of
Gaza's border crossings by Israel, in full compliance
with the terms and provisions of resolution 1860
(2009), in order to ensure the free access of
humanitarian aid and other essential supplies and
goods, including commercial supplies and needed
reconstruction materials, and to facilitate the passage
of persons to and from Gaza.

I turn now to the situation in occupied East
Jerusalem. The Non-Aligned Movement expresses
grave alarm at the recent attacks by extremist and
militant Israeli settlers, protected by Israeli forces, at
the Islamic holy sites of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
Al-Aqsa mosque. Such attacks against Palestinian
worshippers represent a threat and exacerbate an
already volatile situation in the occupied holy city. The
Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel's continuing
provocations, aggression and illegal actions against the
city's holy sites and against its Palestinian inhabitants
living under Israeli occupation.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
condemnation of all Israeli actions and provocative
measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, geographic nature, character and status of
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
3
Palestinian territory. The Non-Aligned Movement
expresses grave concern that, in defiance of the clear
international consensus rejecting Israeli colonization
and in flagrant breach of international law, Israel
continues to construct settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in and around East
Jerusalem, where the occupying Power also continues,
inter alia, to demolish Palestinian homes, evict
Palestinian families from their homes, confiscate
Palestinian land and properties, and carry out
excavations in the city, including in the vicinity of the
Al-Haram Al-Sharif compound.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
time has come for the Security Council to take a clear
position on and serious action against Israel's
violations in occupied East Jerusalem. By staying
silent and leaving Israel to pursue its defiance of
international law through its actions against the Islamic
holy sites in the occupied East Jerusalem, the Council
sends the wrong message in the wrong direction. Such
illegal actions and incitement by Israel confirm doubts
about its willingness to achieve peace on the basis of
the two-State solution and the 1967 borders. We thus
urge rapid and decisive action to prevent this volatile
situation from escalating further.

Turning to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains deeply concerned by Israel's ongoing
violations by air and land of Lebanese sovereignty, in
breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on Israel to
fully withdraw from the remaining Lebanese lands it
occupies in the Shaba'a Farms, the Kfar Shuba Hills
and the northern part of Al-Ghajar village.

With respect to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status oil the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as Israeli measures to
impose jurisdiction and administration there, are null
and void and have no legal effect.

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and that it fully
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In a world where respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms occupies centre stage, nothing
justifies a policy of collective punishment of a people
under effective occupation or the destruction of their
means to live a dignified life. The lack of
accountability for serious violations has reached a
crisis point. The ongoing failure of justice could
undermine hopes for a successful outcome to the peace
process and reinforce an environment that fosters
violence.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains ready to
actively engage in any possible action to guarantee the
investigation and prosecution of all those responsible
for crimes against the civilian population in the Gaza
Strip. The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that justice
for these crimes must take its course.

