Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Mr. Scharia and
Mr. Aboulatta for their briefings.

All over the world, we are confronting new and
dangerous terrorist threats. We see terrorists using
trucks to mow down innocent civilians in city centres,
home-brewed improvised explosive devices left on
trains, aeroplanes brought down by bombs smuggled
on board. More than 17 years after the 9/11 attacks,
terrorists continue to adapt their tactics and launch
barbaric attacks to try to disrupt our modern way of life.

The United States is leading the fight against
terrorism in all its forms. We head a coalition of States
that is successfully liberating territory from the Islamic

State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). ISIS is on the run. It
is only a matter oftime before it loses what is left of the
territory it controls. The United States is also committed
to holding State sponsors of terror accountable,
especially the number-one such country, Iran.

But even as we and our partners step up our efforts
to defeat terror, the United Nations has remained mostly
on the sidelines. However, it does not have to be that way.
The United Nations has a strong foundation to enable it
to be an effective counter-terrorism partner, and that is
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is imperative,
however, that we ensure a balanced implementation of
the Strategy across all four of its pillars, including by
integrating the prevention of violent extremism into
pillars one and four.

The Security Council itself has adopted important
resolutions that oblige all Member States to criminalize
acts of terror, stop the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and end flows of foreign terrorist fighters.
Yet those resolutions will be only words on paper if
Member States do not step up and implement them.
That is where the United Nations can do much more. It
can help Member States strengthen their defences and
follow through on the tough demands that the Council
has made. That is especially true for Member States
that may not have the resources or expertise to address
all of their vulnerabilities. And when States have not
shown the political will to follow through, we must all
work together to press them to do so.

Where the Organization's own counter-terrorism
architecture is concerned, the United States wants
to see an active, strengthened and updated Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
We want to see a strong CTED that will help Member
States understand the gaps in their counter-terrorism
efforts and analyse the ways in which terrorist threats
are changing. The United States will lead the effort to
update the CTED mandate later this year to make the
Organization more relevant to today's threats.

We also fully support the Secretary-General's
effort to reform the way the United Nations addresses
counter-terrorism. But to succeed, those reforms must
do more than change the boxes on an organizational
chart. For example, as the campaign against ISIS
continues, some ISIS fighters will try to slip back into
their home countries to plan new attacks. The United
Nations should help Member States at risk to stop the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters and assess future
threats. It should also help Member States to keep their
citizens from becoming radicalized in the first place.

The United Nations has a lot of tools available
for Governments to draw on. There are experts in
governance, development, communications, security
and, of course, counter-terrorism. The United Nations
should bring all of those components together when
Governments need help fighting the spread of terrorist
ideologies and preventing violent extremism from
taking hold. We call on the entire United Nations system
to support innovative, on-the-ground efforts to prevent
violent extremists and their supporters from inspiring,
radicalizing, financing or recruiting individuals to
commit acts of violence. The United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and CTED must take the lead in
making sure that everyone at the United Nations works
together in this fight. If it is to expand its impact, the
United Nations cannot work alone. It must get out of
New York and engage the various players in the field. It
can gain from their expertise.

As the United Nations strengthens its counter-
terrorism efforts, respect for human rights is vital.
Counter-terrorism should never be an excuse
for ignoring human rights. The fact is that when
Governments abuse human rights in the name of
counter-terrorism, the tactics backfire. Abusing human
rights actually increases local support for terrorism.
Promoting respect for human rights and the rule of law
must be a fundamental part of the United Nations work
with Member States around the world.

Counter-terrorism is a major test of the relevance
of the United Nations to the threats we face today.
The United States will continue to take action against
terrorism, but the United Nations can and must do
more to help. We look to it to respond to global threats.
Fighting terror is at the top of the list, so we urge the
United Nations to step up and help Member States
strengthen their efforts against this shared threat.

