Ms. Blanchett: I am honoured by this opportunity
to address the Security Council at this criticaljuncture.
I am not here as an expert. I stand before members of the
Security Council merely as a witness, as someone who
has seen and cannot look away. I went to Bangladesh
last March as a Goodwill Ambassador of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to see what I could possibly contribute in
response to the massive humanitarian needs unfolding
there. Nothing could have prepared me for the extent
and depth of suffering I saw.

An 18-year-old woman, whom I will call Laila, is
chief among my memories. One ofthe 720,000 stateless
Rohingya refugees who fled violence and abuse in
Myanmar's Rahkine state since last August, Laila fled
her burning village with her infant son, Yousuf. As she
cradled Yousuf in her arms, she described to me how
her husband was forcibly taken from her village and
has not been heard from since. She also described how,
five days later, those same people returned, setting fire
to her home and forcing her to flee alone with her baby.
She saw her uncle killed by men with knives. She told
me: "When I saw that, Ijust ran". She and her son hid
in a forest for months, surviving off plants and trees.
Her harrowing journey ended in Bangladesh, where her
present hardship persists.

Another refugee family took her and Yousuf in,
sharing their cramped shelter. As I sat with Laila, a
small child played behind me. I noticed terrible scars
on his leg. When I asked how he came by those, his
family told me he had been caught in the flames when
their home had been torched. Luckily, they pulled him
free, but the scars will remain - both the physical and
the psychological.

If only such stories were atypical. But. visiting
with refugee families in Bangladesh, I found that they
were shockingly routine. Like those present, I have
heard the gut-wrenching accounts - stories of grave
torture, women brutally violated, people whose loved
ones have been killed before their eyes and children
who have seen their grandparents locked in houses that
were set alight.

I am a mother, and I saw my own children in the eyes
of every single refugee child whom I met. I saw myself
in every parent. How can any mother endure seeing her
child thrown into a fire? Their experiences will never
leave me. That is why I am immensely grateful that
the Security Council - the principle body responsible
for maintaining international peace and security - is
working in unison to resolve that crisis.

I am particularly thankful to the Secretary-
General for giving voice to the Rohingya over the last
decade and for continuing to demonstrate exemplary
leadership on the matter. I must also pay homage to the
former Secretary-General, the late Mr. Kofi Annan,
who gave us a clear and practical vision to resolve the
crisis in Rakhine state - a vision that is shared by the
Council and one which the Government of Myanmar
has committed to implementing. It is a vision that, if
realized, will ensure that women, men and children
of different religions, ethnicities and backgrounds in
Rakhine state can thrive collectively. But as the Council
and the United Nations work with the Government of
Myanmar to ensure that, urgent efforts are still needed
for the Rohingya in Bangladesh.

It is important to recall that this is not the first wave
of massive forced displacement of Rohingya refugees
from Myanmar to Bangladesh in the past 40 years. The
scale of displacement is so large and severe that today
there are more Rohingya living in exile than in Myanmar
itself. In 1978, 200,000 Rohingya refugees streamed
into Bangladesh, fleeing brutality and Widespread
abuse. Gul Zahar, at the time, a young Rohingya woman,
was among those who fled. Fourteen years later, in

1992, another wave of violence forced 250,000 stateless
Rohingya refugees to seek safety in neighbouring
Bangladesh. Once again, Gul Zahar was among those
who fled. There are today 900,000 stateless Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh. Gul Zahar, now 90-years-old,
is sadly among them. Four decades following her initial
flight, Gul lives in abject poverty in Bangladesh with
the sole wish that her great grandchildren will have a
better future. The need for such a future to transpire
inside Myanmar has never been more urgent. If we
fail to act now, Gul's grandchildren, like thousands of
others, will be unable to escape the relentless cycle that
generations of Rohingya have experienced.

Bangladesh's recent response - receiving more
than 700,000 refugees in a matter of months and
providing them safety - is one of the most visible
and significant gestures of humanity in our time, but
the needs are vast and the suffering acute. Much more
international support is needed. Thanks to the efforts
of the Bangladeshi Government, the host communities,
relevant United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the refugees themselves, lifesaving
efforts have ensured that the Rohingya refugees have
endured the monsoons largely unscathed. Yet, as
Council members saw for themselves, they continue
to live in squalid conditions. With only 33 per cent of
the refugee operation funded - amounting to less than
70 cents per person per day - that is not surprising.
Rather, it is quite embarrassing. Many Bangladeshi
villagers living nearby, with very little to call their
own, have been helping the Rohingya refugees over the
past year. If people with so little can step up, why can
we not do better? Refugees need to feed their families.
They need clean water and sanitation facilities to wash,
cook and clean. They need a secure shelter to weather
the monsoons and the heat. Their children need an
education. Their grandparents need to be cared for.
But they need more than just food and water, informal
schools and temporary shelter. They need a future.

In the refugee settlements of Bangladesh today,
women who were raped in Myanmar are now giving
birth to children. Those children, already burdened
by statelessness, are likely to carry that stigma for
the rest of their lives. Many women like Laila, along
with their children, continue to be vulnerable to abuse
and exploitation. Many continue to battle the scars
of trauma and injury, which they received before and
during their flight to Bangladesh. It is imperative that
Governments, development and humanitarian agencies,
the private sector and individuals work in solidarity
to find innovative ways to help the refugees and the
Bangladeshi host communities.

The focus of our efforts must be to provide much-
needed support inside Bangladesh, while working to
ensure that conditions in Myanmar are conducive to
returns. The many refugees with whom I spoke consider
Myanmar their home, but they have real, deep fears
about returning there. The denial of their right to move,
their right to marry, their right to work and their right to
health care and education renders them among the most
vulnerable people on the planet. Refugees move back
home when it is safe and secure to do so. The Rohingya
cannot return to the very conditions they were forced
to flee. They cannot settle for half solutions. They
must know that they belong. A clear pathway to full
citizenship is essential. This is not a luxury. This is not
a privilege. This is a basic right that all of us here enjoy,
which the Rohingya do not.

I implore the Council not to forget this imperative,
support all efforts to make it a reality and, in the
meantime, encourage more robust international support
needed to meet urgent and pressing needs within
Bangladesh. My mind often returns to Laila and her
neighbours. Did she find out what happened to her
husband? Did her shared temporary shelter survive
the monsoons? Did she manage to celebrate Eid al-Fitr
last week? Will her young son Yousuf be able to return
home to Myanmar and go to school one day? Or, like
Gul Zahar, will he too suffer an endless cycle of fear
and forced displacement?

Together, we need to change the future of Laila,
Yousuf, Gul Zahar and of the Rohingya living in
Myanmar, Bangladesh and beyond. There are no short
cuts. There are no alternatives. We have failed the
Rohingya before. Please, let us not fail them again.

