Mr. Lampreia (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to convene this open
debate on small arms. As the Secretary-General pointed out
in paragraph 44 of his report (A/54/ 1) on the work of the
Organization,

"These weapons do not cause wars, but they can
dramatically increase both their lethality and their
duration."

Furthermore, as I stated before the General Assembly, the
"spiralling stockpile of and trade in small arms is closely
linked to organized crime and drug-trafficking"
(A/54/PV.4).

While proposing measures to deal with this highly
complex issue, we must bear in mind the legitimate
defence and security needs of States, as provided in
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. Because
of its multiple dimensions - humanitarian, criminal,
disarmament and security - this issue calls for an
overarching and integrated approach. Its complexity
should not, however, deter us. Brazil has taken an active
part in the discussions in global and regional forums
concerning small arms. We hope that this open debate
will help enrich the deliberations of the General Assembly
on the issue. Brazil has also taken all necessary measures
to ensure full compliance with all arms embargoes
imposed by resolutions of this Council.

How can we move forward on this issue
internationally? Brazil is convinced that the United
Nations is playing a key leadership role in this process.
We were active in the Group of Governmental Experts on
Small Arms set up by the Secretary-General. We regard
this Group as a model clearing house for the diversity of
perceptions on the complex issue. The Group took note,
for example, of the fact that there is no internationally
accepted definition of what is a proportional and
integrated approach to security and development.

I reaffirm Brazil's interest in having the General
Assembly agree to convene in 2001 an international
conference on the illicit arms trade in all its aspects. That
conference would, we believe, provide the ideal setting
for the consideration of measures geared towards
providing the effective, generally accepted and ongoing
implementation of the recommendations of the United
Nations Group of Governmental Experts.

At the United Nations Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, Brazil and Canada
together proposed the negotiation of a protocol on the
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms,
ammunition and other related materials to the forthcoming
convention against transnational organized crime. Those
negotiations are well advanced.

Together with Norway, Brazil has stimulated the
debate on the question of marking light weapons, which
is of vital importance in tracing their origin. Furthermore,
it is essential that global initiatives be accompanied by
regional initiatives. The pioneering Inter-American
Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and
Other Related Materials, of which Brazil was a sponsor,

 

may prove to be a useful experience to be considered by
other regions.

As a region free of international conflicts, South
America traditionally boasts low levels of military
expenditure. For us, the issue of small arms is of concern
mainly in connection with criminal activities. In other
regions, in contrast, the question of controlling the
proliferation of small arms is of direct concern to post-
conflict peace-building, as recognized by the guidelines
recently adopted by the United Nations Disarmament
Commission. Clearly, the emphasis varies from region to
region and these different concerns must be catered to. It is
therefore only by skilfully amalgamating the different, but
complementary, regional perspectives that an overarching
and commonly acceptable vision will be forged at the
conference in the year 2001.

It is commendable that civil society and public opinion
on an international scale have rallied behind the
achievements of Governments in this area. Non-
governmental organizations have played a crucial role in
alerting us to the fact that the dissemination of small arms
is not exclusively demand-led but, perversely, is equally fed
by suppliers. We share that analysis.

We believe that the Security Council can play an
important role in this matter, when its work is combined
with progress achieved in other forums, first because, as in
no other body of the United Nations system, in our daily
dealings with conflict situations we come into constant
contact with the tragic consequences of the unrestricted
spread of small arms, and secondly, because strengthening
arms-trade embargoes, as recommended by the Group of
Governmental Experts, could have a tangible effect in
minimizing the consequences of arms flows.

The presidential statement we are about to issue is an
objective and clear reflection of our responsibility to put the
Council's political weight behind these praiseworthy
aspirations of world public opinion. It is an additional
element in the international community's efforts to
eliminate the destabilizing proliferation of small arms. The
presidential statement should therefore be seen as a sign of
the Security Council's willingness to join other multilateral
forums in dealing with this pressing issue.

