Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda would like
to explain its vote on resolution 2139 (2014), just
adopted, on the humanitarian situation in Syria. First
of all, I commend Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg
for proposing this important resolution, which was
necessary following the failure by all Syrian parties to
fully implement the presidential statement of 2 October
2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).

Rwanda voted in favour of the resolution because
we are appalled by the worsening humanitarian
situation on the ground, as reported on many occasions
to the Council by the United Nations Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos.
We are particularly concerned about the siege on many
cities and populated areas in Syria, including the Old
City of Horns, where innocent civilians, including
women and children, were trapped for months without
any access to basic humanitarian assistance.

Rwanda has on various occasions expressed its
position on the Syrian crisis. Like all Council members,
we believe that there can be no military solution to the
conflict. We reiterate our call on all parties to remain
engaged for a peaceful and political settlement through
the ongoing second Geneva Conference on Syria, which
is the only viable solution that will end the security,
political and humanitarian crisis in Syria.

It is in that context that we deeply regret that the
important amendments on the responsibility of States
that are supplying weapons to the Syrian parties were
not included in the final version of the resolution. Those
reasonable amendments, based on agreed language,
merely expressed grave concern at the negative impact
of the transfer and use of weapons in Syria in terms
of loss of life, security and stability. The amendments
also underlined that the increased arms transfers
to all parties in Syria hurt the prospect of a political
settlement to the conflict, and called upon all States
to refrain from transferring arms to the parties in the
Syrian conflict when they assessed that they would be
used in committing crimes.

It is therefore a shame that, after three years of
a conflict in which over 100,000 people have been
killed, 6.5 million have been internally displaced and
9.3 million are in need of humanitarian assistance, we
instead continue to supply more and more weapons.
We therefore urge that the Secretary-General's call
be heeded, as he has been telling us to stop fuelling
this conflict with deadly weapons and, rather, use our
influence in convincing both parties to make significant
progress in the Geneva peace talks. I think that is very
Wise.

To conclude, we hope that, unlike the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15),
resolution 2139 (2014) will be fully implemented by
both parties, including through the lifting of the siege
on all cities and populated areas and the granting of full
access to humanitarian assistance.

I have the feeling that the Syrian crisis has been
gravely undermining the credibility of the Security
Council for three years now. Nonetheless, following the
resumption of the peace talks and the ongoing process
for the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, which
was all facilitated by permanent members of the
Council, we express the wish that they will use the
same influence to ensure a significant improvement on
the humanitarian front.

