Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay welcomes the convening of today's open
debate and the concept note (S/2016/321, annex) that
was distributed by the President's delegation in a timely
manner.

We also thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his in-depth
briefing to the Council on the issue. My delegation also
highly welcomes the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, on the matter under consideration
today.

In 1986, General Assembly resolution 41/11
created the zone of peace and co-operation of the
South Atlantic, of which Uruguay currently holds the
position of president pro tempore. All coastal States
of both the African and South American coasts of the
South Atlantic take part in the zone. In the outcome
document of the seventh ministerial meeting that took
place in January 2013, paragraphs 108 through 110 of
the Montevideo declaration contain specific provisions
regarding combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which we decided needed to be mentioned in today's
presidential, statement, which we support. The States
members of the South Atlantic zone remain ready to
support the Gulf of Guinea countries in any way they
may seek.

Uruguay wishes to highlight the key role played
by the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Economic Community of West African States,
which have combined their anti-piracy efforts and
coordinated their security policy. Nonetheless, we must
be aware that those efforts have fallen short. The growth
of criminal networks engaged in piracy and armed
robbery at sea has benefitted from the weaknesses of
States in terms of their maritime capacities and ability
to punish those who perpetrate crimes. That is why
maritime security measures to enhance the presence of
those nations at sea will be critical in the short term.
However, to achieve a long-term solution, we must
address the root causes of the problems in the countries
of the region and acknowledge the fact that piracy is
only a symptom of a deeper problem.

At the heart of piracy lie such structural causes as
poverty, unemployment, unequal wealth distribution
and the challenges posed by organized crime, trafficking
in arms, drugs and persons, pollution, illegal fishing
and the ever-increasing presence of extremist groups.
Uruguay therefore believes that in order to tackle
piracy, we must simultaneously reinforce actions for
institution-building in the region. The Gulf of Guinea
is one of the most unsafe maritime areas in the world
and requires targeted responses, given the resources
available to those involved in piracy.

It is worth noting that at least half of all incidents
are not reported and therefore not recorded in the
annual reports of the International Maritime Bureau.
It seems clear that the response to such crime requires
the international community to display the same
involvement and commitment that it has shown in the
fight against a similar scourge in the Indian Ocean,
which has been very successful. Without a strong naval
presence of States in the Gulf of Guinea, we can only
look forward to an endless continuous increase in
maritime crime and piracy, with an impact on countries
that today are currently least affected, risking further
destabilization in the region. It is therefore essential that
the multilateral system, especially the United Nations,
play a key role in combating piracy and in supporting
the countries of West Africa in meeting the challenges
posed by piracy. We underscore that piracy is a global
phenomenon and therefore requires a global response.

Finally, I stress the relevance of the Security
Council and the international community response to
the issue of piracy from various angles, including the
mission carried out by the Council last month to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, where we made it clear
that the only way of delivering peace and stability in
Western Africa is through a frank and open dialogue in
which the United Nations plays a part.

