Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed by the
European Union (EU), the E3/EU+3 and the Islamic
Republic of Iran on 14 July. We strongly believe that
this deal, based on Iran's implementation of essential
changes to its nuclear programme in return for a phased
lifting of sanctions, offers a real, durable and verifiable
path to resolve a dispute spanning over a decade. It also
marks a victory for multilateralism and international
diplomacy, as it proves that sustained pressure by the
international community, including through United
Nations sanctions and their full implementation by
Member States, can create conditions that bring parties
to the negotiating table and keep them engaged in good
faith and in the spirit of compromise.

Lithuania applauds the perseverance and
determination of all those involved in that
extraordinary diplomatic endeavour. In particular, we
acknowledge the instrumental coordinating role played
by both former and current European Union High
Representatives for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
Since the core objective of the deal is to ensure the
international community's trust in a peaceful measure
of Iran's nuclear programme, the full implementation of
comprehensive transparency and verification measures
will be indispensable in ensuring its success. Iran's
agreement to implement the Additional Protocol to
its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement as well as
further transparency measures foreseen in the Plan of
Action will provide the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) with powerful tools to implement
continuous monitoring and will grant the Agency
extensive access to Iran's nuclear sites. We also
welcome the road map agreed on by the IAEA and Iran
on 14 July that provides a specific time frame to clarify
past and present outstanding issues by the end of this
year.

In addition to the rigorous verification measures,
Iran will remain under the legally binding Charter-
based obligations to comply with the arms embargo
and refrain from ballistic missile-related activities.
The travel ban and assets freeze will also remain in
place, while the Council will continue to be actively
engaged in monitoring the implementation of the
Plan of Action. Finally, all current sanctions will be
reinstated in the event of significant non-performance
by Iran with regard to its commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.

In conclusion, Lithuania is convinced that,
if implemented fully and in good faith, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action will become a crucial
element in building trust between Iran and the
international community, open the door to a steady
improvement of relations with Iran and positively
contribute to regional and international peace and
stability.

