Mr. Dieng (spoke in French): I wish first to address
the question raised by the representative of Venezuela
concerning the measures that might be taken with a
view to reducing prevailing tensions.

(spoke in English)

I should, first of all, indicate that, in close
cooperation with my colleague Herve Ladsous, even
prior to my trip to South Sudan we had put in place
a working group to look into the measures that need
to be taken to prevent a further escalation of the
current violence. While I was in South Sudan, what I
offered as a way to help, beginning at the local level
in Yei River state - where, as I indicated and was
confirmed by almost everybody, the situation had been
deteriorating - was to facilitate a dialogue with the
community and religious leaders. We felt that such
dialogue was extremely important.

We also felt that it was important to develop
a communication plan at Headquarters in order to
increase global and regional awareness of the risk of
mass atrocities in South Sudan. As a matter of fact,
as I indicated in my presentation, I hope - and I
mentioned this to our colleagues in the United Nations
country team while I was there - that they will also
help to monitor, on a daily basis, all the incitements
and examples of hate speech, with the help of the staff
on the ground, including in the local languages, so that
they have the most accurate record of such messages.

We also felt that it will be very important to engage
further with the African Union and the countries of the
region, and I am very pleased, Mr. President, that you
will be visiting the region in December. As a matter
of fact, the African Union High Representative for
South Sudan and former President of Mali, Mr. Alpha
Oumar Konare, is very concerned about this and will
be in Juba himself in the coming days to follow up on
the issue. I think we should provide him with as much
support as we can, so I have already alerted him and
have been in contact with the office of Mr. Mogae,
the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, encouraging them to make that trip to
Juba. If necessary, we are considering activating the
mechanism of the African Union's Panel of the Wise
to discuss additional initiatives. In the light of the
seriousness of the situation, we are also considering
asking the Secretary-General - with your support,
Mr. President, and that of all the members of the
Security Council - to convene a high-level meeting to
address the situation.

I have also been urging Riek Machar himself to
make clear to him his responsibilities from his side.
At the end of the day, of course, this is in the hands
primarily of the South Sudanese themselves, and
primary responsibility lies with South Sudan. As I
reminded the authorities while I was there, President
Salva Kiir is in charge of law and order. He is not the
President of the Dinka or of the Nuer, he is the President
of all South Sudanese and the father of the nation. I
have even asked him to clarify the speech he delivered
on 19 October, to reassure the people that he did not
mean that he would be going to Equatoria to fight them.
I have also offered to provide two investigators to help
the South Sudanese judiciary start investigating the
allegations of crimes committed in Yei River state. At
the end of the day, the people must be reassured, or they
will continue to flee the country, and we must put an
end to this situation.

Concerning the question raised by the Ambassador
of Angola, it is clear that the deployment of the 4,000
people in the Regional Protection Force is one thing,
but ultimately, after recruiting and placing 4,000 troops
or even more, that will not solve the problem on the
ground. What we desperately need, and I insisted on
this while I was in Juba, is to have a truly inclusive
process. In the end, with the entire debate that has
taken place regarding Riek Machar's replacement by
Taban Deng Gai, and whatever interpretation can be
put on that - and the man must be included - what
is most important is not about personalities but about
getting civil society and everybody else on board. I was
with the elders of the Equatorias, and that is one of the
reasons that I said at some point while I was there that
there is still hope for ensuring that. But I can say that
in the discussions with some of those actors, one can
feel the hatred, and that situation must be calmed down.

But, unfortunately, what is most worrying is the
amount of arms that are circulating. Many young people
have those weapons and are doing whatever they can to
try to survive. Because the country is split everywhere,
not just in Yei. That is why I have to say that

(spoke in French)

this is a very serious moment in South Sudan, and
it is time to act and to act urgently.

