Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her excellent briefing
today. Listening to her, I am struck by just how central
the European Union (EU) is to every single issue on
the Security Council's agenda, and it is therefore very
useful to have this level of engagement.

Today happens to be an important day for the United
Kingdom's own relationship with the European Union.
At the beginning, therefore, I want to make it clear that
notwithstanding the United Kingdom's forthcoming
departure from the European Union, it will of course
be mutually beneficial for the United Kingdom and the
European Union to continue to cooperate closely across
the three pillars of the work of the United Nations. I
would now like to touch on some of the issues that
Ms. Mogherini brought up in her presentation.

First, with regard to Syria, like others, we very
much welcome the fact that Brussels will host the
third EU-United Nations conference on the future of
Syria and the region. The United Kingdom, like the
other countries represented around this table, strongly
supports the United Nations-led political process,
and we call on the Syrian regime and those who have
influence on it to engage in the political process and
implement the regime's obligations under resolution
2254 (2015). We particularly welcome the recent
announcement of EU sanctions against regime figures,
and the United Kingdom will remain at the forefront
of responding to the humanitarian crisis in Syria. We
have already given 35 2.8 billion since 2012 and we will
remain engaged.

Secondly, on the subject of Iran, we also warmly
welcome the EU's work and the personal engagement
of the High Representative in support of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA). We completely
agree with her that it is a vital instrument in neutralizing
the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran. The United Kingdom
will remain committed to the JCPOA and will uphold
it as long as Iran continues to meet its commitments
in full. We nevertheless continue to see Iran's actions
in its neighbourhood as harmful and destabilizing, in
particular in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen.

Thirdly, with regard to the comments the High
Representative made on the question of reconciliation
in the Western Balkans, again we very much welcome
and support the EU's continued efforts in bringing
lasting stability to the region, not least through the
EU-facilitated dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo.
The United Kingdom was the first State to recognize
Kosovo and its independence in 2008, and we will
continue to work in full support for the recognition of
Kosovo, which will itself enable political normalization
and deliver increased prosperity for citizens across the
region. I should add, however, that we do have concerns
that a dialogue agreement based solely on border
changes could risk endangering stability in Kosovo,
Serbia and the region.

Finally, turning to Africa, we welcome both the
developing dialogue between the EU and the African
Union and the EU's growing cooperation with the United
Nations in States and regions affected by conflict. The
EU's Common Security and Defence Policy missions,
for example in the Sahel, Somalia and the Central
African Republic, have all delivered niche capabilities
and nurtured valued partnerships, while enabling the
United Nations to direct its resources towards action
where it can add value. As United Nations mission
mandates come up for renewal, including a number
this month on Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, it will be important to
strengthen the complementarity between the United
Nations and EU instruments as we move forward.

In the coming period, the United Kingdom will
continue to work in the Council and with the European
Union and other partners in support of the wider
rules-based international system, whether that is in
promoting accountability in Myanmar, enforcing
sanctions against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea or defending Ukraine's territorial integrity. A
close future partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations will be vital if we are to achieve
those important aims.

Allow me to conclude with a comment for the High
Representative. Especially given that the Commission
on the Status of Women is meeting this week here at the
United Nations, I think it would be very interesting to
hear her thoughts on how the United Nations and the EU
could cooperate more in the field of women and peace
and security, particularly when it comes to our peace
operations and involvement in political processes.

