The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations, I have been authorized
to make the following statement on behalf of the
Council in commemoration of the tragic events at
Srebrenica.

"Five years after the fall of Srebrenica in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security Council
pays tribute to the victims of one of the worst
civilian massacres in Europe since the end of the
Second World War. In the week after the fall of
Srebrenica, a United Nations designated safe
area, thousands of innocent civilians were
murdered and thousands of others forcibly
relocated as a result of the policy of ethnic
cleansing.

"The tragic events at Srebrenica must not be
forgotten. The Council regrets the deplorable
events and recalls its resolve to ensure that justice
is carried out fully through the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, and that such crimes are not repeated
in the future. The Council stresses the importance
that lessons be learned and acknowledges the
Secretary-General's report on Srebrenica,
contained in document A/54/549. The Council
reiterates its commitment to the full
implementation of the Dayton Paris Peace Accord
and to the establishment of multi-ethnic
democracy and the rule of law throughout the
territory of the former Yugoslavia."

I now invite the members of the Council to stand
and observe a minute of silence in honour of the
victims of the Srebrenica massacre.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

The statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOO/ZS.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.

