Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita for her valuable briefing on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and her visit to the Sudan. I also thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco and Mr. Mourad Wahba
for their presence at this meeting. Today I will address
four issues with regard to Darfur the security
situation, displaced persons, UNAMID's exit strategy
and the transitional period and peacebuilding.

 

With regard to the security situation, today
and for the past several years, well before Kuwait
joined the Security Council, the security situation in
Darfur has continued to improve steadily, with the
exception of clashes initiated by a particular faction
that has continually rejected the peace process from
the very start. We therefore reaffirm the importance
of supporting the efforts of the Sudan to extend its
sovereignty throughout its territories, including by
assuming its primary responsibility for protecting
civilians in view of UNAMID's military drawdown, a
process that confirms the continuing stable situation in
Darfur and the diminishing need for a United Nations
military presence there.

The displaced persons and civilians in Darfur
in general remain a central priority for the Security
Council, and their safe, dignified and voluntary return
must therefore remain our common goal. Their return is
evidence of the efforts to successfully address the root
causes of the conflict without creating new benchmarks
or indicators. We welcome the ongoing cooperation
between UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan,
as well as with communities in Darfur, in meeting with
the displaced, as we saw in Nyala this year, because
communicating with them will move us closer to
ensuring their desired return.

With regard to UNAMID's exit strategy, we welcome
and affirm the importance of ensuring that the Sudan
and its partners continue working on implementing the
remaining provisions of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in order to pave the way for the mission's
withdrawal next year. The Doha Document remains
a cornerstone of the settlement in Darfur, and we
urge the Security Council to give priority to political
solutions that fulfil the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. We commend the timely visit by the three
Assistant Secretaries-General, which we were briefed
about today, reflecting UNAMID's changing mandate
with a view to ensuring a smooth exit. With regard to
the transitional period and peacebuilding, supporting
sustainable peace in Darfur requires that we closely
monitor the needs of the Sudanese Government and
UNAMID. The visit was therefore a welcome and
much-needed development after our meeting last
September on the margins of the high-level week of
the General Assembly to discuss peacebuilding in
Darfur. It is high time that we expedited our efforts to
help the Sudan and its people in order to present it as
an example of how to transition from peacekeeping to
post-conflict peacebuilding.

In conclusion, we affirm our willingness to support
the efforts of the Secretariat in assessing the needs of
the next phase, and we renew our call for support to
the Sudan in achieving stability and a comprehensive
peace throughout its territories, as it is doing with
neighbouring countries.
