The Deputy Secretary-General: Since the Council
was briefed yesterday by Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco (see S/PV.7I23), there have been
reports of continued serious developments in Ukraine.
In Crimea, key sites such as airports, communications
and public buildings, including the regional parliament,
reportedly continue to be blocked by unidentified armed
men. There are further reports of armed personnel
taking control of regional administration buildings in
several cities in the East and South of Ukraine.

The new Crimean Prime Minister, Sergei Aksenov,
today released a statement appealing to President
Vladimir Putin to provide assistance in "ensuring peace
and tranquillity on the territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea". In the same statement, he
announced that he was taking control of security in
Crimea "on a temporary basis". He told all security
personnel to declare allegiance to him rather than to the
authorities of Kiev. Following the reported deployment
of additional Russian troops and armoured vehicles
to Crimea, the Russian Federation's upper house of
Parliament today approved the request of President
Putin for Russian forces to be used in Ukraine "pending
the normalization of the public and political situation in
that country".

At the same time, in this fluid situation, however,
there are some encouraging signs. One of them is
the reported announcement from Kiev just now of
the intention to broaden the Government to include
representatives from eastern Ukraine. We also note
that the calls for dialogue among all other interested
parties, both inside and outside Ukraine, appear to be
resonating.

Referring to the Security Council discussions
yesterday about Robert Serry's fact-finding mission
and his possible visit to Crimea, Mr. Serry was in
touch with the authorities of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea. He came to the conclusion that a visit to
Crimea today was not possible for logistical reasons.
In his statement today, Mr. Serry noted that if he had
travelled to Crimea, he would have conveyed, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, a message for all to calm the
situation down and to refrain from any actions that
could further escalate an already tense environment.
Robert Serry will travel to Geneva today, where he will
brief the Secretary-General on his mission to Ukraine
and discuss further possible steps.

The Secretary-General is gravely concerned that
the situation has further deteriorated since yesterday's
meeting of the Council. In that regard, let me reiterate
the Secretary-General's important messages, conveyed
in his statement of today:

"The Secretary-General continues to closely
follow the seriously and rapidly unfolding events
in Ukraine, including developments in Crimea, and
is gravely concerned about the deterioration of the
situation.

"The Secretary-General reiterates his call
for the full respect for and preservation of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.

"He calls for an immediate restoration of calm
and direct dialogue between all concerned to solve
the current crisis.
"The Secretary-General will be speaking with
President Vladimir Putin of Russia shortly about
the situation in Ukraine."

Let me say in closing that at this crucial moment it
is important to recall the mission ofthe Organization. It
always seeks the peaceful settlement of disputes. That
is the essence of the Charter of the United Nations and
should serve as our primary guide in this situation.
Now is the time for cool heads to prevail.

