Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting in response to the very understandable
request from the Permanent Representative of Georgia.
We are grateful for the briefings from the Secretariat.

Events in Georgia over the past three weeks raise
fundamental questions for the Council - and for the
United Nations more widely - and this meeting is an
important opportunity for Council members to set out
their views.

Since the outbreak of fighting in Georgia on
7August, the United Kingdom's approach has been
based on two basic principles: first, full support for
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity; and
secondly, full support for efforts to end the violence
and lay the foundations for a peaceful and enduring
settlement to the conflict that is acceptable to all the
parties. We supported French-led efforts to secure an
immediate end to the fighting, efforts that culminated
in the six-point agreement signed by Russia and
Georgia, together with the agreed clarifications issued
by President Sarkozy. We support it, and we continue
to support efforts to ensure the full implementation of
that agreement, including the full withdrawal of
Russian forces back to the positions occupied prior to
7 August.

To that end, we and others have been closely
involved in discussions here in New York on a draft
Security Council resolution that would command broad
support in the Council, that would codify all elements
of the six-point plan and that would establish the basis
for progress towards a lasting settlement to the
conflict.

At the beginning of this week, as my French
colleague implied, those of us involved in negotiations
on a draft text were cautiously optimistic about the
prospects for agreement. But Russia's decision on
Tuesday unilaterally to recognize the independence of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia torpedoed those
negotiations. By its actions, Moscow has effectively
ruled out agreement on a comprehensive Council
response to the situation in Georgia.

Let me be clear. Russian military action and
Russia's recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
constitute a unilateral attempt to redraw the borders of
a neighbouring country through the use of force. It is
our view that that is entirely unacceptable and
unjustified. It is in direct contravention of the founding
principles of the United Nations and is in defiance of
numerous resolutions adopted by the Council. It is also
a flagrant breach of point 6 of the agreement signed by
President Medvedev. Condemnation of Russia's actions
has come not only from the foreign ministers of the
Group of Seven (G7), Russia's partners in the G8, but
from many parts of the international community, as the
enormous implications of Russia's actions sink in.

Russia's decision has grave humanitarian and
political implications. We have heard justifications for
Russia's actions based on the need to prevent
humanitarian catastrophe. But what we have seen in
recent weeks is ethnic Georgians being pressured to
flee from their homes in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Tuesday's decision by Russia will encourage those in
South Ossetia and Abkhazia who are bent on violence
and intimidation, and there is already credible evidence
that they have accelerated their work.

We call on Russia to do three things: first, to
abide by international law as the basis for resolving
this crisis; secondly, to act now to ensure full and free
humanitarian access to Abkhazia and South Ossetia and
to prevent violence and intimidation against ethnic
Georgians - and that does not mean requiring ethnic
Georgians to accept Russian citizenship as the price of
remaining in South Ossetia; and thirdly, to implement
urgently and in full its undertakings under the six-point

agreement, including withdrawal of its forces to the
positions occupied prior to 7 August. It is unacceptable
that, over two weeks since the agreement was signed,
Russian forces continue to occupy parts of Georgia
well beyond the conflict zones. We look to Russia to
facilitate the deployment of international observers, as
prefigured in point 5 of the six-point plan, to speed up
the Russian pullback.

The use of force, violence and intimidation
against civilians and de facto annexation cannot be the
basis for a peaceful and durable settlement to this or
any other conflict. Future arrangements in South
Ossetia and Abkhazia can be agreed only through
international negotiations involving all the parties, as
envisaged in point 6 of the six-point plan. The United
Nations has already expressed its willingness to help
take forward this initiative, in cooperation with other
international actors. We encourage the Secretary-
General to begin consultations to that end as a matter
of urgency.

