Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Equatorial
Guinea, South Africa and Cote d'Ivoire welcome
the adoption of resolution 2499 (2019), renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for another year. Indeed,
the renewal of MINUSCA'S mandate will support
the tangible progress made by the authorities of the
Central African Republic in implementing the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. The three African members of the
Security Council commend France's penholdership
for ensuring transparent negotiations and all other
delegations for their constructive contributions,
resulting in a resolution that highlights the interests of
the Central African Republic and its people at a pivotal
time for the country.

We have been closely following the situation in
the Central African Republic since the signing of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
of 6 February between the Government and armed
groups. In that regard, we commend President Faustin
Archange Touadera and his Government for their
commitment to and constant efforts aimed at promoting
lasting peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. We believe that MINUSCA has played a vital
role in supporting peace efforts in the Central African
Republic and should continue its mission by being
equipped with adequate resources.

The gradual restoration of State authority throughout
the Central African Republic and the improvement of
living conditions for the population constitute a real
hope for the return ofa lasting peace in the country. The
fact that those imperatives are taken into account in the
text of the resolution guided the three African members
of the Council in voting in favour of the resolution. In
that context, the three African members of the Council
welcome the work done by MINUSCA and its regional
partners in strengthening the capacity of the defence
and security forces of the Central African Republic.
Moreover, we encourage coherence, transparency
and effective coordination in providing international
support to the Central African Republic.

The coming year marks a turning point in the
political life of the Central African Republic, which
is currently engaged in preparations for the 2020-2021
elections. The three African members of the Council
welcome the fact that the resolution includes national
priorities, as expressed by the authorities of the Central
African Republic, including MINUSCA'S support for
the holding of the 2020-2021 elections. We recall that
MINUSCA's ongoing support is essential to ensuring a
credible and inclusive electoral process. That is why we
are endorsing timely operational, logistical and security
support for MINUSCA in helping with the holding of
elections, as well as the coordination of international
support and the Mission's current robust mandate, good
offices and technical assistance.

Lastly, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and
C6te d'Ivoire reiterate their support for MINUSCA
and President Faustin Archange Touadera, whose
commitment and leadership should contribute to the
return of lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic.

