Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to speak at this meeting on
the very important issue of the Bougainville peace
process in Papua New Guinea. I make this statement on
behalf of the members of the Pacific Islands Forum that
are Members of the United Nations, including
Australia, Kiribati, the Republic of Marshall Islands,
the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu
and my own country, Fiji.

This issue has been on the agenda of the Security
Council since 1999 but has, of course, affected one of
our neighbouring countries, Papua New Guinea, for a
much longer time. Consecutive Governments in Papua
New Guinea have given the highest priority and
greatest attention to this issue, including the current
Government of Prime Minister The Right Honourable
Sir Michael Somare.

The Security Council is well aware that our
subregion has played a significant role in supporting
Papua New Guinea through our own regional initiative
of a Peace Monitoring Group on Bougainville. We are
all determined to see the successful conclusion of the
current peace process, which shows all positive signs
of success. As the Council is well aware, through the
efforts and resources of the Governments of Australia
and New Zealand, and ably supported by the Kingdom
of Tonga and Solomon Islands - in the early stages -
and Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji, we mounted
and have continued the regional Peace Monitoring
Group efforts.

It therefore gives me pleasure to learn from the
Secretary-General and our Papua New Guinean
colleague, Ambassador Robert Aisi, that positive
progress has been made on the three principal fronts:
peace and reconciliation, arms disposal and
constitutional reforms. It is also heartening to learn that
regional and international friends and agencies,
including the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOV), headed by Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, are working diligently to consolidate peace.

We recognize the involvement of other
Governments and international non-governmental
organizations, organizations and agencies in providing
assistance to peace-building, reconciliation, restoration
and other sectoral development assistance to
Bougainville. They include the Governments of Japan
and the United Kingdom, the European Union, the
United Nations Development Programme, churches,
non-governmental organizations, the Red Cross and
Doctors Without Frontiers. Here in New York, the
efforts of many, including the members of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and UNPOV, are
providing the necessary catalytic role in managing the
dialogue process among all affected parties.

Although the proposed timetable set out in the
Papua New Guinea Government's August 2002 aide-
memoire has slowed somewhat, we very much hope
that stage II of the weapons disposal can be completed
as now planned, by 24 December. There is also a good
prospect that stage III of the weapons disposal can be
completed by the middle of 2003, thus paving the way
for elections for an autonomous Bougainville
government.

It must be emphasised, however, that meeting
deadlines for weapons disposal will not happen
automatically. It will require energy and the firm
commitment of all the parties and the continued active
engagement of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville in facilitating the peace process.

While we as a subregion remain committed to
supporting the Peace Monitoring Group until the peace
process is firmly established, it is in the interest of all
of us to move forward as quickly as possible and to see
the process become increasingly autonomous as it
draws to a successful conclusion. Against that
background, the Pacific Islands Forum Group supports
the extension of the UNPOB mandate for whatever
period is required.

