Mr. Och (Mongolia): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to congratulate you, Madam President, on the
Republic of Korea's accession to the presidency of the
Council, and to applaud your leadership in organizing
this open debate commemorating the tenth anniversary
of the historic adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). I am
confident that the debate will contribute to our efforts
to realize the global agenda of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

I also wish to express our appreciation to
Mr. Jan Eliasson, the Deputy Secretary-General, for
his statement.

Mongolia welcomes and supports the presidential
statement adopted today by the Security Council
(S/PRST/2014/7). We reaffirm our strong commitment
to contributing to international efforts to ensure the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The potential spread of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery continues to
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Mongolia shares the view that the international
community should redouble its efforts to promote full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We believe that the 2011 extension for 10 years of
the mandate of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) was a significant step in
strengthening its role in facilitating the provision of
technical assistance and in enhancing its cooperation
with the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prevention of
Chemical Weapons. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Committee's intensified efforts to fulfil
its mandate, including by encouraging universal
implementation through reporting by Member States,
as well as improving mechanisms for sharing effective
practices for strengthening national capabilities for
implementing their commitments.

In compliance with paragraph 4 of resolution
1540 (2004), the Government of Mongolia submitted
its initial report in 2005; its second national report,
which provides additional information on measures
undertaken after 2005, was submitted to the Committee
last month.

Mongolia has worked to promote the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by becoming a party to
all the major international frameworks and it continues
to fully implement its obligations under the relevant
multilateral agreements. At the national level, we
have also been taking measures to establish a relevant
domestic monitoring mechanism. That enforces a
series of laws prohibiting any non-State actor from
manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, developing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery,
particularly for terrorist purposes. With a view to
strengthening its legal environment for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), Mongolia has reviewed its
national laws and policies. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to specifically highlight Mongolia's foreign
policy outlines, renewed and approved by Parliament in
2011, which stipulate that Mongolia shall refrain from
stationing nuclear weapons or any other type of weapon
of mass destruction on its territory.

In addition to this, Mongolia has taken steps to
strengthen its monitoring mechanism for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). In January, Parliament's
standing committee on security and foreign policy set
up a working group to monitor the implementation of
laws relating to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. The working group has recommended
that its sub-group, made up of representatives from
15 ministries and agencies, intensify efforts to improve
border controls, export and import controls and law-
enforcement measures.

My delegation welcomes the continuing outreach
activities designed to promote national implementation
arrangements, including strengthening the close
collaboration of all stakeholders at the international,
regional and subregional levels. As a beneficiary,
Mongolia is grateful to the donor community for its
financial and technical contributions in support of
our activities related to resolution 1540 (2004). We
also note the efforts of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs to assist Member States in implementing their
obligations with respect to the resolution, and we ask
that it continue to do so.
Despite the progress we have achieved, many
countries still face challenges in maintaining effective
border controls and enforcement mechanisms aimed
at combating illicit trafficking and brokering in items
related to WMDs. Recognizing the need to continue our
concerted efforts to improve our capability to address
the threats posed by weapons of mass destruction,
Mongolia shares the view that the 1540 Committee
should continue its work to further enhance its role as
assistance facilitator to better respond to the needs of
Member States.

