Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing. We
appreciate his service and contributions to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We also thank Foreign Minister Dacie and
Ambassador Citaku for being here today.

The United States applauds the leaders of Serbia
and Kosovo for their expressions of commitment to
normalization between their countries. We hope to
see that normalization dialogue continue to intensify.
Neither side should engage in any effort to undermine
its legitimacy, including diplomatic recognition of the
other side. That has no place in a genuine commitment
to normalization.

Now is the time for both parties to be flexible in
reaching compromises that both can agree to. The
United States is committed to supporting the talks in
whatever way possible. We will seriously consider any
deal that is durable, implementable and sellable in both
countries and that enhances stability. We urge Kosovo
and Serbia to recognize the value of fully committing
to normalization, which will bring great benefits to the
people, the economy, the culture and peace and security
of both countries. Mutual recognition and normalized
relations between Kosovo and Serbia are the future.
All sides will benefit from recognizing that reality and
embracing it.

Considering the future of UNMIK, as we have
noted many times before, we feel that the Mission has
fulfilled its purpose and should draw down. We request
that the Secretary-General and UNMIK initiate a
strategic review to provide the members of the Security
Council with critical information so that we can assess
and evaluate the United Nations presence in Kosovo
and ensure good stewardship of valuable United
Nations Member States' time and resources. We also
need to assess and develop a viable exit strategy for
UNMIK. That is a principle that guides our approach to
all other peacekeeping missions and should be possible
with UNMIK, as well. The United States also supports
the gradual transparent transition of the Kosovo
Security Force into a multi-ethnic NATO interoperable
military with a limited territorial defence mandate.
The legislation pending before Kosovo's Assembly
is fully in line with resolution 1244 (1999). It is the
sovereign right of Kosovo to establish and maintain an
armed force. That force, as planned, would contribute
to regional and global security. We encourage all sides
to avoid disinformation and provocative rhetoric about
that legitimate, gradual multi-year transition.

The United States continues to encourage countries
that have not yet done to join more than 110 other States
Members of the United Nations in recognizing the
reality of Kosovo's independence. We strongly support
Kosovo's membership in all relevant international
organizations, including the United Nations. We
particularly encourage all INTERPOL members to
support Kosovo's membership at that organization's
general assembly on 20 November. Kosovo meets all
membership criteria for INTERPOL. United Nations
membership is not arequirement for j oining INTERPOL.

Kosovo's membership in INTERPOL
fundamentally is about enhancing the international law
enforcement community's collective ability to combat
terrorism, violent extremism, trafficking, cybercrime
and other international criminal activity in the Balkan
region and beyond. It is neither an impediment to
the dialogue on normalization of relations nor in the
international community's interest to postpone it
until Serbia and Kosovo reach an agreement. UNMIK
long ago ceased police functions in Kosovo. Having
the Kosovo police - recognized by both Belgrade
and Pristina as the sole law enforcement authority in
Kosovo - join INTERPOL will no doubt strengthen
international security. We urge all to support Kosovo
on 20 November.

Finally, we reiterate our call on both sides to fully
embrace normalization and support one another in all
aspects of the enhanced relations that will come with it.

