The President (spoke in Spanish): I Will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

I would like to thank representatives for their
kind expressions of support addressed to the
presidency. My presence in this Chamber attests to the
priority that Chile attaches to the promotion and
protection of the rights of children, both male and
female, in armed conflict.

We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Mali, which
holds the chairmanship of the Human Security
Network, of which Chile, together with 12 other
countries, is a member.

It is hard to imagine that more than 300,000 boys
and girls are still participating in armed conflict in
various regions of the world. That is a fundamental
challenge to the values that should govern the world. It
is our responsibility to continue to work for the
restoration of human dignity and to take the necessary
measures for the immediate demobilization,
rehabilitation and reinsertion of those boys and girls.
That is a task to be carried out jointly by Governments,
the United Nations system and civil society.
This is why we attach particular importance to the
report of the Secretary-General. We welcome his
recommendations and firmly support the appeals for
action made by his Special Representative, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and by the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund, Ms. Carol Bellamy.

The Security Council acknowledged its
responsibility when, in 1998, it included this item on
its agenda. As the Secretary-General has said, the time
has come for the implementation of international
instruments and resolutions to protect children.

We also have a responsibility to expand the
concept of early warning so as to identify situations
that threaten international peace and security. Our
challenge is to act before, during and after conflict. We
must commit ourselves to the implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council in recent
years.

We believe that, if we are to succeed in ensuring
the full implementation of the legal framework to
protect children in armed conflict, we must seek out
and develop effective monitoring and information
mechanisms that enable us to oversee such
implementation in a more systematic manner.

In this context, it may be useful to recall the
proposal that we made in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security. We suggested that every year a
member of the Council should be requested to monitor,
together with the relevant departments of the
Secretariat, the implementation of our decisions. A
similar initiative was suggested by some non-
governmental organizations during the recent Arria-
formula meeting in relation to children in armed
conflict.

In the context of our monitoring efforts, the
identification of parties to conflict that recruit or use
children should be kept under constant review. We
must also consider monitoring other forms of violation
and abuse of children.

After the parties that perpetrate such abuses have
been identified, it will then be time to begin work on
the nature of the measures or sanctions to be imposed
on them, particularly in the case of repeat offenders in
the use or recruitment of children as soldiers.

We are convinced that education is one of the key
instruments for promoting lasting protection for
children - a conviction that is shared by the members
of the Human Security Network.
We must design and implement policies and
programmes geared towards both the therapeutic
healing of the physical and psychological damage done
to children who have been abused and the restoration
of the rights that were violated in situations of war and
armed conflict.

I invite representatives to expand the global
movement seeking to ensure that the rights of children
in armed conflicts are included, as a matter of priority,
on the international security agenda and in
development policies at both the national and
international levels.

Specifically, my country proposes that we
concentrate on the following areas: first, the
establishment of a structured monitoring and
information mechanism; secondly, the adoption of
specific measures aimed at violator countries, as well
as repeat offenders; thirdly, the inclusion in our future
work of other serious violations; and fourthly, an
emphasis on educational policies to facilitate
reintegration into society.

I wish to conclude, as earlier speakers have done,
by recalling the words of Graca Machel, who appealed
to us to take advantage of this and every opportunity to
transform our moral outrage into proactive strategies
for change. Let us fulfil our obligations to ourselves
and to the future: our children - our boys and girls -
who have the right to enjoy peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Colombia, on whom I now call.

