Ms. Viotti: I thank the Russian Federation for
organizing this meeting on peace and security in Africa.
Collaboration among the United Nations, the
African Union and its member States, Africa's regional
economic communities and other regional mechanisms
has never been greater. Our partnership is underpinned
by shared values, enshrined both in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African
Union, as well as by the principles of complementarity,
respect and African ownership.

In 2016, the African Union Peace and Security
Council identified 20 challenges to peace and security.
But what stands out today are not the challenges that
the continent faces. Rather, it is the determination of
African Heads of State and Government to address
them in a holistic manner. In 2013, they pledged,

"not to bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next
generation of Africans and to undertake to end all
wars in Africa by 2020".

In July in Niamey, the African Union Assembly
adopted "Silencing the Guns: creating conducive
conditions for Africa's development" as the theme for
2020. That speaks to an increasingly strong partnership
among African States members as the cornerstone
for advancing peace and security, underpinned by
inclusive sustainable development on the continent. The
African Union and its States members have achieved
important milestones in their pursuit for a higher level
of effectiveness, self-reliance and cooperation.

The African Union Peace Fund has so far
secured $124 million - the highest level of assessed
contributions since its establishment in 1993. And the
African Union Mediation Support Unit and the FemWise
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation are now operational, boosting capacity to
defuse crises and making such efforts more inclusive.

The United Nations and the African Union have
also strengthened their partnership with the signing of
two joint frameworks by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union, namely, on peace and
security and on sustainable development. Partnership
has been evident at the country level in peace processes
and the lives of people. Close coordination among
the Southern African Development Community, the
African Union, the United Nations and other partners
supported dialogue and reconciliation in Madagascar
and thereby contributed to the holding of peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections in 2018.
In the Central African Republic, the African Union
led a mediation process, with support from the United
Nations and involving the Economic Community of
Central African States and neighbouring countries.
That process culminated in African Union-led peace
talks in Khartoum and resulted in the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic of 6 February. The United Nations is
now actively supporting its implementation, including
through the Peacebuilding Fund, with a focus on top
priorities of the Government and partnering with
civil society.

In Guinea-Bissau, the group of five comprised of
the United Nations, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
European Union continues to assist efforts to restore
stability and sustain peace.

In the Sudan, the signing of the constitutional
declaration last month, following efforts led by Ethiopia
and the African Union with support from the United
Nations, has allowed for the establishment ofa civilian-
led transitional Government.

Partnering with African civil society is also
bearing fruit, and the progress achieved in nations
such as Liberia and, more recently, Guinea-Bissau and
the Sudan shows us the critical contributions made by
women to peace and stability.

Beyond geography, the thematic areas of partnership
are extensive and diverse. Cooperation among the
United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations is also growing in the area of electoral
processes. Ahead oflegislative and presidential elections
in West Africa over the last couple of years, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel organized
joint or coordinated visits with various African partners
to Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Senegal and other countries to
promote peaceful and inclusive processes.

The United Nations is helping to implement the
recommendations of a study conducted by ECOWAS
and the Economic Commission for Africa to address
challenges related to pastoralism and security in
West Africa, with support from the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund.

The United Nations and the African Union cooperate
closely to ensure that the voices of women and youth are
integrated within peace processes. Next year will mark

the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. It
coincides with the 2020 goal on gender mainstreaming
in peace and security of the African Peace and Security
Architecture - an opportune moment for reinvigorating
resolve. Both the African Union and the United Nations
have in place youth strategies and envoys. They are
valuable not only as advocates, but also as agents for
change in our organizations.

In Central Africa, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa is working closely with
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to develop and strengthen its capacities,
including with regard to conflict prevention, mediation,
early warning, collaboration with civil society and
gender mainstreaming. And the alignment between the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
the African Union strategy in the region has enhanced
collaboration in response to the multifaceted challenges
facing the region, including through the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel, co-chaired by the
African Union and the United Nations.

Partnerships among subregional organizations are
also intensifying. The United Nations Regional Offices
for Central Africa and West Africa are supporting the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed between ECCAS and ECOWAS last year.

Notwithstanding the progress achieved, the
international community needs to support African
efforts more effectively. The United Nations continues
to work closely with the mediation teams of the African
Union, the subregional organizations, Member States
and civil society groups. Institutional capacity needs
to be further strengthened to be able to undertake
preventive diplomacy.

Central to the United Nations support for peace
and security on the African continent are our peace
operations. More than 80,000 peacekeepers currently
serve in seven peacekeeping operations in Africa.
In fact, in terms of personnel and budget, all of our
largest missions are deployed on the African continent.
Contributions from African nations themselves have
been indispensable to our peacekeeping operations, not
only in Africa but also beyond.

Africa is now the largest troop-contributing
region to United Nations missions, and there is direct
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations on peacekeeping operations themselves.
In Somalia, Mali and the Sahel, the United Nations
supports African Union-led operations, in addition to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.

However, we can and have to do better. The
Secretary-General has stressed the need to ensure the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for African Union-led peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council and under the
Council's authority. Political will and resources are also
required in peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts,
including through support for infrastructure for peace
at the local and national levels and policy dialogue with
the Peacebuilding Commission.

It is also important that the international community
actively support the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative ofthe African Union. The Council has already
signalled its strong backing in resolution 2457 (2019).
The Secretariat, as well as United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, is scaling up support for
realizing the objectives of the African Union initiative.

Building partnerships and harnessing their
power requires long-term vision and commitment.
Collaboration between the African Union Commission
and the Secretariat will remain strong. The Secretary-
General looks forward to even greater partnership and
collaboration, enabling the African Union to achieve its
2063 vision of equitable, people-centred transformation
and lasting peace and security.

