The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.

Let me at the outset thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank
Mr. Ivan Mrkie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

There were several positive developments during
the reporting period. Technical discussions on the
implementation of agreements reached so far in the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU)
resulted in Serbia's endorsement of the technical
protocol on the implementation of the agreement on
thejoint management of crossings. Serbia also engaged
with the EU to help clarify the ambiguity concerning
Kosovo's participation in regional forums. We welcome
these developments and hope that the sides will soon
resume substantive engagement within the framework
of the EU-facilitated dialogue to resolve the contentious
issues.

Despite the relative calm that prevailed during the
reporting period, there has not been substantial change
in the situation with regard to minority communities.
Recurring security incidents affecting them need to be
urgently addressed in order to promote intercommunity
harmony and facilitate their return. UNMIK, together
with the other international presences, should continue
to encourage the Kosovo authorities to address the
problems adversely affecting the minority communities
and their cultural and religious sites. In that connection,
UNMIK's continued support of UNESCO remains
critical.

The issue of missing persons is an important
humanitarian issue. We hope that with UNMIK's
direct support and encouragement to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, it will be possible to make
further progress on that issue.

We note UNMIK's continued monitoring of the
ongoing Medicus human organ trafficking trial before
the District Court of Pristina. The trial should take place
in a free, fair and transparent manner. The international
presences in Kosovo led by UNMIK should render full
assistance to the process.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the fact that UNMIK has continued
to implement its mandate in an impartial and status-
neutral manner and has facilitated cooperation between
Pristina and Belgrade, the communities in Kosovo, the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
commend and support Special Representative Zarif and
UNMIK for their contribution towards improving the
situation in northern Kosovo, and for the services that
the Mission is rendering in areas that better the daily
lives of all Kosovars. The Mission should continue to
implement its mandate in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) and other relevant decisions. Other
agencies in Kosovo - the OSCE, KFOR, EULEX and
so on - should continue to cooperate and coordinate
with UNMIK in accordance with their respective
mandates.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.
