Mr. Lovald (Norway): Like others, I too would
like to welcome the presence of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tom Koenigs and to thank
him for his briefing. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his extensive report on
Afghanistan (S/2006/ 145).

There have been several achievements in
Afghanistan during the Bonn process, in particular in
building a democratic framework. However, as the
Secretary-General points out, Afghanistan still faces
tremendous challenges.

At the London Conference, we renewed our joint
commitments to the Afghan people. Norway fully
endorsed the Afghanistan Compact and the interim
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. Those
documents provide the necessary framework for further
development to take place in Afghanistan and for our
continued long-term support. Norway was pleased to
pledge financial support to Afghanistan for the coming
five-year period.

A comprehensive approach to peacebuilding is
necessary in Afghanistan, and Norway therefore fully
supports the three pillars of the Afghanistan Compact.
The plans are ambitious. The focus now must be on
implementing the Development Strategy and on
reaching the benchmarks for the Afghanistan Compact.
For the Afghan people, it is important to see that peace
brings development.

We have four remarks regarding the main tasks
ahead.

First, Norway remains concerned about the
deteriorating security situation. The increase in violent
attacks - including suicide bombings - is worrying.
However, that does not change our commitment to
Afghanistan and to the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). We are reinforcing our
presence in the north, including in the provincial
reconstruction team in Meymana. Norway believes that
strengthening security-sector reform is vital for
building sustainable peace. The rule of law must be
provided through a strengthened police and judicial
system.

Secondly, the illegal drug production and trade
represent a major concern. Any failure to tackle that
problem will undermine efforts to bring about
sustainable peace and development. A comprehensive
approach to the problem is necessary.

Thirdly, progress on administrative reform must
continue, and the Afghan authorities must strengthen
their capacity to provide services to the Afghan people.
It is important that the authority of the central
Government is projected throughout Afghanistan.

Fourthly, further efforts are needed to ensure that
human rights obligations are respected. In particular,
Norway would like to draw attention to the importance
of respect for women's rights. Norway places great
emphasis on resolution 1325 (2000), on women, peace
and security, and recently launched a national action
plan to strengthen its implementation. In Afghanistan,
and also in other conflict-affected countries,
coordinated and sustained efforts are needed to
implement that particular resolution.

Norway welcomes the interim National Action
Plan for Women in Afghanistan, which builds on the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and reflects resolution
1325 (2000). Norway will provide support for the
implementation of that Plan, inter alia by providing
financial assistance through the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played an important role
through the Bonn process and by assisting the Afghan
Government in establishing the new targets of the
interim Afghanistan National Development Strategy
and the benchmarks of the Afghanistan Compact.
Norway welcomes the recommendations of the
Secretary-General with regard to the future mandate of
UNAMA. We support a continued and strengthened
role for UNAMA in monitoring and coordinating
international assistance. That includes a strengthened
role for UNAMA in the consultation process between
the donors and the Afghan authorities. We look
forward to seeing UNAMA co-chairing the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board. We would also
like to underline the importance of the Board's being
representative. The selection of its members must be
based on a transparent and open process.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Norway's
continued strong support for UNAMA in Afghanistan.

