Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Columbia for her excellent contribution to today's
discussion, which is a very important one for my
country and the other members of the Council. I would
also like to express my gratitude for the fifth annual
report on the Peacebuilding Commission (S/20l2/70),
as well as to commend the Secretary-General on his
personal involvement in strengthening the United
Nations role in peacekeeping. I also wish to thank as
Ambassadors Eugene-Richard Gasana and Abulkalam
Abdul Momem, along with World Bank Vice-President
Joachim von Amsberg, for their edifying presentations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement that
will delivered later in the meeting by the representative
of Tunisia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Post-conflict management is so important that
its outcome, whether for good or ill, can either save a
country or condemn it to instability, as examples drawn
from recent experience amply prove. In particular,
they show us that the bases of peacebuilding begin
to take shape as soon as peace is established and that
they play a determining role in the country's process
of transition and transformation. Before they become
the responsibility of the international community,
those transitions and changes are first and foremost
the responsibility of the authorities of the affected
countries. Ownership on the part of the stakeholders
concerned in post-conflict countries is a sine qua non
condition for any successful peacebuilding initiative.
Such national ownership requires prioritizing actions
to ensure that the stabilization process goes forward,
without backsliding. In our view, those priorities are
security, the rule of law, national reconciliation and
socio-economic development.

Clearly, no country emerging from conflict can
build peace without timely, substantive and sustained
help from the international community, including its
neighbouring States and the regional and subregional
organizations it belongs to. The United Nations system
is called on to play a central and catalytic role in
peacebuilding, given the confidence it inspires, the
credibility it brings and the collective knowledge it
has gathered over decades. Within the United Nations
architecture, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has
demonstrated its usefulness, its relevance and its ability
to turn the tide in the initial stages of peacebuilding.

The establishment of the Commission, six years
ago, decisively marked the beginning of a new United
Nations approach to international peace and security
and development. By virtue of its multifaceted
nature, that new organ filled an institutional vacuum,
addressing issues of security, development and aid in
an integrated way. Because of the wide representation
of its membership, the Commission is a credible entity
for coordination and the sharing of best practices in
helping countries emerging from conflict.

I would like to focus today on two crucial issues
that seem to me to demand special attention, namely,
funding and coordination. The PBC cannot fully reach
its potential and make a difference on the ground if it
lacks the funding necessary for its work, as all speakers
today have stressed. The funding it can count on has
to date fallen short of the urgent needs of the countries
on its agenda. That affects not only its effectiveness
but also its visibility as a peacebuilding actor, as
members of the Council saw in West Africa last May.
We agree with the Working Group on Lessons Learned
that the Commission would benefit from exploring
new, innovative and dependable means of funding its
projects while strengthening its relationships with other
elements of the United Nations system, international
financial institutions and regional development banks,
such as the African Development Bank and the Islamic
Development Bank.

The important work done by the Working Group
on Lessons Learned in mapping possible areas of
cooperation among the various country configurations
should be encouraged. It must be said that the
Commission's growing appeal for countries emerging
from conflict is often not accompanied by awareness
of or gratitude for its work. Communication lines must
therefore absolutely be established to give greater
visibility to the PBC, to its role in countries benefiting
from its assistance and to the contributions it can make
elsewhere, as underlined by the Secretary-General in
his opening statement.

The Organization enjoys significant human,
technical and financial resources that would benefit
from being focused along the lines of the PBC. It is
therefore crucial to increase coherence. The contribution
of regional actors and subregional organizations is
of great importance to achieving peace, stability and
development for countries emerging from conflict. We
believe that triangular cooperation is an approach that
the Commission should further explore, especially when
it comes to South-South cooperation. That would make
it possible to adapt methods to local circumstances and
to optimize the use of available resources.

With the establishment ofthe Guinea configuration,
in 2011, the number of PBC country configurations
rose to six. We would like to take this opportunity
to commend the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and his predecessor for the practical and
important work they have done.

Given the geographic proximity of many countries
emerging from conflict and the similar socio-economic
and security challenges they face, we believe that the
time to establish regional configurations has come.
Such areas of focus, for example along the Mano River,
which runs through Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone,
or in the Sahel or the Great Lakes region, would make for
better coordination of action and increased coherence
in peacebuilding operations at the subregional level.
In the light of recent developments in the Sahel, we
believe the PBC should come to the aid ofthe countries
of the Sahel-Sahara Strip that are either in conflict or
emerging from institutional crises.

Strengthening the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission within the United Nations architecture
is of particular importance to sustain the successes
achieved in many countries on the African continent.
The relationship between the Commission and the
Security Council should be further strengthened. In that
context, we commend the regular invitations extended
by the Council to the Chairs of the configurations to
share their perspectives and assessments ofthe countries
on the Commission's agenda. At the same time, we
appreciate and support strengthened cooperation
between the Commission and the Economic and Social
Council and between the Commission and international
and continental financial institutions.

