Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's meeting. We also wish to thank Mr. Vieira de
Mello, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
for his briefing on humanitarian activities relevant to the
Security Council. We appreciate the positive efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, under
Mr. Vieira de Mello's leadership, to alleviate humanitarian
crises throughout the world.

We note that, although there is no shortage of
international conventions on humanitarian questions and
that tremendous efforts have been made by all concerned,
the humanitarian situation remains grim and problems
abound. We are deeply concerned by the frequent threats to
the safety of humanitarian workers and appeal to all
concerned effectively to guarantee their security and
freedom of movement so as to ensure the smooth conduct
of humanitarian activities.

At the same time, we have always held that the
solution of humanitarian problems must include palliative
measures and the elimination of the root causes of the
problems. When the international community provides
humanitarian assistance to a region, it must delve deeper
into the situation, seeking the root causes of local conflicts
and humanitarian crises. We must strive to eliminate these
causes by encouraging national reconciliation, enhancing
mutual confidence, promoting economic development and
maintaining national stability.

Sanctions have a direct impact on the humanitarian
situation in the countries concerned. The Security Council
has imposed sanctions against Iraq for more than eight
years now, visiting great suffering on the Iraqi people and
deeply hurting the neighbouring countries. China is
opposed in principle to the use of sanctions as a means of
settling international disputes. When they do become
necessary, we favour the setting of schedules and the
limitation of the sanctions' scope so as to avoid the
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
countries concerned. We believe that the Security Council
should seriously study the humanitarian impact of
sanctions, fully taking into account the potential serious
consequences of any such actions in the future.

As a result of prolonged warfare and natural
disasters, many African countries face a very grim
humanitarian situation, with large numbers of refugees
going without food and clothing, being displaced and
lacking medical care. However, as a result of internal and
external factors, their plight has not fundamentally
improved. As the international community has paid great
attention to the humanitarian situation in the former
Yugoslavia and has provided much assistance there, it is
all the more unconscionable for us to forget the hundreds
of thousands of our African brothers and sisters who also
require the international community's special care. We
hope that no double standards will be applied in the
humanitarian sphere.

We believe that the international community should
pay appropriate attention to humanitarian affairs.
However, in international relations, there is a tendency to
politicize humanitarian questions and to use them as a
pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of sovereign
countries. This can only arouse great concern. Without
regard to the specific causes of humanitarian crises,
frequent recourse to the threat or use of force will not
help to solve the problems, but will serve merely to
further complicate efforts to solve them. We hope that the
countries and organizations concerned in this respect will
strictly adhere to the provisions of international law and
the United Nations Charter and scrupulously respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of all countries.

The Chinese Government has always attached great
importance to the work being done in the humanitarian

 

field and has made its own positive efforts through bilateral
and multilateral channels. We are ready, along with other
members of the international community, to continue to
make our own efforts to alleviate the international
humanitarian situation. China supports the work of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
other United Nations bodies and will continue to play a
leading role in this area.

