Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank the Italian presidency and your delegation,
Mr. President, as well as the delegation of France for
taking the initiative to convene this morning's briefing.
We also appreciate the briefings by Mr. Filippo Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and
of Mr. William Lacy Swing, Director General of the
International Organization for Migration.

Bolivia endorses and aligns itselfwith the statement
by Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Alpha
Conde, who condemned the inhumane treatment and
enslavement of migrants in Libya, describing them
as a despicable trade and a relic from a bygone era.
We agree with his assertion that modern practices of
slavery must come to an end and that all available tools
must be used to that end. We also support the appeal of
the African Union to carry out an urgent investigation
into those repellent acts and inhuman practices in order
to identify those responsible and bring them to justice.

Bolivia expresses its greatest concern for the
inadmissible and harrowing plight of migrants in
Libya who have been victims of serious human rights
violations. This is the fourth time this month that
the Security Council has dealt with this issue: we
addressed it during the debate on trafficking ofpersons
(see S/PV.8111), we also raised it at the briefings on
challenges in the Mediterranean and on the situation in
Libya. This demonstrates the gravity of the situation,
which demands the immediate attention of the
international community.

According to statistics from the International
Labour Organization, in collaboration with the
International Organization for Migration, in 2016 more
than 40 million people were subjected to some form
of modern slavery. That means that in the world today
there are five victims of slavery for every 1,000 people,
and one out of every four of them is a child. Those are
horrifying figures that the Organization must not, and
cannot, ignore.

The Security Council should do everything it can
to ensure that the investigation mechanisms and the
initiatives proposed by the African Union are carried
out. We highlight the fact that investigations are being
carried out by the Government of National Accord
in Libya through a high-level committee in order to
identify those responsible for such inhuman acts. In
addition, the Government of National Accord must
cooperate with the investigations being undertaken
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, as such events may constitute crimes
against humanity. Should that be the case, these crimes
must be brought to trial before the Court.

We urge all States to address the situation
of migrants in Libya in a humane way, through
international, regional or bilateral cooperation and
dialogue. Work must be done to strengthen effective
measures to combat and eliminate human trafficking
and smuggling, support victims and survivors and help
them reintegrate, as well as to bring perpetrators to
justice and increase opportunities for migration.

In the same way, we reiterate the importance of
implementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and we call on States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. I recall the words of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime: human trafficking is a parasitic crime that feeds
on vulnerability, thrives in times of uncertainty and
profits from inaction".

In conclusion, it is important to recall that the
crisis in Libya and its fallout in the broader region
of the Sahel are the direct and practical result of the
recourse to regime-change policies, to interventionism
and to meddling in the internal affairs of other
States - elements that have done nothing but leave
behind millions ofvictims, displaced persons, refugees
and dead.

