The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms the
statement of its President of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/1999/28) and its resolution 1209 (1998)
of 19 November 1998 and the statement of its
President of 31 August 2001 (S/PRST/2001/21),
takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled 'Small arms'
(S/2002/1053) of 20 September 2002, and
welcomes all initiatives taken by Member States
following the adoption of the Programme of
Action by the July 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All its Aspects. The Council
expresses grave concern at the harmful impact of
small arms and light weapons on civilians in
situations of armed conflict, particularly on
vulnerable groups such as women and children,
and recalls in this regard its resolutions 1296
(2000) of 19 April 2000, 1314 (2000) of 11
August 2000 and 1379 (2001) of 20 November
2001, and the statement of its President of 7 May
2002 (S/PRST/2002/12).

"The Security Council encourages all
Member States to continue to take all measures to
fully implement at the national, regional and
international levels the recommendations
contained in the Programme of Action. The
Council recognizes its responsibility to examine
ways and means in which it can further contribute
to dealing with the question of licit trade in small
arms and light weapons in situations under its
consideration.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
inherent right of individual or collective self-
defence in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations and, subject to the
Charter, the right of each State to import, produce
and retain small arms and light weapons for its
self-defence and security needs. Bearing in mind
the considerable volume of licit trade in small
arms and light weapons, the Council encourages
States to adopt legislative and other measures to
ensure effective control over the export, import,
transit, stocking and storage of small arms and
light weapons. The Council urges Member States
to consistently and responsibly use end-user
certificates in their transfers of small arms and
light weapons and calls on States to establish an
effective national end-user certificate system and
to study the feasibility as appropriate of
developing an end-user certificate system at the
regional and global levels, as well as an
information exchange and verification
mechanism.

"Arms-exporting countries are encouraged
to exercise the highest degree of responsibility in
small arms and light weapons transactions. All
States have the responsibility of preventing the
illegal diversion and re-export of small arms and
light weapons. The Security Council welcomes
the establishment of the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts with a mandate to examine
the feasibility of developing an international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace
in a timely and reliable manner illicit small arms
and light weapons. The Security Council
encourages international cooperation in the
consideration of the origin and transfers of small
arms and light weapons.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of further steps to enhance
international cooperation in preventing,
combating and eradicating illicit brokering in
small arms and light weapons, and calls upon
States that have not already done so to establish,
where applicable, a national register of arms
brokers and, in the case of supply of arms to
embargoed destinations, of intermediary firms,
including transport agents. The Council urges

S/PV.4()3')

 

States to impose appropriate penalties for

all

illicit brokering activities, as well as arms
as

transfers that violate Security Council embargoes,
and to take appropriate enforcement action.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
cooperation and sharing of information among
the Member States, among the various sanctions
Committees, and among the panels of experts and
the monitoring mechanism on arms traffickers
who have violated arms embargoes established by
the Council. The Security Council welcomes the
identification, in cooperation with the States
concerned, of those arms traffickers who have
violated the arms embargoes. The Security
Council calls upon Member States to impose
appropriate penalties on those arms traffickers
who have violated its arms embargoes. In this
connection, the Council calls on Member States
to provide technical and financial support to
Interpol's International Weapons and Explosives
Tracking System (IWETS).

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations
Coordinating Action on Small Arms (CASA)
mechanism can play in assisting Member States
with the implementation of the Programme of
Action. In this regard, the Council notes the
proposal of the Secretariat to create a Small Arms
Advisory Service.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of arms embargoes as targeted
measures and their contribution to an overall
strategy for preventive diplomacy, particularly
with respect to illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. In this regard, the Council underlines
the importance of pursuing more vigorously and
expeditiously the application of arms embargoes
in countries or regions threatened by, engaged in
or emerging from armed conflict and to promote
their effective implementation. The Council shall
also consider taking measures to restrict the
supply of ammunition to such regions.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
primary responsibility for the implementation of
sanctions measures rests with States. At the same
time, the Council underlines the importance of
establishing on a case-by-case basis specific
monitoring mechanisms or similar arrangements

appropriate to oversee the strict

implementation of arms embargoes decided upon
by the Council. The Council may wish to study
ways to strengthen such mechanisms with a view
towards better coordinating their work. The
Security Council should consider innovative
strategies to address the close interrelationship
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and, among others, drug trafficking,
terrorism, organized crime and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources. In this
regard the Council calls on Member States to
make available all relevant information
concerning such activities.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the effective implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Council in its relevant
resolutions, and encourages Member States to
provide the sanctions Committees with available
information on alleged violations of arms
embargoes. The Security Council also calls on
Member States to give due consideration to the
recommendations of the report of the Monitoring
Group established pursuant to resolution 1390
(2002) (S/2002/1050 and Corr.l); the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism on Angola Sanctions
(S/2000/1225 and Corr.l and 2); the report of the
Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone Diamonds and
Arms (S/2000/1195); and the reports of the Panel
of Experts on Liberia (S/2001/1015 and 5/2002/470).

"The Council also stresses the need to
engage the relevant international organizations,
non-governmental organizations, business and
financial institutions and other actors at the
international, regional and local levels to
contribute to the implementation of arms
embargoes.

"Arms embargoes help to reduce arms flows
to the targeted regions and groups, but do not
address weapons already existing in conflict
areas. The Security Council therefore reiterates
the importance of carrying out disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes as
comprehensively and effectively as possible in
post-conflict situations under its consideration.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report, no later than

 

S/PV.4639
December 2003, on the implementation of all the The Security Council has thus concluded the
recommendations contained in his report." present stage of its consideration of the item on its

. . . a enda.
This statement Wlll be issued as a document of the 3

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/30. The meeting rose at 4.30 pm.
