Mr. Feltman: I wish to thank the Security Council
for the opportunity to brief it on the third report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIL) (Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2016/830).

As with previous ones, the report was prepared
with the input of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, and in close collaboration with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and other relevant
United Nations actors and international organizations.

The report stresses that ISIL and its affiliates have
continued to experience significant military setbacks,
which has undermined ISIL's ability to hold territory,
generate assets and maintain "governmental" structures.
ISIL is attempting to adapt to this new reality and has
intensified its efforts at extortion so as to compensate
for the loss ofrevenue from oil. In Iraq and Syria, ISIL's
previous success in holding territory and operating as a
quasi-State has been significantly challenged owing to
the efforts of several Member States.

However, the report notes that the threat posed by
ISIL continues to be significant and to diversify. ISIL
and associated entities continue to compete strategically
but also to cooperate tactically, occasionally providing
one another with operational support. The military
pressure currently being exerted on ISIL in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic has resulted in an increase
in the number of foreign terrorist fighter returnees,
in particular to Europe and the Maghreb, presenting
a growing challenge to global security. ISIL has also
increased the number of attacks outside conflict zones
and employs deadlier tactics.

Increasingly complex and nearly simultaneous
attacks in different countries, committed through
large-scale operations and individual or small terrorist
cells either directed or inspired by ISIL, have a
significant impact and present particular problems
to Member States in terms of a security response.
ISIL continues to assert itself in cyberspace, using
closed forums, encrypted messaging systems, and
communications through the so-called dark net to
recruit and distribute its propaganda.

To highlight the impact ofISIL in various regions of
the globe, the report focuses on South-East Asia, Yemen
and East Africa. In South-East Asia, ISIL's propaganda
has re-energized pre-existing terrorist networks and
inspired individuals to travel to conflict zones as foreign
terrorist fighters. The region hosts foreign terrorist
fighters actively directing attacks and is affected by
ISIL propaganda and fund-raising efforts, as well as the
risks presented by foreign terrorist fighter returnees. In
Yemen, even though ISIL has intensified its recruitment
efforts and attacks, especially in the Aden area, ISIL
has not yet managed to gain significant local support
and is generally rejected by the population. The ISIL
leadership nonetheless maintains a close interest in the
country. Two new ISIL cells have emerged in Somalia.
One of those groups, operating in the Puntland region,
is being supported by ISIL in Yemen. The second is
operating in southern Somalia. Both groups face strong
resistance from Al-Shabaab.

With regard to Member States' efforts to address
the threat of ISIL, the report highlights some of the
actions taken in South-East Asia. For example, it
stresses that countries of the region have introduced and
continue to update national counter-terrorism strategies
and legislation; established national counter-terrorism
coordinating bodies; strengthened international
cooperation, although more work needs to be done in that
area; developed institutional and legislative counter-
terrorism financing tools; recognized the importance
of putting in place effective border controls; and given
increased attention to developing comprehensive
approaches to countering and preventing recruitment
and violent extremism.

A growing number of Member States have
addressed the potential threat posed by returnees
through a broad range of criminal justice, administrative
and rehabilitation and reintegration measures, as the
Council called for in resolution 2178 (2014). They have
also taken a preventive approach, including by charging
individuals with inchoate and preparatory offences.
However, Member States continue to face numerous
challenges in that context, such as the difficulty of
generating and converting intelligence information
into admissible evidence. The overall progress made
by Member States in developing and implementing
rehabilitation-and-reintegration strategies remains
more limited among Member States of some ofthe most
affected regions.

During the reporting period, a number of United
Nations entities have taken further steps to support
Member States' efforts to counter the threat of ISIL.
Examples include the fact that the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force has
further developed the capacity-building implementation
plan mandated by the Security Council for countering
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The plan was
presented to Member States almost 10 months ago, but
has only been 20 per cent funded to date.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is
developing a programme for States in South and South-
East Asia on strengthening legal and institutional
frameworks in order to target the financial flows
and economic resources of ISIL, Al-Qaida and their
associates. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has submitted a
report on best practices relating to how protecting
and promoting human rights helps prevent violent
extremism. CTED has been assisting the police
chiefs of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
in establishing a regional joint pperations centre in
Kuala Lumpur. The United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute is enhancing its
cooperation with Jordan, Kenya, Mali, Morocco, the
Philippines, Thailand and Indonesia on the design
and implementation of rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes for violent extremist offenders and
foreign terrorist fighters. In the field, the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya continues to prepare
assessment reports on ISIL that it shares with Member
States.

As the military operations against ISIL in Iraq,
the Syrian Arab Republic and Libya continue to
make progress, we anticipate an increase in the
number of returnees and attacks outside conflict
zones. The increasingly transnational threat that ISIL
represents may therefore become a growing challenge
to international peace and security. In that context,
the Secretary-General's call for comprehensive and
purposeful international cooperation to effectively
prevent violent extremism and counter-terrorism
becomes all the more important.

Despite the international community's efforts,
international cooperation on counter-terrorism is
still not up to the level of the danger we are facing.
Furthermore, if we aim to anticipate new terrorist
threats and dynamically address ISIL's evolving
nature, we must complement military, security and
law enforcement measures with preventive action that
addresses the drivers of violent extremism conducive to
terrorism, as demonstrated by the focus provided by the
Security Council.

Nevertheless, to effectively address the growing
transnational threat of terrorism and violent extremism,
I would like to underscore the importance of political
will. I would also like to encourage the Council to
consider the importance of further mobilizing the
financial and technical resources needed to meet the
growing demands of programmes to counter terrorism
and prevent violent extremism. Such efforts would be
an enormous help to the United Nations in supporting
Member States in implementing the relevant Security
Council and the General Assembly resolutions.
