The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 994 (1995), document S/1995/467.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 9 June 1995 (S/ 1995/467)
submitted pursuant to its resolution 994 (1995) of 17
May 1995. It is concerned at the situation described
therein, and at the continuing failure of the parties to
cooperate satisfactorily with UNCRO and to comply
fully with the demands of the Council. It condemns in
particular the continuation of offensive actions and the
intimidation of UNCRO personnel in violation of its
resolution 994 (1995).
"The Security Council looks to the parties to
cooperate fully and unconditionally with UNCRO in
the performance of its mandate and to ensure the
safety, security and freedom of movement of its
personnel. The Council demands that they fulfil their
commitment under the cease-fire agreement of
29 March 1994, in particular in respect of the
withdrawal of all forces and heavy weapons from
the zones of separation, and fully implement the 2
December 1994 agreement on economic confidence-
building measures. It calls upon the parties, and in
particular the Government of Croatia, to cease all
military action in and around Sector South. It also
calls upon all parties to respect fully the
international border between the Republic of Croatia
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
stop any action which extends the conflict across
this border, since this is in violation of the Council's
resolutions. It reiterates its warning that in the event
of failure to comply with the demand in its
resolution 994 (1995) that the parties refrain from
taking any further military measures or actions that
could lead to the escalation of the situation, it will
consider further steps needed to ensure such
compliance.

"The Security Council requests the Committee
established under resolution 724 (1991) of 15
December 1991 to continue to investigate, in
accordance with its mandate, reports of violations of
resolution 713 (1991) of 25 September 1991.

"The Security Council welcomes the agreement
of the Government of Croatia to a continued
UNCRO presence in the area of Western Slavonia
known as Sector West for the purposes of
implementing its mandate, in particular in respect of
human rights, to which it continues to attach great
importance. It endorses the Secretary-General's view
as to the necessity for reconciliation and
confidence-building in that Sector. It stresses the
importance it attaches to full respect for the human
rights of the Serb population there. It encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his coordination with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights as well as other international organizations
and agencies in this regard.

"The Security Council notes the
Secretary-General's judgement that completion of
the redeployment of United Nations peace-keeping

 

personnel in the Republic of Croatia by 30 June 1995
envisaged in its resolution 982 (1995) of 31 March
1995 is no longer possible. It requests the
Secretary-General to proceed as expeditiously as
possible with this redeployment with the aim of
fulfilling all UNCRO's tasks under its mandate. It
demands that the parties cooperate with UNCRO's
efforts to implement fully its mandate.

"The Security Council notes the fact that both
parties have stated their desire that the peace-keeping
mission should continue, and are seeking UNCRO's
assistance. It welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to monitor closely their cooperation with
UNCRO and their compliance with the cease-fire
agreement of 29 March 1994, and requests him to
keep the Council fully informed. Such cooperation and
compliance are essential for the implementation of
UNCRO's mandate and for progress towards a
negotiated settlement respecting fully the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia and
which guarantees the security and rights of all
communities.

"The Security Council could not countenance
moves by the local Serb authorities in the Republic of
Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to establish a union between them, since this would be
inconsistent with the Council's commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

"The Security Council stresses that there can be
no military solution to the conflict and calls upon
the parties to reaffirm their commitment to a
peaceful resolution of their differences.

"The Security Council notes with distress the
loss of life and casualties which have been suffered
by UNCRO and extends its condolences to the
families of the bereaved.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/PRST/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6 pm.

