Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, on behalf of the delegation of the
State of Qatar, which holds the presidency of the ninth
Summit of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. I am confident that your
extensive experience, knowledge and wisdom will lead
the work of the Security Council to a successful
conclusion.

I should also like to express our deep appreciation
to your predecessor, Mr. Moctar Ouane, Permanent
Representative of the friendly Republic of Mali, for the
excellent manner in which he guided the work of the
Security Council last December.

I should like also sincerely to congratulate the
new members of the Security Council on their election
and to wish them every success. Nor can I fail to thank
the outgoing members of the Council for the
outstanding work they have done.

Let me also express my heartfelt thanks to Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for his efforts as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001).

There is no doubt that terrorist acts pose a grave
challenge to us all. They make it incumbent on us to
act to eradicate that scourge. Like other States, we are
fully convinced of the need to mobilize international
efforts to combat terrorism under the auspices of the
United Nations.

We truly and firmly believe that we cannot win
the war against terrorism through the actions of one
State alone or those of a number of States, or even
those of the Security Council. This can be
accomplished only through our common determination
to work together at the international level. The United
Nations in this regard is, we believe, the only forum
which can face up strongly and effectively to this
challenge facing all States - strong and weak, without
exception - and all humanity. We therefore believe
that we ought to stand shoulder to shoulder in taking
strong, decisive measures with broad foundations to
eradicate this scourge.
We reaffirm the commitment of the Governments
of the Islamic States to join in the efforts of all
Governments, bilaterally and internationally, to
struggle to eliminate terrorism. Such determination has
been expressed at the highest levels, particularly at the
emergency meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
member States of the OIC in Doha on 10 October 2001.
In that meeting it was reaffirmed that all practical
measures would be taken in cooperation with the
international community in accordance with the
commitments springing from all resolutions and
international agreements to which the Islamic States
are party.

All States must refrain from providing any form
of assistance or safe haven to the perpetrators of acts of
terrorism, acts which run counter to the Charter of the
United Nations. They must commit to international
efforts to deal with those international issues that
foment and create terrorism - problems such as
poverty, hunger, disease, despair and lack of future
prospects, as well as regional conflicts, the denial of
fundamental human rights, lack of opportunities for
equal justice and protection under international law,
and the lack of sustainable development and
environmental protection. All these provide fertile
grounds for terrorism.

The definition of terrorism and the drafting of an
international convention to combat it are not academic
or theoretical issues; they are factual, practical issues.
A strict, comprehensive definition of terrorism could
help us in waging the war against it. Proceeding from
such a convention, we could set out clearly those States
and groups against whom the war is targeted, those
who are qualified to lead the struggle against terrorism
and terrorists, and the ways and means to be used in
such a war.

The lack of an international understanding on the
definition of terrorism and terrorists only encourages
more political organizations with extremist ideologies
to use terrorism towards their objectives. Some
terrorist organizations and some Governments have
found that the international community is unable to
define terrorism. That has encouraged them to ignore
all the values of modern civilization and has led them
to cooperate with suspect international crime
organizations.

We believe that any delay in creating an
international understanding on terrorism will open the
way for some to use the issue in a selective and
contradictory manner, which in the end will only
weaken the international campaign against terrorism.
The international community must not err in describing
terrorism and linking it with the legitimacy of the
struggle against the occupation of the land of others
and the legitimacy of resisting such occupation. Islam
stands against aggression and terrorism, as well as
against injustice against others and hurting or
endangering innocent people.

The above-mentioned emergency meeting of the
Islamic Conference stressed the right of the Syrian,
Lebanese and Palestinian Arab peoples to combat
occupation as a legitimate right enshrined in
international laws and norms. The Conference
condemned the terrorism by some States and refuted
the link between terrorism and the right of peoples to
resistance.

We in the OIC stress our commitment to work
with the international community to combat terrorism
according to international laws and conventions, as
well as to human rights. We stress once again our
strong rejection of all forms of international terrorism
that threaten innocent lives and the dignity and security
of people in all places. We condemn all terrorism that
threatens the economic and social development of all
States.

International terrorism is a very complicated,
multifaceted issue, and it must be defeated through a
comprehensive, integrated approach. Member States of
the OIC have reaffirmed this effort through their
participation in the current international campaign to
combat terrorism.

