Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian):
The problems of Africa are a constant focus of attention
in the United Nations Security Council, and this reflects
the serious concern of the international community over
the situation in the African continent.
We can hardly count on long-term harmonious
development of the world if African States, which make
up almost one third of the international community,
continue to find themselves in a political and socio-
economic "earthquake zone".

Today's Security Council meeting is a reaffirmation
of the fact that we all understand the pressing need to
have a coordinated strategy for maintaining peace and
stability on the African continent and for settling and
preventing armed conflicts there as they arise.

There can be no doubt that a key role in this matter
belongs to Africans themselves. We note with satisfaction
the activation of the peacekeeping efforts of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of such
subregional organizations as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD). In a
number of cases, this has enabled us to achieve important
positive steps in the settlement of conflicts. These efforts
must be fully strengthened by the authority and capacities
of the United Nations. In this connection we should talk
not about replacing African efforts but about the
complementarity of cooperation, coordination and
assistance on the part of the United Nations in
establishing African peacekeeping machinery.

One of the key components of the strategy for
strengthening peace in Africa must be the promotion by
the United Nations of the establishment of an effective
pan-African system which is geared to both prevent and

 

settle conflicts and also to a comprehensive solution to the
task of post-conflict rehabilitation. For this we need
coordinated action on the part of various bodies and
agencies of the United Nations system. One of the real
opportunities for establishing such work is the application
of Article 65 of the Charter on cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

We support the steps by the Secretary-General to
expand relations between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in preventing and
settling conflicts. These steps help to activate the
implementation in the African region of concrete peace
initiatives including, recently, those pertaining to conflicts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and between
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

A significant potential is available to the United
Nations in the area of mobilizing international donor
support for African peacekeeping. An example of this is the
establishment of a trust fund for enhancing preparedness for
conflict-prevention activities in Africa.

An important area in cooperation between the United
Nations and the OAU in developing peacemaking potential
is, we feel, the programme to exchange personnel and
information and to train staff.

We propose that we should together think about how
we can strengthen the role of African regional
organizations - first and foremost the OAU - in
peacemaking. We note the major importance of the fact that
peacemaking activities for such organizations must be based
in full compliance with the United Nations Charter. No
enforcement measures - neither sanctions nor, even more
importantly, military force - should be undertaken by
regional structures without the authorization of the Security
Council. In turn, the Security Council could rely more on
the joint views of Africans themselves in seeking ways to
solve various problems on the continent.

The holding of open meetings of the Security Council
on Africa, such as today's, will help to reaffirm precisely
such an approach. We are open to other forms of
cooperation of the Council with interested States and
organizations in order to promote finding an adequate
reaction on the part of the Council to specific conflicts. The
existing rules of procedure give us enough opportunities for
this.

Russia approaches problems of cooperation in Africa
and with Africa from a position of open-mindedness, equity
and mutually advantageous partnership without being
didactic, without ideological stereotypes and without
national narrow-mindedness. From this standpoint we are
prepared to take part in international promotion of the
establishment of the peacekeeping potential of Africa,
with the understanding, of course, that outside assistance
in this area should be in addition to, and should not
replace, steps taken by African States themselves.

