Ms. Amos: The Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/376) provides a compelling reminder of the
situation that confronts civilians affected by conflict
and violence, and of the pressing need to strengthen
efforts to protect them. Since the submission of the
report, a number of the situations to which it refers have
deteriorated.

In Syria, in recent weeks we have seen an
alarming intensification in the violence. The ongoing
use of artillery and tanks by Syrian security forces
in populated areas is of the utmost concern, as are
reports of summary executions of civilians, torture
and other forms of ill-treatment by Syrian security
forces and militia, including against children. Schools
have been raided, used as military bases and detention
centres. Hospitals and health facilities have been
targeted. Anti-Government groups are also reportedly
responsible for Violations, including torture, summary
executions and abductions.

Residents in the most affected areas are often
unable to access water, food or medical care. It is
imperative that civilians who wish to leave areas of
fighting be allowed to do so safely. All relevant parties
need to allow safe, timely and unimpeded access by
humanitarian organizations to all areas affected by
Violence to enable the provision of assistance to people
in need.

The plight of civilians in other situations also
warrants our continued attention. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, intensified military operations
in North Kivu between the Congolese armed forces
and the March 23 Movement (M-23) have displaced
over 220,000 people since early April. Meanwhile, the
redeployment of some Congolese forces to fight the
M-23 has left a security vacuum elsewhere that is being
exploited by the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du
Rwanda and other armed groups in an effort to take
control of mines and towns. The result is that tens of
thousands of civilians have been displaced.

Continued fighting between the Sudanese Armed
Forces (or SAF) and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement-North (or SPLM-N), including aerial
bombardment of civilian areas by the SAF, has resulted
in a sharp increase in the number of refugees fleeing
to South Sudan. Those remaining in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan urgently need assistance, yet the
Sudanese Government continues to refuse humanitarian
access to areas under SPLM-N control. We are in
ongoing discussions on this.

In Yemen, a Government offensive to regain
control of cities in the Abyan governorate has resulted
in civilian deaths and injuries. Road closures and the
presence of mines and unexploded ordnance have made
it difficult for civilians to obtain treatment and to leave
areas of fighting.

Fighting in northern Mali has forced 174,000
people to flee the country. An additional 170,000 are
internally displaced. Insecurity in the north has severely
restricted humanitarian access and forced a number
of humanitarian organizations to cease operations.
This is troubling given reports of arbitrary detentions,
extrajudicial executions, sexual violence, including
rape, and other violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law by the parties to the conflict.

In Afghanistan, the number of internally displaced
people has continued to grow, with more than 87,000
Afghans displaced in the first four months of this year.
As of April, there were an estimated 408,000 internally
displaced persons in the country. On a more positive
note, there was a 21 per cent reduction in overall casualty
figures in Afghanistan during the first four months of
2012, compared to the same period last year. However,
the deaths on 6 June of 40 civilians and the wounding of
67 others in indiscriminate attacks by anti-Government
elements and an airstrike by pro-Government forces
underline the precarious position in which civilians find
themselves. They also underline the need for all parties
to take the necessary steps to spare civilians from the
effects of hostilities. I welcome NATO's decision this
month to cease aerial attacks on residential areas.

Lastly, I am concerned by renewed violence
this month in the west of Cote d'Ivoire and between
Israel and militant groups in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

The Secretary-General's report provides important
recommendations for addressing the five core challenges
to enhance the protection of civilians. I would like to
focus on four issues identified in the report.

First is the need for a comprehensive and robust
arms trade treaty. The poorly regulated trade in arms
and corresponding widespread availability and misuse
of weapons fuel and facilitate many of the violations
that that we see in armed conflict. Next month's United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty will
provide an opportunity to address the humanitarian
impact of the poorly regulated trade in arms.

Secondly, action is needed to address the use in
populated areas of explosive weapons with wide-area
effect, the humanitarian impact of which is clear in
parts of Syria. More than 21,000 civilians were killed
or injured by explosive weapons in 2011. Some 87 per
cent of these deaths and injuries occurred in populated
areas, including markets, schools, places of worship
and homes.

I urge the Council to be more proactive and
systematic in calling on all parties, in Syria and
elsewhere, to refrain from using explosive weapons
in populated areas. The Council might also consider
more robust actions, such as the imposition of
targeted measures against the leadership of parties
that use explosive weapons in violation of applicable
international law.

The third issue I would stress is the need for
more systematic recording of civilian casualties.
Such recording, combined with regular reporting, can
confirm the causes of harm to civilians and the actions
needed to end such harm, including by the Council. It
also allows parties to conflict to better understand the
impact of their actions, enabling them to undertake
prompt corrective action to ensure their compliance
with the law.

I am encouraged by the commitment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia to establish a civilian
casualty tracking analysis and response cell, as well as
its adoption of the policy on indirect fire.

The final issue is accountability. In most, if not
all, of the situations mentioned, serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law are being committed. The perpetrators of such
acts must be held accountable, either domestically or
internationally. The Security Council and Member
States have a responsibility to ensure that this happens.

The workshop on accountability, convened in
November 2011 jointly by the Permanent Mission
of Portugal and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, discussed ways in which the
Council could more actively support and strengthen
accountability at both the national and the international
levels. I would urge the Council to engage in
further dialogue with a View to taking forward the
recommendations emerging from the workshop.

As the Secretary-General has reminded us,
the solution to many of the problems we see in
contemporary conflicts is strengthened compliance
by parties to conflict with the letter and spirit of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Ensuring such compliance begins, of course, with the
parties to conflict. But the responsibility is not theirs
alone. It is a responsibility that is incumbent upon us
all - the United Nations, its Member States and the
Security Council. We can and must do more to fulfil
that responsibility and ensure that the law has meaning
for those it is intended to protect.

