Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2017/539). Let me also thank Special Representative
Arnault and his team for his important briefing and,
more important, for the work that they carry out on a
daily basis.

I want to take this opportunity to say a few words
about the courage of both sides. Peace is never easy.
It requires a great deal of courage and endurance. In
Colombia we have seen both. We congratulate the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) for reaching another historic milestone in
the peace process, with the successful laying down
of individual arms by the FARC-EP on 27 June. As
the Security Council saw first hand during its visit
to Colombia, the process was not without challenges.
We therefore commend the firm commitment of both
sides and their efforts to overcome challenges in the
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement that
resulted in this historic achievement. I concur with
Ambassador Rosselli in his description ofthe exemplary
achievements reached thus far.

The United Nations Mission in Colombia has played
an important role in support of the peace process. We
believe that a second political mission will support the
parties in building trust and overcoming challenges for
the next stage. For that reason, we strongly support a
second United Nations mission in Colombia. A second
mission must be tailored to the next stage of the peace
process. We would like to underscore the need for a
second mission to have sufficient presence locally and
regionally to be able to effectively and meaningfully
verify the implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Final Agreement. That includes the reintegration
of elements of the FARC-EP as well as personal and
collective security guarantees, as requested by the
parties. I must say that we are concerned about the
killings of human rights defenders, FARC-EP members
and their families, as well as violence against social
leaders - as reported by the Secretary-General.

It is also important that the second mission should
cooperate, support and coordinate with the United
Nations country team with regard to overlapping
mandates. That should maximize synergies and avoid
duplication so that the United Nations can really deliver
as one and adopt a coherent approach to facilitating the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

Peace can be made only by those who are part of
the conflict; however, once they set out along the path
of peace they should not walk it alone. All parts of
the State need to facilitate the implementation of the
Agreement, including moving forward on the amnesty
provisions. The goodwill and generosity of spirit of
partners is essential. A committed and sustained effort
is needed in support of the implementation of the wider
Peace Agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends. In that regard, we were impressed by the
presentation of the annual report of the United Nations
Post-Conflict Multi-Partner Trust Fund for Colombia,
which brings together the Colombian Government, the
United Nations and the international community. We
are very proud to have contributed to that Fund.
I thank the Special Representative for his update
on the situation of children, and in particular on the
implementation of the agreement signed on 15 May
2016 on the separation and reintegration of children
associated with the FARC-EP. The focus must now be
on reintegration and rehabilitation of children separated
from the ranks of the FARC-EP. In that regard, we
would like highlight the Colombia conclusions of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which I had the pleasure and honour
to chair, and the recommendations they contain.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative for the work that the Mission has
undertaken regarding the inclusion and participation
of women, as well as in developing prevention and
protection mechanisms for possible situations of
gender-based violence. I also credit the Government for
the way it is carrying out that agenda.

The Peace Agreement marked a new beginning for
Colombia. With each milestone along the way, peace is
further consolidated. Yet, as the Secretary-General told
us in January, peace is not inevitable. It still requires a
lot of hard work. In our national capacities, as Member
States and friends of the Colombian people, but also as
a united Security Council, we must continue to stand
with the parties as they continue to work for lasting
peace in Colombia.

