Mr. Jilani (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): We wish
to convey to you and the members of the Council our
gratitude and appreciation for your immediate response
to our request to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council to consider the grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. I
would also like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his statement
before the Council and for his tireless efforts and
unwavering commitment to bringing the parties back to
the negotiating table and to putting an end to the tragic
deterioration of the situation.

The immediate response of the Council is an
acknowledgement of the extremely dangerous situation
in the region and the continuous deterioration of
Palestinian-Israeli relations, as well as the ongoing
escalation of Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people and the Palestinian Authority and its leadership.
This grave situation threatens to push the region into
total confrontation and war.

As the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to decline dramatically and as the
toll of death and destruction continues to rise as a
result of the ongoing assaults by the Israeli occupying
forces against the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian Authority, it is incumbent upon the
international community to address this dangerous
crisis. The Security Council should uphold its
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security and undertake the necessary action to remedy
this grave situation.

Upon instruction from Prime Minister Sharon, the
Israeli occupying forces intensified the bloody military
campaign against the Palestinian people and
Palestinian institutions. In just the past few days the
Israeli occupying forces have killed more than 50
Palestinians, including women and children, and have
wrought vast destruction on both public and private
Palestinian property. This has included attacks on the
official compounds of President Yasser Arafat in Gaza
City and Ramallah and the destruction of several police
and security installations, as well as of Palestinian
radio and television facilities. At the same time, the
Israeli occupying forces have repeatedly raided densely
populated Palestinian cities and refugee camps. These
raids and attacks have resulted in the killing and injury
of many Palestinian civilians, many of whom were
uprooted from their homes more than 50 years ago and
have been living under Israeli occupation for almost 35
years.

Since 28 September 2000, the Palestinian people
have suffered flagrant violations of their human rights
as defined by international humanitarian law and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. For over 16
months, they have been subjected to continuous and
systematic war crimes and State terrorism being
committed by the Israeli occupying forces.

These crimes have included the killing of more
than 900 Palestinians, including many children, and the
injury of tens of thousands, many of whom have been
permanently disabled as a result of the serious injuries
sustained. The Israeli occupying forces have also
committed crimes of extrajudicial killings; the
destruction of homes, buildings, agricultural fields,
roads and other infrastructure; the confiscation of more
land for settlement activities and the destruction of
numerous economic facilities. At the same time, the
Israeli Government has ordered the tightening of the
military siege and restrictions on the freedom of
movement of all Palestinian persons and goods,
virtually dividing the occupied Palestinian territory
into numerous detention centres, while continuing the
military siege of President Arafat and the whole
Palestinian population of more than 3 million.

Last week, President Arafat repeated the call he
made in December for an immediate and total cessation
of all acts of violence. That same day, in an address to
the Israeli people, Mr. Sharon declared his intention to
continue and escalate the bloody attacks against the
Palestinian people and its National Authority by using
all Israeli air, land and naval weaponry and continuing
the policy of extrajudicial killings.

In addition to all of this, Mr. Sharon decided to
set up what he refers to as buffer zones around

S/PV.4478

 

Palestinian cities and villages in order to transform
them into Bantustans and collective detention jails. He
has also decided to build a wall to separate East and
West Jerusalem with the aim of entirely isolating Arab
Jerusalem and imposing a complete siege from the
north, south, east and west. All of these illegal policies
and practices are extremely dangerous and aim at
breaking the will of the Palestinian people, humiliating
them and destroying their national dignity. Mr. Sharon
and his Government bear full responsibility for these
actions and their dangerous consequences and
repercussions.

We have listened with great interest to the
statement made by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, which we consider to be an important prelude
to our discussion. We hope to be guided by it and to
build upon it, in order to come out of this meeting with
action that is unanimously approved by the members of
the Council and that can actively contribute to calming
the situation and moving the parties back to the
negotiating table. In his statement, the Secretary-
General expressed the deep concern of the international
community and its conviction that the situation has
reached the edge of the abyss and threatens to plunge
the entire region into war. We share his concern and
support his analysis of the problem and the mechanism
for resolving it.

In his statement, the Secretary-General also
expressed what we believe to be an international
consensus: that there is no military or security solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, and there is no
alternative to a political solution through the
negotiation process. There is also international
consensus that the core of the solution depends on
addressing the three key problems mentioned by the
Secretary-General: the Israeli occupation of Arab and
Palestinian territories, lack of security, and economic
depravation. These problems are interlinked and must
be addressed in a coordinated manner. The Secretary-
General has warned of the danger of attempting to deal
with the security issue in isolation from the political
issues, specifically the question of land and the socio-
economic issues. The failure to appropriately address
these issues collectively will result in a situation worse
than the one now prevailing.

It must be reiterated here that Mr. Sharon has
never concealed his opposition to a final settlement,
and he has imposed the condition of seven days of
calm, giving those opposed to the peace process ample

opportunity to divert any calming of the situation and a
return to negotiations. This condition is being imposed
on the Palestinian side, while the occupation forces
simultaneously continue to commit extrajudicial
killings and assault the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian Authority and its security installations. This
is all being done by the Israeli side with the purpose of
aborting any attempt to implement the Mitchell
recommendations and to complete the negotiation
process, particularly to avoid the requirements of a
freeze of settlement activities.

At the same time, Mr. Sharon's attempts to bury
the Mitchell recommendations do not mean that the
international community should declare them defunct
before an agreed and implementable alternative can be
found. Otherwise, the international community once
again risks appearing helpless to compel Israel to
implement what the international community has
accepted and is committed to. The alternative is that
Israel alone decides what can and cannot be accepted
and when and how what it has accepted is to be
implemented, if at all. This is truly a depressing
situation.

Despite the pessimism about finding a solution to
the Middle East conflict and the hardened position on
both Israeli and Palestinian sides, there is a growing
conviction on both sides that the requisites for solving
this conflict do not differ much whether we reach a
solution now, after a year, or after ten years. It is the
same solution upon which the whole peace process in
the Middle East has been based, as defined in Madrid
in 1991 and in the Oslo agreements.

This solution is based on ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories occupied
since 1967 and on the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, to
coexist in peace and security with the State of Israel
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
This is the vision that has received international
consensus. This is the vision that was declared by
President Bush and detailed by Secretary of State
Powell and was welcomed by the Palestinian side.
What remains is for it to be accepted by the Israeli
side. Herein lies the question of the failure or success
of the international community in shouldering its
responsibilities through this Council.

