Mr. Guehenno: The representative of the Russian
Federation asked whether we had been approached by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). We
have not. We have heard from press reports that such
an idea might be considered, but thus far I am not
aware of any North Atlantic Council decision with
respect to Afghanistan.

(spoke in French)

The representative of France asked about the
forthcoming decree concerning the police. As we
understand it, the decree will provide information
about the size of the police and border police forces,
about the restructuring of the Ministry and about the
creation of a road police as part of the transformation
of the police structure in Afghanistan. What will the
obstacles be? The obstacles will be of the same kind as
those encountered in the creation of the Afghan
national army: the questions of funding and of
balanced representation among the various ethnic
groups within the police and, generally, the question of
how to improve the security situation. That is
something that we have been discussing this morning.
The police in a pacified Afghanistan will necessarily
take the lead role vis-a-vis the army. We are not quite
there yet. There is also the question of extending the
national police beyond Kabul, and I think that will
certainly be one of the most delicate and most
important questions in moving peace-building forward
in Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

The Permanent Representative of Angola asked
whether it would be realistic to have elections in 2004.
Indeed, the challenges are considerable, and this
morning's discussion shows that, as far as improving
security is concerned, there is still a long way to go.
But was it realistic to have an Interim Administration
two weeks after the Bonn Agreement? Was it realistic
to have an Emergency Loya Jirga a few months later? I
think that, ever since the beginning, we have been
under a very tight timetable; that was a political
decision. Thus far, we have met the various deadlines,
and I think that is a tribute to the political will of the
Afghan people - and also to the sustained
commitment of the international community. If that
political will and the commitment of the international
community remain what they should be, then perhaps
we will not say that it is unrealistic to have elections.

Ambassador Nishimura referred to me the
comments of the representative of Chile about lessons
learned from other experiences with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). There are
many lessons indeed; I would focus on two of them.
One is the question of financing, which is a perennial
problem with any DDR programme and a concrete
example of the importance of a sustained international
commitment to Afghanistan. The other lesson - and I
think this morning's discussion has been an illustration
of this - is that there must be a close link between the
DDR programme and the reform of the security sector;
they really go hand in hand. So I think that more and
more coordination between those two facets of the
consolidation of peace in Afghanistan is welcome.

The representative of China asked us how we
could reduce attacks on United Nations personnel. I
think there are two answers to that question. One is of a
general nature. Attacks on United Nations personnel
are only one disturbing aspect of the general security
situation in Afghanistan. Everything that is done to
reform the security sector - to consolidate local
politics throughout Afghanistan through institutions,
not through the power of the gun - will have a
positive impact on the security of our people. That
being said, the other response that we can give is that
we must take precautions. We are doing that through
the implementation of what we call Minimum
Operating Security Standards (MOSS) - that is, we
are instructing United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan to follow strict procedures with respect to
transit from one place to another - such as from their
residences to the places where they work - so as to
minimize risk for our people in Afghanistan.

