Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude for the valuable briefings just
provided by Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Henrietta
Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014). Their complementary input provides us with
a general overview of the current circumstances of
the conflict.

Like other Council members, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is closely following events in
Yemen. My country has always been very concerned
about the ceaseless suffering inflicted on millions as
a result of the war that has been raging in the country
since March 2015.

When Mr. Griffiths informed us last month (see S/PV.8512) that both the Government and Houthi
opposition forces had finally accepted the first phase
of the Stockholm Agreement - pertaining to the
withdrawal of forces from the city of Al-Hudaydah and
its port, as well as those of Saleef and Ras Isa - it was
difficult to believe that the withdrawal would have been
possible so soon. However, it made us all the more keen
to see it come to pass. Indeed, as Mr. Griffiths said
previously and reiterated today, United Nations teams
were able to conduct monitoring patrols on the first day
of the withdrawal of Houthi troops from those areas,
whose security then became the responsibility of the
coast guard.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the implementation of the first phase as regards the
concept of broader redeployment in Al-Hudaydah, in
line with the Stockholm Agreement. We encourage
the Government of Yemen to respond accordingly
to such action by the Houthis by upholding its
commitment under the first phase, when requested by
the United Nations. Similarly, we implore the parties
to continue their collaboration in the next steps in
order to make progress on the remaining aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement.

With regard to the humanitarian issue, we are
concerned about the challenging situation faced by
millions of people who lack food, access to drinking
water and the necessary medical care, and by
children exposed to the threat of cholera and other
diseases. Similarly, we regret the difficulties faced by
humanitarian agencies, which cannot gain access to all
in need. We hope that the Government of Yemen and
the Houthi leaders will provide the necessary coverage
for such personnel and their humanitarian services.

A discouraging statistic we received at the
beginning of the month can be found in the report
commissioned by the United Nations from a professor
at the University of Denver, who is an expert at its
Josef Korbel School of International Studies. The
report states that by the end of the year approximately
233,000 people will have lost their lives in the conflict
in Yemen - 140,000 of them will be children under
the age of 5. From our perspective, it illustrates the
high level of crime to which Yemen's civilians are
being or have been subjected. Ms. Fore's briefing today
highlights the catastrophic situation on the ground. My
delegation condemns and denounces any action that
could prolong that calamitous situation.

Before concluding, my delegation commends
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) for organizing and conducting
the important visit to the countries of the region in
order to obtain first-hand information on the status
of implementation of the sanctions. We believe that it
demonstrates the commitment and desire to use accurate
information in order to avoid taking decisions that do
not reflect the reality of the conflicts we deal with.

Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends and acknowledges the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
humanitarian agencies and international contributors.
We encourage everyone to continue to support the
people of Yemen at this difficult time.

