Mr. Grant (Canada): Let me begin by thanking
Sweden for convening this much-needed open debate
and congratulating, you, Sir, on your very capable
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.

I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict - a network of42 Member States representing
all five regional groups of the United Nations.

We welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/465), and we thank him for his ongoing
efforts to shine a light on the terrible situations affecting
children in armed conflict around the world. Effective
monitoring and reporting are key to the prevention of
and the response to grave violations of child rights. The
Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its strong support
for the Special Representative and the continued
independence and impartiality of the United Nations-
led monitoring and reporting mechanism, established
in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005).

We commend Ms. Londofio's courage in sharing
her story with us today. We also thank United
Nations bodies, such as UNICEF, which work to
protect and promote the rights of children in armed
conflict worldwide.

The report of the Secretary-General illustrates
in stark detail how armed conflict often strips
away - in practice, if not in principle - the
protections that children are afforded by families and
society. It shows us how children are victimized and
how their victimization helps perpetuate conflict and
poverty. We are encouraged by those armed forces and
groups that have signed action plans in the past year
to help make violations against children a problem of
the past. Notwithstanding those important steps, it is
our collective responsibility to do better. On behalf
of the Group of Friends, I would like to highlight four
areas that merit attention by the United Nations and all
Member States.

First and foremost, in order to strengthen the links
between child protection and conflict prevention, we
must strengthen our resolve to better protect children
in armed conflict. All parties to armed conflict must
fully comply with their obligations under the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law, human
rights law and refugee law. Additionally, there are several
practical protection tools that Member States have the
option of using, notably the Safe Schools Declaration;
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict;
the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, known as the
Paris Principles; the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups; and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. We call upon Member
States to further strengthen the protection of children
in armed conflict, including through ratification of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, as well as consideration of the endorsement of
those commitments.

Secondly, Ms. Londofio's briefing shows us the
importance of integrating the protection, rights and
well-being of children in peace processes. Accordingly,
we welcome the launch ofa process to compile practical
guidance on child protection issues for peace processes.
We urge the drafters to specifically consider the needs
of the girl child, whose particular challenges are too
often forgotten or overlooked.

Thirdly, we recognize that children affected by
armed conflict are not defined by their victimhood
alone. When they are successfully reintegrated
into their families and communities, they can be
an important source of resilience. To that end, we
pledge to elevate and echo the voices of child victims,
especially the voice of the girl child. We also support
strengthened accountability for all perpetrators of child
rights violations and commend organizations, such as
Justice Rapid Response, that offer surge capacities for
that purpose.

Fourthly, the Special Representative pointed out
in a recent statement that we must work together to
leave no child affected by conflict behind so as to fully
realize the potential of the Sustainable Development
Goals. To make progress towards achieving that goal,
we must address the cross-border nature of violations
by supporting the development of regional, subregional
and national prevention plans and strategies. We must
also ensure greater awareness and understanding of the
unique challenges associated with children in armed
conflict though training and advocacy.

(spoke in French)

Let me make several additional remarks in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.

As a firm advocate for respect for international
humanitarian law and international protection
frameworks, Canada has been actively engaged in issues
involving children and armed conflict for more than 20
years, including when Canada previously served as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council from
1999 to 2000. Together with Security Council members
and other States Members, we worked tirelessly to ensure
the children and armed conflict item was placed at the
core of the Council's agenda. Canada's long-standing
chairmanship of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict also has its origin in our commitment
to bringing parties concerned together to achieve
shared goals. We continue to take concrete steps today
to strengthen international protection frameworks.
Canada recently launched the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers. To date, the voluntary and
non-binding Principles have now been endorsed by 65
States. In order to pursue collective action against the
unlawful recruitment and use of child soldiers, Canada
is developing guidelines for States having endorsed
them to implement the Vancouver Principles.

(spoke in English)

Canada encourages those States that have not yet
endorsed the Vancouver Principles or the complementary
Paris Principles to consider doing so without delay.
Despite those important steps, as noted in the report
of the Secretary-General, children continue to be used
for combat and denied humanitarian access in such
places as South Sudan, Syria, Yemen, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and elsewhere. Canada is particularly appalled
by accounts that Rohingya children in Myanmar and
Bangladesh have been victims of killings, rape and
sexual assault, and have been used as human shields and
mine-sweepers. This has to stop and those responsible
must be held accountable.

In conclusion, I strongly call upon all Member States,
including the members of the Security Council, to join
the growing number of countries acting to safeguard
the rights of children and to protect them from violence
in situations of armed conflict. It is only by working
together that we will overcome these challenges.

