Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking the briefers. Haiti is facing a continuous political crisis, intertwined with social economic challenges that in turn affect the security situation. A great deal of work has been done, but the challenges remain and need to be addressed. We urge all parties to pursue an open and inclusive dialogue, demonstrate political will and take a constructive approach to discussing the most pressing issues as a road map for reform and a constitutional revision process. That is where the solution can be found and that is what the people of Haiti expect from their political leaders. It is important to define the electoral calendar and create conditions for legislative elections to be held. In that regard, we welcome the United Nations Development Programme training programme to ensure the success of the forthcoming elections and to help increase women's political participation, since the ratio of women parliamentarians in the legislature is ranked among the lowest in the world. Mobilizing domestic forces and translating the plans into action enables the international community to support national efforts. Haiti will require continued assistance in the course of achieving stability and development. The Latin American region offers useful experience in terms of how to build effective and sustainable agreements. We commend the role and efforts of the Haitian National Police in maintaining peace. Recent reports about the rising level of violence, including kidnapping, hijacking, robberies and gang-related criminality, among other things, are extremely worrisome. We condemn the involvement of gangs in the protests and their contribution to escalating violence. Given the complex and challenging environment, the response capability of the Haitian National Police needs to be increased in order to conduct effective operations against gang members and to fulfil their mandate fully. We welcome the progress in implementing the 2018 legal aid law. However, despite that progress, more needs to be done in pursuing accountability for recent human rights violations and corruption scandals and to effectively fight impunity in Haiti. Progress is also needed in strengthening access to justice and reparation for victims and respect for human rights. The recent report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the Bel Air incident reveals a trend in the resurgence of gang-related violence in Haiti; lack of accountability for serious human rights violations and abuses, including by the police; as well as the absence of the State in certain urban areas, preventing authorities from ensuring protection. It is important to make full use of the accountability system to ensure that all cases are properly investigated and perpetrators brought to justice. The goal of a stable Haiti with fully functioning, unified State institutions and authority can be achieved only through a Haitian-led and -owned political process. Finally, I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Helen La Lime, and her team for their important work. We encourage everyone to continue their efforts to work together, rebuild mutual trust and ensure stability and development in Haiti.
