Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): Once
again, the Security Council is acting to help the people of
Haiti achieve their aspiration to live in freedom and
peace. Rene Preval, the democratically elected President
of Haiti, has called upon the Council to renew the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH). We are delighted that the Security Council
will respond to that call in a positive fashion.

UNSMIH and its predecessor have done much to
help the Government of Haiti to professionalize its police
and maintain the kind of secure and stable environment in
which durable democratic institutions may be built. My
Government commends all those who have contributed to
the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti, and
especially the Government of Canada, which has provided
outstanding leadership.

The result is that clear gains have been made. A new
civilian police force has been established and the Palace
security force is being professionalized. The Haitian
economy is also beginning to improve. The Haitian
Parliament has passed key privatization and civil service
reforms that will spur economic growth. The International
Monetary Fund (IMF) has approved a structural-
adjustment programme and a $120-million credit and
business leaders are increasingly optimistic.

Even more important, the climate of democratization
has made it possible for the average people of Haiti to go
about their daily lives free from the fear of officially
sanctioned violence. Haitians are no longer forced to
choose between living in terror and trying to flee the
island on leaky rafts and boats headed for American
shores.

Despite the progress, obstacles do remain. There
continue to be individuals and groups within Haiti who
oppose the democratic path. We hope and believe that the
day is approaching when the Government of Haiti will be
able to assume full responsibility for public safety, but

 

that day has not yet arrived. The extension of UNSMIH's
mandate will allow this transition to go forward, while
minimizing the risk of serious setbacks or disruption.

My Government has been heartened by the continued
strong support for Haitian democracy that has been
demonstrated by the Organization of American States, the
United Nations and the members of the Security Council.
We look forward to its being continued today. As a
member of the group of "Friends of the Secretary-General
for Haiti" and the delegation that introduced this draft
resolution, we support it strongly and hope it will be
adopted unanimously by the Council.

We also look forward to the Secretary-General's report
in March next year. We hope that report will provide the
international community with guidance on how to continue
contributing to the consolidation of peace and stability in
Haiti.

The restoration of democracy to Haiti has been one of
the most heartening developments of recent years. But
there, as elsewhere, democracy remains a work in progress.
Our responsibility, which we have met and I hope will
continue to meet, is to help the Haitian people to secure for
themselves a future marked by enduring freedom, stability
and a steadily improving quality of life.

