Mr. Butler (Australia): May I begin by saying that it
gives us Australians a sense of confidence to see you, Sir,
in the high office of the presidency of the Security
Council.

The peace process launched in Madrid, and enhanced
by the Oslo accords, was never going to be simple. The
legacy of four decades of animosity and frequent wars
cannot be easily erased. In the Israeli-Palestinian context,
there is now a pressing need to generate momentum
towards meeting the objectives which were agreed in the
Declaration of Principles, so that popular confidence in
the ultimate value of the peace process can be reinforced.
For, clearly, the building of peace must be directed
toward developing a sense of mutual respect and trust
between Israelis and Palestinians.

Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) have shown remarkable resilience in persevering
with highly difficult negotiations. Both have faced
exacting political, social and economic pressures,
including determined attempts by opponents of peace to
wreck the negotiations. Leaders on both sides deserve
commendation, not condemnation, for the bravery they
have shown in the pursuit of the goals which they
declared for themselves in 1993.

The Australian Government will continue to support
those parties which have displayed courage and
commitment in the quest for peace since Oslo. We
ourselves have an absolute commitment to upholding the
right of Israel to live at peace with its neighbours. We
also strongly support the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and, if they so choose, to an
independent State as a neighbour of a secure Israel.

In taking a principled stand on those issues, it is
incumbent upon Australia to adhere no less firmly to
issues of principle in regard to Jerusalem. The Australian
Government has long regarded East Jerusalem as a part
of the occupied territories. As is well known, we do not
recognize either the unilateral declaration in 1968 of
Israeli sovereignty over East Jerusalem or the "basic law"
of 1980, which proclaimed Jerusalem as Iisrael's "eternal
capital".
The continuing expropriation of land belonging to
Palestinians and the expansion of settlements in the
occupied territories is contrary to international law. It
represents, moreover, a serious impediment to the peace
process.

The question of settlements and East Jerusalem is a
highly emotional one for Israelis and Palestinians alike. It
 

has a resonance well beyond the immediate region. We
would urge the Israeli Government to strengthen the peace
process by defusing tension over land expropriation and
settlement activity prior to the commencement of formal
negotiations on those issues. We would urge both sides to
address the issue in good faith, as they have agreed to do
in the Declaration of Principles, and in accordance with the
timetable envisaged in that document.

Australia believes that agreement on the final status of
Jerusalem can be reached only through such negotiations,
and in the context of a comprehensive peace in the region.
We would be prepared to support any agreement that all the
parties concerned may reach which respects and reflects the
traditional character of the city and the aspirations of its
inhabitants.

