Mr. Brutus (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank you, Madam President, the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador Patriota for their
opening statements. I would also like to express my
appreciation to the representative of Venezuela, whose
statement touched upon the situation in Haiti. Finally, I
would like to commend the Security Council for having
taken the initiative to convene this open debate, which
is so important with respect to inclusive development
and peacekeeping. I am particularly pleased to
participate as the Republic of Haiti has benefited for the
past 10 years from the presence of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose
mandate clearly reflects the interlinkages between
peace and development.

The relevance of the Council's discussion is clear.
A peacekeeping operation, regardless of the scope of
the resources available to it for capacity-building in
the area of security, is never enough in and of itself
to bring peace and balance to the community in
question if the missions ignores or underestimates the
link between security and development, and between
inclusive development and peacekeeping. Development
challenges raise multiple questions. The United
Nations, backed by its experience acquired in some 50
peacekeeping missions worldwide, has established an
irreplaceable normative framework that increasingly
encompasses not only the many sources of instability
and conflict, but also the dynamic interactions between
these factors, which in post-conflict situations often set
up insurmountable obstacles to growth, development
and, consequently, to any effort to build lasting peace.

The Haitian Government fully endorses the
current efforts to adopt a comprehensive, consistent
and integrated approach to peacekeeping and security,
based on preventing conflicts or their resumption.
We believe in particular that peacekeeping and the
need for development go hand in hand. To be truly
effective in the long term, peacekeeping must be part
of an overarching political arrangement that takes
into account all emerging threats to security and
all situations that may promote underdevelopment
or contain the seeds of conflict and their possible
reoccurrence. This is why, during its long-standing
cooperation with the members of the Security Council
concerning the mandate of MINUSTAH, the Haitian
Government has always stressed its desire to see its
partners attach greater importance to development
needs, in particular the many structural deficiencies
and vulnerabilities that hinder the economic and social
integration of disadvantaged groups and the delivery of
essential services to the population.

In this regard, we welcome the convergence of
vision and efforts of the Haitian Government and
MINUSTAH in shaping and adapting the stabilization
programme. We are pleased that certain development
needs, and in particular those involving infrastructure,
post-earthquake reconstruction and the protection of
civilians have been taken into account, including in
the framework of quick impact projects, which make
significant contributions to the maintenance of peace
and stability. The two parties attach equal importance
to ownership by the Haitian Government of joint
projects and where follow-up must be guaranteed.

With regard in particular to the current political
situation, which has raised some concern among
members of the international community, I wish to
reassure all our partners that, thanks to the spirit of
compromise and consensus shown by President Joseph
Martelli and the majority of the Haitian political
class, Haiti has successfully overcome the crisis that
threatened to undermine the progress of the stabilization
programme undertaken during the past decade. This is
an indisputable example of the Haitian people's true
political maturity and their significant achievements
attained, inter alia, with the support of MINUSTAH in
stabilization and development.

We are deeply grateful to our partners in the
international community for their support to the people
and Government of Haiti throughout the exceptional
crisis in our country. We hope that the Security Council
and all our partners in the international community
will maintain their support for the Government and
people of Haiti as they strengthen the rule of law and
democracy. In more general terms, we believe that
the example of MINUSTAH in Haiti could, in spite
of its limitations, serve in many ways as a model for
establishing an effective post-conflict peacekeeping
mandate.

Capacity-building in the area of security should
go hand in hand with development concerns. Our
partners in the international community must work
with the host country, and in harmony with its national
development strategy, to create conditions conducive
to lasting inclusive development - in other words, to
improving the people's living conditions, which is a
decisive factor in the maintenance ofpeace. As a result,
in future responses in terms of peacekeeping missions,
it is important for the Security Council to take into
account, at an early phase, such crucial interlinkages
between peacekeeping and development. That is, in my
view, one of the crucial conditions for the maintenance
of a lasting peace on the ground.

