Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his valuable briefing and everything he
has done for the Organization and Somalia during his
years of service. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours. I would also like to thank Mr. Francisco
Madeira, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN-Women.

I would like to address three aspects of today's
topic - first, local developments; secondly, regional
and international developments; and thirdly, terrorism
and the security situation.

First, with regard to local developments, we
welcome the improvement in the relationship among
the various State institutions in Somalia, including
official authorities, as well as the improvement in
the relationship with the federal states. That steady
improvement has prompted the League of Arab States
to welcome several developments, including the success
of national reconciliation and the support for Somalia's
national development plan. That was expressed in a
resolution adopted by the Arab League Summit in April
that also welcomed the support for stability in Somalia
and called on other Arab States to offer all possible
support to the Somali Government. During the recent
ministerial-level meeting of the Arab League held
in Cairo two days ago, the current presidency of the
Ministerial Council called on Arab States to support
the elected Somali Government and make every
effort to work with it to foster peace and development
in Somalia.

We support the Somali Government's efforts
to improve the economic situation in the light of the
difficulties it is facing. We also want to remind the
Council of the call that the Arab League has made to
Arab organizations and funds to offer their support
to the Somali Government in order to improve the
situation throughout the country. We reiterate the call
to the Security Council to maintain its united position
in support of the sovereignty, stability and territorial
integrity of Somalia while providing it with the
financial and political support that it needs.

Secondly, with regard to regional and international
developments, the positive events that we have been
witnessing in the Horn of Africa represent great
progress that will undoubtedly help to entrench peace
and security in the region. We welcome the visits
exchanged between the leaders of States in the Horn
of Africa, including the visit by the President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia to Asmara. We also
welcomed the quadrilateral meeting held in Djibouti
between the Foreign Ministers of Somalia, Eritrea,
Ethiopia and Djibouti. These are all developments that
will have positive effects not only in the countries in
the Horn of Africa but in their neighbours as well.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
on Somalia (S/2018/800) mentions some regional
developments that are of concern, but because they are
less worrying than formerly, we still feel cautiously
optimistic. We also welcome the Somali partnership
conference held in Brussels in July, in which Kuwait was
a participant, designed to support Somalia's transition
plan and national security architecture in preparation
for holding elections by 2020.
Thirdly, with regard to terrorism and security, the
repeated terrorist attacks on Somalia's capital, most
recently on 2 September, are very worrying. We once
again condemn such attacks in the strongest terms, as
we condemn the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which
is responsible for these heinous acts. We commend
the courageous role of the Somali National Army and
the troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in confronting the dangers that Somalia
is facing and protecting its people and institutions. We
appreciate their sacrifice and pray for those who lost
their lives.

We also welcome the current developments
regarding AMISOM's handover of its responsibilities
to the Somali National Army, in accordance with
the recommendations of the operational readiness
assessment. We also welcome the launch of the new
policing model. At yesterday's Council meeting (see S/PV.8349), we heard from the Permanent Observer of
the African Union (AU) to the effect thatjoint efforts on
the part of the AU and the United Nations would offer
more opportunities for strategic cooperation between
the two organizations on the African continent.

In conclusion, we would like to once again thank
Mr. Keating and to welcome his successor, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom. We wish him success in his new position and
look forward to working with him in order to help
him succeed in his work and achieve greater stability
in Somalia.

