Mr. Naidu (Fiji): Mr. President, my delegation is
very pleased to see you preside over this very
important meeting. We welcome you to New York. We
also commend the dynamic leadership of Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello through whom the Security Council
mandates have been accomplished to date. My
delegation also wishes to recognize the contribution of
Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Foreign Minister, for his role
in the developments in East Timor leading to its
independence on 20 May 2002.

Fiji is closely following the progress of
developments in East Timor. As a fledgling State of the
wider Asia-Pacific region that has come out of years of
struggle and conflict, we are truly proud of East
Timor's achievements thus far. Its successes closely
mirror those of similar peace-building initiatives in the
Pacific, such as Bougainville, Solomon Islands, and, to
some extent, my own country, Fiji. We hope that this
wind of peace heralds more constructive engagements
towards democratic governance in the region and
beyond.

Fiji's peacekeeping task in Suwai, bordering West
and East Timor, has not been an easy one. While light
is visible at the end of the tunnel, we will stay engaged
as long as is necessary.

We congratulate the Constituent Assembly and
the people of East Timor on their plans for
independence on 20 May 2002 and observe that the
presidential elections scheduled for 14 April 2002 are
on target. Fiji has been approached to provide one of
the two international members of the Board of
Commissioners for the April presidential elections. In
this regard, my Government is pleased to be of service
in this historic engagement, as well as in similar
electoral engagements, such as the recent one in the
Solomon Islands.

Some remarkable advances made since October
2001 are detailed in the Secretary-General's report on
the mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Fiji is
heartened by the building of a rapprochement between
West and East Timor through the border reconciliation
meetings between Indonesia and East Timor. As
expected, the resulting positive effects on internal
security have been reported by the Secretary-General.
This increasingly welcome environment, coupled with
some outstanding tasks for the new Assembly to
resolve with the assistance of UNTAET, will encourage
more refugee returns.

In this difficult transition period, we are
particularly challenged by the preparatory work on
building a gender component into the administration
system prior to independence. In turn, we are hopeful
that this will engender a more secure domestic
environment than as reported with respect to women
and children.

We are pleased to see civil service recruitment
reaching close to its target, a slow but steady
development of the infrastructure and robust socio-
economic progress, especially in the education sector.
It is critical, however, that allocations in the United
Nations core budget remain committed to support a
specific number of civilian technical assistance posts.
This would boost programmes for socio-economic
development and poverty eradication.

All parties have been alerted to the downside of
UNTAET's drawdown and ultimate withdrawal. In
anticipation of this event, we therefore encourage the
Constituent Assembly, in conjunction with UNTAET,
to continue with measures that would cushion the
impact on the local economy.

Although security is largely at hand, much
depends on the border delimitation issue to be
determined by the respective Governments of East
Timor and Indonesia. Capital investment is also critical
in order to develop the full capacity of the East Timor
Defence Force and, similarly, for the certification
targets of the East Timor Police Service. Until both the
Defence Force and the Police Service show the
capability to maintain security in East Timor, the
UNTAET military and civilian police components
should stay engaged. This transition is predicated on a
viable capital programme.

Other related concerns that will sustain post-
independence East Timor are equally dependent on
benevolent international and bilateral donations. In this
regard, we are very hopeful that an outpouring of
goodwill will in time bring a fitting closure to
UNTAET's mandate.

We also look forward to the celebrations on 20
May 2002, and we anxiously await the welcoming of
East Timor into the fold of the United Nations, thus
increasing the number of Member States from 189 to
190.

