Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I am surprised by the logic of
representatives of some delegations who have described
the liberation of Syrian territories from terrorist groups
by saying that the Syrian Government is continuing
to seize territories. The Syrian Army and its allies are
liberating territories that were under the control of
armed terrorist groups, which for many years had used
children, women and the elderly as human shields. I
should like to underscore from this seat that the day will
come when all the aggressive military forces, without
exception, will leave Syrian territory. There will be no
one to carry illegal arms against the Syrian people and
the Syrian State.

We had hoped to hear a collective reaction from the
Security Council to the bloody massacre perpetrated
by the terrorist organization Da'esh in the Al-Suwayda
city two days ago.

As we are discussing the fifty-third report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/724) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, I should like to assure members of
the Council once again that the Syrian Government is
eager to provide all kinds of humanitarian assistance
to all its citizens throughout Syrian territory. That is
a duty to which it remains committed. It is also keen
on cooperating and coordinating with its humanitarian
partners and the United Nations, in compliance
with the guiding principles of General Assembly
resolution 46/182, on coordinating and strengthening
humanitarian aid. The resolution also calls for respect
for the sovereignty and independence of States and
underlines the role of the State involved to supervise
the distribution of humanitarian aid on its territories
and the need to respect the principles of neutrality,
integrity and non-politicization.

The constitutional and legal duties enshrined in
all international instruments, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism,
require the Syrian Government to carry out military
operations in order to liberate civilians from the armed
terrorist groups that were besieging them and had used
them for many years as human shields.

The day before yesterday, we sent out an official
letter responding to the content of the fifty-third report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in Syria, and I should like to make the following
comments in that regard.

First, day after day, the Syrian State - thanks to
its institutions and the support of the Syrian people and
with international support from Syria's real friends,
who believe in the principles of international law - is
making important progress on the ground in liberating
Syrian territory from the armed terrorist organizations
that were spread among civilians while using them
as human shields. They exploited and recruited their
children and seized the humanitarian assistance that
was sent to them. Those achievements and significant
efforts of the Syrian national institutions have ensured
support for the Syrian people and the delivery of United
Nations humanitarian aid to them.

Secondly, the counter-terrorism operations carried
out by the Syrian State are in line with its constitutional
mandate and consistent with the principles of
international humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. For its part, the United Nations
should step up its support to the Syrians, in accordance
with humanitarian principles, especially in coordinating
with the Syrian national institutions, rather than with
the so-called local councils, which are in fact unreal
entities affiliated with terrorist organizations and
secession bodies. The authors of the report have been
trying to promote these entities in an unprofessional
way, and make up allegations on their important
humanitarian role in the delivery of humanitarian aid.

Thirdly, contrary to what certain people have
advocated, the successful military operations carried
out by the Syrian Arab Army and its allies against
armed terrorist groups that controlled certain regions
classified by the United Nations as besieged or hard-
to-reach, in addition to achieving compromises or
reconciliation agreements in other regions, have
alleviated the suffering of civilians and lowered
the number of such regions, while to a great extent
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid to them.

Fourthly, the Syrian Arab Republic stresses
once again the fact that unilateral coercive economic
measures imposed by the European Union, the United
States and others against the Syrian Arab Republic
significantly hamper our ability to meet the basic needs
of the Syrian people and to improve their means of
subsistence. We note the latest United Nations report
on the negative effects of those measures, which hinder
humanitarian efforts at the national and international
levels. This is the report of the Human Rights Special
Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral coercive
measures on the enjoyment of human rights (A/72/370)
and his latest briefing to the International Syria Support
Group, in which he underscored the seriousness of
the continuation of such measures with regard to the
humanitarian situation of Syrians, particularly in terms
of health, education, electricity, water and remittances.

Fifthly, the operations led by the Syrian State to
liberate Syrians from terrorism in the south of the
country have unveiled the true motivations of some
parties and Governments that were concerned not about
meeting the needs of the Syrians who were displaced
to the Syrian border with Jordan, but rather about
protecting the armed terrorist groups in the region,
particularly members of the White Helmets terrorist
organization. This terrorist organization was and
continues to be the logistical and operational hand of
the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups,
such as Al-Qaida. Those terrorist organizations carry
out attacks against Syrians and destabilize Syria and
the region. The White Helmets, under orders from their
sponsors, fabricate insidious information and falsify
evidence to mislead the international public opinion
with regard to Syria's use of chemical weapons with
the aim ofjustifying aggressive action against Syria by
certain permanent members of the Security Council.

My country stresses that the humanitarian system of
the United Nations must make serious efforts to regain
the confidence of the Syrian Government through a new
approach to responding to the humanitarian situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic, based on the principles
of objectivity, transparency and impartiality. However,
that cannot happen if a shadow continues to be cast on
the achievements of the Syrian State and its efforts to
meet the needs of its people, and ifa blind eye continues
to be turned to certain States that support terrorists in
Syria and exploit the humanitarian situation for their
narrow political agendas.

My country's delegation listened carefully to
the briefing of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
My delegation had sent an official response on the
annual report contained in document S/2018/465. We
confirm once again that the accusations made during
the briefing against the Syrian Government totally and
deliberately ignored the information that the Syrian
Government has provided to the Secretariat, as well
as the fact that the suffering of Syrian children is the
result of the practices of armed terrorist groups.

The briefing and the report of the Special
Representative are predicated on a false premise based
on incredible information provided by suspicious
sources linked to the armed terrorist groups. All the
allegations made are refuted by the testimony ofcivilians
protected by the Syrian Arab Army after having been
evacuated from the areas under the control of armed
terrorist groups for many years. Their testimony tells
about injustice, exploitation and starvation inflicted
on civilians and their children by those groups, whose
crimes do not spare women, children or the elderly.

The Syrian Government has provided the Office
of the Special Representative with documented
information on child recruitment by armed terrorist
groups. We deny and totally reject what is stated in
the report and characterized as proof of recruitment of
children by the Syrian Government. If that were true,
why have we not received any detailed information on
that issue despite our repeated requests?

The Syrian Government asks the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary- general to launch
an investigation into the fate of the children who were
kidnapped following the terrorist bombing that targeted
buses meant for the evacuation of civilians leaving
the villages of Fo'ah and Kafraya in the Al-Rashidin
area of Aleppo province on 15 April. According to the
information held by the Syrian Government, 32 ofthese
kidnapped children are currently at a care refuge called
DAR RAF in the Reyhanli region of southern Turkey,
while the rest of the kidnapped children are in the Atma
refugee camp.

Finally, I want to comment on the allegations
concerning Law No. 10. I would like to inform the
Council that two days ago, my delegation sent a letter
to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council in response to the false and deceptive
allegations regarding the nature of this Law and its
ends. My delegation's letter clearly defines the Law and
explains its legal nature, which is to protect properties.
We reject all allegations claiming that the objective of
the Law is to confiscate properties.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.
