My delegation would like to thank the French presidency of the Security Council for the month of June 2020 for organizing today's open Security Council video-teleconference on a very important question - children and armed conflict - as we are celebrating this year the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, and the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore, for their comprehensive and enlightening insights. Twenty years ago, the world committed to taking action on combating the use of children in armed conflict. The adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict was a milestone that contributed to the release of more than 145,000 boys and girls from armed groups and the prevention of the recruitment and use of millions of children around the world. For two decades, tangible progress has been made in the protection of children in situations of armed conflict, notably with the adoption of international standards for the protection of children and the implementation of strategies and programs to protect war-affected children. However, children continue to be the primary victims of conflict. The last few years have unfortunately been marked by an alarming recurrence and intensification of conflicts with devastating effects on civil populations, including children. With the proliferation of conflicts, we no longer count the situations where children are recruited and exploited by armed groups. Several statistics are presented, but, in fact, no one knows the real number of children victims of war. Even if they have been released after being abducted, many have experienced horrific scenes during their detention that have been traumatic for their psychological development. How can we expect them to be able to overcome their suffering and start their lives over? These children need our support as a priority. The international community would benefit from a global, comprehensive, strategic and coordinated approach to this challenge consisting of concrete and immediate actions that not only tackle the ongoing situations of armed conflicts, but also emphasize the prevention aspect. At the same time, the approach should be pragmatic, combining both incentive and deterrent measures, particularly in terms of accountability and the fight against impunity. The Kingdom of Morocco condemns in the strongest terms all forms of violence against children, their abduction by armed groups, their use as human shields or as hostages, and their recruitment in refugee camps. Morocco has assiduously joined international efforts to end the involvement of children in armed conflict. It has acceded to all the international instruments relating to the rights of the child and was among the first countries to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, also known as the Paris Principles. As part of the extension of its commitments to protecting the rights of children wherever they are, the Kingdom of Morocco endorsed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, the Safe Schools Declaration and other instruments highlighting the importance of child protection for a range of related issues. The Kingdom of Morocco thanks Ms. Virginia Gamba for presenting the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) and welcomes the removal of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen from the list of groups violating children's rights annexed to the report. In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco condemns in the strongest terms all forms of violence against children, in all contexts and under all circumstances, including in armed conflicts. The importance that my country attaches to the rights of the child at the international level is manifest, in particular, in its presidency of the UNICEF Executive Board in 2019 and its vice-presidency of the Board this year. I take this opportunity to reiterate to Ms. Fore and UNICEF our great appreciation for the remarkable work that she and her staff are doing and for their selflessness in promoting the well-being of all children around the world, despite the difficulties, with the ultimate objective of leaving no child behind.
