Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (Spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you every success and
hope that your leadership of the Council's work will
show the necessary vitality, dynamics and ability of
the Council to respond to events affecting international
peace and security.

Since the onset of the newly emerging phenomenon
of piracy, especially off the coast of Somalia, Saudi
Arabia was one of the first countries affected owing
to its geographical location and economic and political
status. Our commercial ships and oil tankers fell under
a direct threat. Some of them were exposed to repeated
attacks, robberies and kidnapping. My country therefore
welcomed the adoption of resolution 1851 (2008),
which led to the establishment of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia has supported the Group and participated in its
meetings, its working groups and its Trust Fund.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia notes with
satisfaction the latest decrease in piracy off the coast of
Somalia. However, we realize that the threat still exists
and that there is an urgent need to support Somalia's
new Government and help it to assert control over the
various parts of the country, including supporting it in
addressing the root causes of piracy off its coast and
on the seas. In that regard, we continue to cooperate
with the international community as it seeks to find
a permanent framework that legalizes the use of
contractual security personnel. That goal is achievable
if we commit ourselves to transparency and full respect
for the sovereignty of each State and the laws that
regulate its regional waters.

I cannot conclude my statement without addressing
the air, sea and land piracy carried out by Israel against
the Palestinian people in Gaza. I wonder what the
minimum number of Palestinian victims needs to be
before the Security Council is moved to shoulder its
responsibilities and seek to stop the Israeli killing
machine. How can you, Mr. President, and members
of the Council turn a blind eye to the wounded babies
and children or ignore the screams of women and the
groans of the elderly who at this very moment are being
subjected to bombardment with Israeli missiles and
rockets? How can anyone hold the victim responsible
for its own killing and ignore the deadly years-long
blockade imposed by Israel on the Gaza Strip? Is it not
time for the Council to order the cessation of violence,
wherever it takes place and whatever its origin, and end
the occupation and to lift the sea blockade in order to
give the Palestinian people an opportunity to lead their
lives freely, independently and in dignity, like the rest
of humankind?

