Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate Ambassador Ellen Loj,
Chairperson of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, and Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on their
briefings today. We also thank them for their tireless
efforts to conduct the work of their respective
Committees in a dynamic and effective manner.

Cooperation among the three Committees -
whose mandates share many complementary aspects -
is essential for proper coordination of the international
community's efforts in this area. We support the
initiatives already carried out, and we urge even closer
cooperation. In that connection, Brazil agrees with the
text of the presidential statement to be read out at the
conclusion of this meeting.

Brazil has reaffirmed its commitment to the fight
against terrorism and its repudiation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations as an extremely grave
threat to international peace and security. We are
prepared to continue to work to find increasingly
effective ways in which to combat that threat.

The debates on United Nations reform promoted
by the Secretary-General once again offer us an
opportunity to establish a definition of terrorism and to
identify coordinated, expanded and integrated actions
to be taken by the international community to confront
this problem. We welcome the suggestions made by the
Secretary-General in his report "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005), and we consider them to be a good basis
for broader discussion of the subject in the General
Assembly.

Brazil welcomes with satisfaction the General
Assembly's adoption of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
(General Assembly resolution 59/290), and we are now
considering the possibility of ratifying it as soon as
possible. Brazil believes that the threat of catastrophic
terrorism, although undoubtedly very important, should
not be our sole concern in confronting threats to peace
and security that are caused by terrorist acts.

With regard to the Security Council, we support
the current process of reforming the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We hope
that that body can soon become completely
operational. We wish to help make the transition period
as brief as possible. In our opinion, the CTED is
intended, above all, to protect those States that wish to
cooperate but, for various reasons, are unable to do so.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and, by extension,
the CTED do not have the role of a sanctions
committee, as members are well aware.

The activities of the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) should be
developed in the framework of the structure established
in resolution 1373 (2001), resolution 1535 (2004) and
resolution 1566 (2004) itself. Given the sensitivity of
the issue of international terrorism, working with the
participation of Member States is more important than
trying to force decisions that might not necessarily
reflect the various legitimate concerns that may arise.

Many countries have doubts about the
appropriateness of resorting to lists to confront the
problem of international terrorism. In the end, such an
approach could put unnecessary limitations on our
consideration of the ultimate causes of violence. Many
problems could be created. For example, contacts with
certain armed groups might become more difficult,
which would make negotiated solutions to conflicts
less likely.

Questions related to the inclusion or deletion of
names on sanctions committee lists have not yet been
adequately resolved. On various occasions, we have
recalled the need to develop precise and uniform
procedures to update, correct and improve the lists of
individuals subject to sanctions. With regard to the
1267 Committee, we reaffirm that it must develop such
procedures and methods, in addition to continuing its
practice of conducting periodic reviews of the lists of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, with a view to the possible delisting of
names. As we have previously stated, adopting
measures to refine the consolidated list and clarifying
list management procedures are the main ways in
which the 1267 Committee can provide an incentive
for contributions by Member States to the List.

Without a consensus definition of terrorism, it is
not appropriate to consider - as envisaged in
resolution 1566 (2004) - possible practical measures
regarding individuals, groups or entities involved in
terrorist activities not covered by resolution 1267
(1999). Resolution 1566 (2004) reflects negotiated
language that contains a clear and important political
message, but it does not constitute a conceptual
definition of terrorism and cannot be interpreted as
such.

Furthermore, under the Charter of the United
Nations, the General Assembly has the functions and
powers enabling it to define subjects such as terrorism.
In the absence of a common definition, the compilation
of a consolidated list of individuals and organizations
classified as terrorist could lead to the undue
politicization of a committee. Hence the importance of
the appeal made by the Secretary-General in his report.

The work of the 1540 Committee is now entering
an important phase. More than 110 Member States
have submitted their reports, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004) and with the
specific guidelines drawn up by the Committee. We
urge those Members that have not yet submitted their

national reports - including requests for technical
assistance when necessary - to do so as soon as
possible.

The Committee recently began to consider the
reports with the support of a group of experts. Our
intention is that that work be carried out in a manner
commensurate with the urgency required by the threat
of non-State actors gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction.

In our opinion, the final outcome of the work of
the 1540 Committee should be a framework for
national and international efforts to confront the threat
posed by non-State actors, particularly terrorists. The
Committee could also facilitate the provision of
technical assistance to States that request it, in order to
help them build their capacities in the relevant areas.
Such efforts must always be developed in cooperation
with Member States, with full respect for the integrity
of multilaterally negotiated instruments and
international law, particularly the rights and obligations
of Member States.

Brazil continues to believe that a world free of
weapons of mass destruction would be a safer world
and that the very existence of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, in the possession of either non-
State actors or States themselves, is a threat to
international peace and security. Effective, irreversible
and verifiable disarmament by States possessing such
weapons would be a clear sign of their commitment to
that cause.

While terrorism is completely unacceptable, it is
nonetheless widely recognized that certain situations,
usually related to social, political and cultural
oppression as well as to severe economic inequalities,
have the potential to create an environment conducive
to the development of extremism. Brazil believes that
our strategies to fight terrorism must also tackle, in an
appropriate manner, the roots of terrorism, as this is the
most effective long-term method of creating
alternatives for individuals that might move them away
from the use of this form of violence.

