Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting and for the three briefings
you delivered at the beginning of our work, which have
clarified the great burdens and responsibilities that
you shoulder in addition to the responsibilities of the
presidency this month. We also thank his Excellency
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for his briefing and
applaud the cooperation among the three Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004). We also applaud
the cooperation between them and the Groups of Experts
of those Committees, the Counter-terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of 1267 Committee.

The three Committees on counter-terrorism and
their Groups of Experts are among the most important
tools available to the Security Council in countering the
phenomenon of terrorism. That can be done by looking
for the best ways and means to defeat this hateful
scourge, which poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. The close cooperation between the
Committees and the Member States, in compliance
with the relevant Council resolutions on counter-
terrorism, has allowed the international community
to achieve several successes against terrorism,
represented by joint Visits, workshops, joint briefings
such as those of today's meeting, as well as cooperation
with international organizations, the exchange of
information and other practical measures.

With regard to the threats posed by terrorist groups,
despite the victories achieved by the international
community against the so-called the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida, these
entities continue to pose a threat to international peace
and security, as the President said. Da'esh continues to
evolve through establishing a covert global network in
Iraq and Syria that aims to continue terrorist attacks
and undermine all the successes achieved through
the cooperation and solidarity of the international
community. This requires each of us to multiply our
efforts and cooperation if we want to preserve our gains.

In this regard, we thank the Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh) Al-Qaida and
associated individuals groups undertakings and entities
and the Chair of the Counter-terrorism Committee for
the efforts made by the two Committees, which include
visits to Member States, comprehensive assessments
and analyses of emerging issues, and identifying the
trends and developments that accompany efforts made
by Member States to counter terrorism. These efforts
will support Member States and United Nations entities
in undertaking the necessary measures, in accordance
with international law, in order to mutually benefit
Member States and the other subsidiary bodies.

We commend the role of CTED in assisting Member
States in implementing Security Council resolutions
and in cooperating with international organizations.
We particularly mention the assistance provided to
Member States in implementing the advanced passenger
information system and the passenger name record
system through cooperation with the International
Civil Aviation Organization. This work comes pursuant
to Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2396
(2017) and in accordance with domestic laws as well as
international human rights law.

With regard to the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
hope that the briefing delivered by the President of
the Security Council will lead to greater conviction
on the part of the Member States with respect to the
need to promote efforts for the optimal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) with the aim of fully
implementing its provisions and achieving universality
in this process.

Our objective is to operationalize the mechanisms
of the Committee on all levels - national, regional
and international - which has become an integral
part of international efforts aimed at attaining
non-proliferation. This is extremely important in
achieving international peace and security.

I would like to note four issues that you mentioned
in your briefing, Mr. President: the need to highlight
the sectors that require the greatest attention in the light
of new proliferation threats; national plans relevant to
resolution 1540 (2004); the country and regional visits
of the Committee and its Groups of Experts; and the
importance of taking the specific circumstances of
States into consideration in implementing measures to
counter proliferation.

On more than one occasion, Kuwait has expressed
its concern with respect to the challenges faced in
the world today by the non-proliferation regime for
weapons of mass destruction. The proliferation ofthose
weapons and the increased possibility of their falling
into the hands of non-State actors cause great concern,
especially given the growing threats posed by terrorism
and the increase of conflicts and instability in our
contemporary world.

In that context, the possibility of non-State actors
acquiring, developing, using and trafficking in weapons
of mass destruction will increase, threatening serious
and unpredictable consequences. One of our main tasks,
therefore, is to correctly assess the evolving nature of
the threat posed by proliferation and rapid advances in
science and technology, while responding in a timely
manner by taking preventive and proactive measures.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
reaching universality in that vital process. We cannot
wait until those weapons are used by non-State
actors. Prevention is better than cure. We should
like to emphasize in this regard that Kuwait remains
steadfastly committed to and actively participates in the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions that
are relevant to anti-terrorism and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

