Mr. Waheed (Maldives): It is with a sombre spirit
that the Maldives takes this opportunity to speak on
the situation in the Middle East, a region that has
throughout the past millennia been plagued by conflict
and which today faces one of its darkest hours. Although
the Middle East is embroiled in many conflicts, the
greatest need at this moment lies undeniably with the
State of Palestine. With more than 500 people killed
over the past two weeks, the majority of them civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, the toll on
the future of the Palestinian people is immeasurable.
That toll will be exacerbated further by the lack of
medical supplies and equipment and basic development
that has resulted from Israel's illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip. That toll will be but one more violation of
international law on top of the occupation, aggression,
extra-judicial executions, excessive and indiscriminate
use of brutal force, forcible colonization, forced
displacement and the collective punishment of an entire
people and nation.

That toll is and has been, for the better part of the
last century, too much to bear. The Maldives echoes
the calls made in this Chamber for the de-escalation of
hostilities in the Gaza Strip, the restoration of calm, the
reinstatement of the November 2012 ceasefire and the
immediate, unconditional end to the Israeli blockade.
Furthermore, the Maldives calls for greater assistance
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which has issued
an emergency appeal for assistance and is currently
housing more than 84,000 displaced peoples, with that
number soon likely to exceed 100,000.

The realization of peace in the Middle East will
not be achieved unless bold decisions are made by the
Security Council to fulfil its mandate to protect the
vulnerable, as outlined in the Charter of the United
Nations. A resolution from the Council calling for an
immediate ceasefire, the reopening of the Gaza Strip
based on the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access,
an end to the blockade, and the guaranteed protection of
civilian populations is long overdue and much wanted.
During the holy month of Ramadan, the prayers of
the Maldivian people have been for those who have lost
life and limb in this conflict. The wanton destruction,
violence and hatred that have marred this time weighs
heavily on the souls of 1.5 billion Muslims the world
over. The Maldives reiterates its enduring support for
the legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to freedom, justice and dignity.

