Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Valerie
Amos for their briefings on recent developments in
Haiti. I also welcome the representative of Haiti.

Colombia and Haiti share not only maritime
borders and a historic past, but also a deep concern for
the welfare of Haiti's people. Our country has
expressed and reiterated, on many occasions and at the
highest level, its desire to be involved in and support
humanitarian efforts and reconstruction in Haiti. On
24 September in the General Assembly, President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon of Colombia called on the
Council to "consider transforming the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti into a true development
operation" (A/65/PV.15, p. 5) for the nation.

Today, we reaffirm that conviction, because it is
clear that Haiti is in need of sound institutions, a
stronger democracy and infrastructure for
development. To achieve that, it needs foreign
investment to generate employment and create wealth.
All of this must be undertaken with respect for the
principles of non-interference in Haiti's internal affairs,
its independence, national sovereignty, cultural identity
and diversity in order to put it on the road to
development and reconstruction.

Colombia, like many countries, has joined in
providing humanitarian aid to Haiti, but we feel no
need to go into details in that respect. We are certain,
however, that all the cooperation given so far is not
enough to meet the needs of a people to whom the
world owes a historical debt that must be repaid. In the

anguish, pain and sadness we see on Haitians' faces,
we see not only hope but also the opportunity to
become better human beings, to ennoble the meaning
of the word "life" and, above all, to join with them in
solidarity from the bottom of our hearts, with no
expectation of reward other than answering the call of
our consciences.

We know that with its mandate for maintaining
security, facilitating the creation of a stable
Government, disarming, demobilizing and
reintegrating all armed groups, and helping to reform
the police and justice systems, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) still has
major challenges ahead. It is time to focus the scope of
the tasks that the Security Council has assigned it, so
that, together with the Organization of American States
and other regional organizations, we can achieve the
rapid stabilization and reconstruction in Haiti.

We share Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
concerns about Haiti, in particular on the need to
complete the election process successfully. In our view,
the completion of the second round of elections is a
critical element of Haiti's recovery, reconstruction and
development. We must focus all our efforts on this end
and support the Haitian Government, its authorities and
the Organization of American States.

MINUSTAH's mandates include fostering the
principles of democratic governance and institutional
development. To that end, the consolidation of the
electoral system, the strengthening of justice and the
establishment of a legislature that responds to the needs
of its people are critical priorities. Colombia supports
the call on MINUSTAH to continue supporting projects
that contribute to a climate of trust. International
financial institutions and donors worldwide have a
central role in the future of Haiti. Development and
welfare must go hand in hand with social awareness on
the part of those institutions, so that the dividends are
accompanied by progress, security and peace.

Finally, we are fully convinced that all action for
Haiti's recovery and strengthening of Haiti, through
sectoral and coordinated planning that allows the
participation of all Haitian political and social actors in
the process of national reconstruction, is an
indispensable prerequisite. Likewise, we call on the
countries and organizations that made offers of
cooperation to ensure the prompt realization of such
assistance so that efforts under way are not in vain.

