Mr. Alasania (Georgia): I want to express my
gratitude to the members of the Security Council, who
are truly concerned about the situation and the
deterioration in Georgia.

First, I would like to make a few comments, on
the statement of the Russian Federation's
representative, and then I have to make an urgent
statement because I have received a phone call from
my Foreign Minister with more urgent and disturbing
news.

It was appalling to hear the Russian Federation
representative talking about the ethnic cleansing
supposedly perpetrated by the Georgian armed forces. I
want to remind the Council and Ambassador Churkin
that it is the Russian Federation that really was and is
supporting militarily the regime in Tskhinvali and
Sukhumi, who are the perpetrators of the ethnic
cleansing, which has been confirmed by numerous
declarations of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and General Assembly
documents.

At the same time, I was surprised that there was
no mention in the Russian Federation representative's
remarks of any of the bombing incidents which
occurred overnight and during the day, because they
are exactly the reason why we have all gathered here to
elaborate on these tragic, criminal, aggressive acts
from the Russian Federation side.

Now, I would like to add to my statement by
saying that right now, as we speak, Russian bombers
are bombing the Poti port, which is the western port of
Georgia, as well as the Senaki airfield, which was
bombed numerous times today. And of course, it was
anticipated from my side that we would have some
kind of provocation cropping up in Abkhazia as well:
we are seeing the bombardment of the Kodori region of
upper Abkhazia. I have been told that there is
confirmed information that the bombers are in the air

and are headed in the direction of Georgia, so this is
still continuing.

This is a very serious matter. I understand that the
Russian Federation is a permanent member of the
Security Council, but the facts that I presented to
Council members today and credible media reports -
not the reports of the propaganda media of the Russian
Federation, which use exactly the wording that is
familiar from that representative's remarks, but
credible reports - are saying that we are at war. I
understand that the Russian Federation is a permanent
member. It is very hard to counter or oppose a
permanent member in the Security Council. But what I
ask of the Council is a very solid statement to the
Government of the Russian Federation, as well as to
the opposing parties, that these kinds of actions should
stop. The bombardment of the sovereign territory of
Georgia should stop, and we call for an immediate
ceasefire. I truly hope that most, if not all, Council
members will agree with this and will make
judgements based on the information that was
produced today by the Georgian side and by members
of the Security Council.

