Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting. We also thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Ambassador Khairat Umarov, as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), concerning the
sanctions on the Taliban, and Ms. Ghizaal Haress
for their important and comprehensive briefings.
I also welcome the participation of our colleague
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, in the meeting.

I would like to take this opportunity to renew the
support of the State of Kuwait to all efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and the members of United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
given the difficult situation there. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/1092) on the
situation in Afghanistan during the past three months.

We hold our meeting today following the
parliamentary elections held two months ago in
Afghanistan. I am pleased to congratulate the
Government and the people of Afghanistan for
successfully holding those historic elections, where
the Afghan people showed their courage in the face
of challenges, threats and acts of violence by going to
the polling centres to choose their representatives in
the Parliament.

To accompany that historic achievement, the
Security Council and the international community not
only followed the elections, but we as members of the
Council also welcomed and supported those elections
through press statements. Last November, the Geneva
Ministerial Conference was held to supportAfghanistan,
and reaffirmed without any doubt that the international
community continues to stand with Afghanistan.

As this year is coming to an end, we must address
the issue that concerns us the most in Afghanistan,
namely, the peace and reconciliation process to end
four decades of security and political instability, which
have had an adverse impact on the life of Afghan
citizens. The delicate political situation in Afghanistan
requires that all wise people and political party leaders
in Afghanistan give primacy to national interests over
party interests. They must intensify efforts to ensure
the success of upcoming presidential elections in
April 2019 in order to guarantee a better future and a
decent life for Afghan citizens after long years of war
and conflict.

The Security Council must also continuously
intensify efforts to support the political process and
encourage Afghanistan to hold presidential elections
as scheduled. In that regard, I join my colleague the
representative of the United Kingdom in welcoming
the appointment by the United States of Mr. Zalmay
Khalilzad as the Special Representative for Afghanistan
Reconciliation. We also read with relief the content of
the report of the Secretary-General on the effective and
positive role of that appointment on revitalizing the
peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. We
wish Mr. Khalilzad success in that vital mission.

We also express our relief for the efforts made by
UNAMA field offices, which have supported peace
initiatives in 11 provinces, including supporting the
role of the youth in the peace process and settling
sectarian conflicts.

In the area of security, we share the concern of the
Secretary-General regarding the ongoing instability and
the growing impact of the armed conflict on civilians,
especially the continuous increase in the number of
civilian casualties as a result of suicide and aerial
attacks. In that regard, we renew our call to all parties
to the conflict to honour their obligations by virtue of
international human rights law and to immediately stop
targeting unarmed civilians.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait renews its
support to Afghanistan in achieving permanent peace
and stability by reaching a diplomatically negotiated
settlement. We stand with Afghanistan in its war
against terrorism. We also believe that the diplomatic
efforts must be accompanied by an investment in
education. True reform in any society begins with a
real investment in comprehensive education system
that raises a promising and educated generation that is
free from the clutches of sectarianism and contributes
to building a safe nation for all. There is a famous
Chinese saying on the importance of education that best
describes my point, and with it I will end my statement
today. If you are planning for a year, sow rice; if you
are planning for a decade, plant trees; and if you are
planning for a lifetime, educate people.

