Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Russian delegation for convening this important debate,
and I join previous speakers in thanking the briefers
for their statements. Nigeria commends the two ad hoc
Tribunals for their contributions to the development of
substantive and procedural international criminal law
and the promotion of the rule of law. Their work has
helped to strengthen the international criminal justice
system and the fight against impunity and has affirmed
the importance of ensuring accountability for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Council members will recall that at the meeting held
on Wednesday, 16 April, to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary ofthe genocide in Rwanda (S/PV.7155), the
Council adopted resolution 2150 (2014), which calls on
States to recommit to preventing and fighting genocide
and other serious crimes under international law. The
Council acknowledged that the prosecution of persons
responsible for genocide and other serious crimes by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
has contributed to the process of national reconciliation
and to the restoration and maintenance of peace in
Rwanda.

In the interests of justice, all Member States have
a duty to cooperate with the ICTR, the International
Residual Michanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
Government of Rwanda in order to arrest and prosecute
the remaining fugitives indicted by the Tribunal.
According to the report of the ICTR (see S/2014/343),
Member States have intensified their cooperation, with
the goal of apprehending and bringing to trial within
their national jurisdictions the Rwandan suspects on the
INTERPOL list of wanted fugitives. This is a welcome
development, and we hope it sends a clear message
that there will be no place for the perpetrators of mass
atrocities to hide.

Nigeria takes positive note of the progress the
ICTR has made in implementing its completion
strategy, which has been updated continuously since
2003. The smooth handover of most of its judicial and
prosecutorial functions to the Residual Mechanism
is an important indication of that progress. While we
understand that preparing and submitting archives to
the Mechanism is a major challenge, we nonetheless
call on the Tribunal to continue to focus on the process
of transferring the records and archives. One important
fact is that the lessons learned in managing the judicial,
administrative and prosecutorial functions of an
international tribunal are vast, and sharing them will
enable current and future international and domestic
courts to learn from the successes and challenges that
form the ICTR's legacy.

Turning to the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, it is significant that there are no outstanding
fugitives and that the Tribunal has concluded its
proceedings against 141 of the 161 individuals it has
indicted. This reassures us that the Tribunal has been
making progress in fulfilling its mandate to meet
the completion strategy deadlines. Its support for the
Residual Mechanism through a variety of processes,
including recruitment, communications, information
technology support and registry management, is
commendable.

We are concerned that various factors, including
the late arrests of some individuals and issues that
are particular to specific cases, could militate against
the efforts to complete some trials and appeals by the
31 December deadline for transfer to the Mechanism. We
encourage the Tribunal to work expeditiously towards
completing the outstanding judicial proceedings while
observing all appropriate procedural safeguards,
adhering to the fundamental principles of due process
and fairness, and ensuring a smooth transition to the
Residual Mechanism.

Nigeria welcomes the progress reports from the
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the period from
16 November 2013 to 15 May 2014 (S/2014/350, annexes I and II). We are satisfied that in accordance with its
mandate, the Mechanism has assumed responsibility for
many functions of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. We urge the Mechanism to continue
to work closely with the principals and staff of both
Tribunals in order to facilitate the smooth transition of
the remaining functions and services and to harmonize
and adopt best practices.

Finally, we would like to state that Nigeria remains
committed to the fight against impunity. We believe
it must be confronted wherever it occurs. We support
strong global action against mass atrocities, and to
demonstrate our support we have ratified the relevant
international legal instruments.

