Ms. Juul (Norway): International support for
Afghanistan is taking its toll in many ways. A few days
ago, Norway lost four soldiers in action, and yesterday
we were saddened to hear of the loss of one United
Nations national staff member. The International
Security Assistance Force losses for June this year
totaled more than 100 soldiers.

It is more important than ever that we maintain
our resolve to see our effort through. Afghanization is
not a euphemism for exit and implies no quick
solution, but rather underlines the importance of an
Afghan-driven process that is responsible, inclusive
and truly national in nature, aiming at a better future
for the Afghan people. That resolve to help the Afghan
people is mandated by the Security Council and is
increasingly focused on being Afghan-led and on
prospects for a political solution. Our international
obligations are long-term but our commitments should
be guided by pragmatism and realism, thus avoiding
unrealistic benchmarks and artificial deadlines.

We welcome the first briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan
de Mistura. We commend the very professional and
sound commitment he brings to the task. We also
welcome his focus on the three-plus-one priorities for
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in implementing its new mandate in a
flexible and realistic way that also reflects current
political realities.
However, we would particularly emphasize the
importance of continued United Nations support for
advancing the human rights agenda in close
cooperation with Afghan authorities and the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, including the
role of civil society in promoting fundamental rights
and freedoms for all Afghans in tomorrow's
Afghanistan. The need for international civilian
support to the Afghan people is undiminished, as is the
need for constructive partnerships between Afghan
authorities and the United Nations.

It is important to protect UNAMA's added value,
in particular its international legitimacy, political
outreach, field presence and role as international
guarantor for the integrity of the political process
leading to increased Afghan ownership. To that end, it
is vital that the vacancy rate in UNAMA is further
reduced and security for its staff properly ensured.
More flexible use of UNAMA's critical staff is
welcomed, but should never compromise the Mission's
ability to implement its comprehensive mandate.

The Consultative Peace Jirga, held in Kabul four
weeks, ago, also highlighted the need for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. We note in particular the
commitment to demand a just peace that guarantees the
rights of all of the country's citizens, including women
and children. Many women in Afghanistan are
concerned about their role and rights in terms of the
outcome of the reconciliation process. Any Afghan
reconciliation process must be Afghan-led and in
conformity with the country's Constitution. But only a
political process that can provide a political settlement
with the armed opposition without alienating groups
that support the Afghan Government will be
sustainable.

Addressing issues of transitional justice and
human rights in a context of ongoing conflict is indeed
challenging, but all Afghans need to be included in a
meaningful way and to have their rights protected in
the context of the peace process. The Afghan people
have an enormous desire and need for justice and good
governance. If that is not met, it will be further
exploited by the armed opposition. A just and durable
solution in Afghanistan must be one that brings about
better prospects for all Afghan citizens.

One of the first public achievements of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General was to
obtain the necessary guarantees for the upcoming
parliamentary elections - particularly to secure the
seats reserved for women and ensure an international
presence in the handling of complaints. We welcome
the work done thus far by the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission
to prepare for parliamentary elections in September,
including the implementation of fraud mitigation
measures. We also welcome the independent nature of
the electoral institutions and urge them to ensure
transparency and avoid any political interference. But
we also note the shortcomings so far with regard to a
proper vetting process for candidates.

Adequate security for electoral staff and
campaigners will be a crucial task, as will the proper
staffing, in particular when it comes to female staff, of
the Independent Electoral Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission at the provincial
level. Building on lessons learned from the 2009
elections will also be crucial. We urge the Afghan
authorities to start planning for comprehensive long-
term electoral reform.

The parliamentary elections will be an important
test for Afghan democracy and for the political
processes, which go together with Afghan ownership
and reconciliation. Strengthening legitimate democratic
institutions will enable an intra-Afghan dialogue to
take place and will mitigate the risk of further political
fragmentation.

The Kabul Conference in July will be the first of
its kind to take place inside the county. It will focus on
a renewed partnership between the Government and its
own people. Rather than raising high expectations for
the event, we should focus on realistic achievements
and the need to strengthen the implementation phase.
The Kabul Conference is an important step in a longer
process where Afghan authorities are determined to set
their own priorities and implement tangible national
programmes supported by the international community
under the leadership of the United Nations. Norway
looks forward to contributing to that process as a
reliable partner for a transition towards responsible
Afghan ownership.

