The President (spoke in Arabic): After consultations
among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council recalls all its previous
resolutions and statements of its President which
underscore the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
statutes of regional and subregional organizations.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the briefings of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Antonio Guterres,
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, on 13 June 2019
and reiterates that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of peace and security, and consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter, can improve
collective security.

"The Security Council encourages the holding
of an annual briefing by the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, and expresses its
intention to consider further steps to promote
closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in the fields of
conflict early warning, prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
and to promote the coherence and effectiveness of
their efforts. In this regard, it welcomes the already

existing strong cooperation initiatives between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States.

"The Security Council takes note of the
outcome of general meetings on the cooperation
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and their specialized
agencies, the last of which was held in Geneva in
July 2018.

"The Security Council encourages the holding
of an annual informal meeting between its members
and the members of the Council of the League of
Arab States, as well as the consideration of the
proposal by the Council of Ministers of the League
of Arab States to establish a consultative framework
between the Arab League and the United Nations
to enhance collaboration in maintaining peace and
security in the Arab region.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of intensifying coordination between
the League of Arab States and the United Nations
special envoys, as appropriate, in addressing the
current crises in the Arab region with a view to
reaching a more comprehensive understanding
of the crisis in the region, strengthening the
capacity of the two organizations and developing
effective solutions through joint action where
appropriate. The Security Council also emphasizes
the importance of trilateral cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States on
cross-regional peace and security issues, as well as
with other regional organizations on situations of
common interest.

"The Security Council recognizes and further
encourages efforts by the League of Arab States
to contribute to collective endeavours to settle
conflicts in the region peacefully, while reaffirming
its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
countries and to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council commends members
of the League of Arab States on their ongoing
commitment to international peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, including through the
contribution of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
"The Security Council welcomes the upcoming "The Security Council requests the Secretary-

opening of the United Nations liaison office in the General to report, as appropriate, on further
headquarters ofthe League ofArab States in Cairo ways of strengthening institutional relations and
in June 2019, and encourages the United Nations cooperation between the two organizations."

Secretariat and the Secretariat General of the
League of Arab States to maximize the utilization
of this office towards strengthening cooperation
between the two organizations. The meeting rose at 12.15p.rl1.

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOlQ/S.
