Mr. Jayasekara (Sri Lanka): My delegation
wishes to convey its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and for your delegation's
leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We take note of the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict
(S/2010/181), which provides useful insights on how
we must move forward on this important issue.

Following the end of the armed conflict in
SriLanka last year, the recruitment of children by
armed groups has ended. This year, one persistent
violator, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
terrorist group, has been de-listed from annex II of the
Secretary-General's report following its defeat and the
consequent end to its abominable practice of child
recruitment. The other former armed group, the Tamil
Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal, which entered into an
action plan with UNICEF and our Government, has
released children in its custody and entered the
democratic process.

At the end of last year, at the invitation of our
Government, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, General Patrick Cammaert, visited
Sri Lanka and witnessed at first hand the progress
following the end of the conflict.

It may be recalled that over a decade ago the
Government of Sri Lanka voluntarily submitted the
case of the LTTE for the consideration of the Working
Group. We did so because our Government has a
zero-tolerance policy on child recruitment and we fully
condemned the recruitment of children by the LTTE.

My delegation is pleased to inform the Council
that by bringing an end to the armed conflict, our
Government was able to take into its care more than
570 children, some as young as 14 years of age, who
had been recruited by the LTTE. As detailed in the
Secretary-General's report, those children have now
been put through a comprehensive rehabilitation
programme by the Government, with the assistance of
UNICEF, and have been returned to their communities,
where they will resume normal life with their families
and continue to receive community-based
rehabilitation.

Throughout the military operation conducted by
our armed forces to liberate civilians held as human
shields by the LTTE terrorist group, our armed forces
took care to ensure the safety and security of innocent
civilians, including children. For that reason, nearly
300,000 civilians fled from the clutches of the LTTE
and sought the protection of the armed forces.

Since the end of the conflict, our Government has
provided food, shelter and medical care to those

internally displaced persons (IDPs), including children,
with assistance from the United Nations and other
donor agencies. Special educational facilities are
provided to the displaced children. Nutritional food
supplements have also been provided to infants.
Displaced children have been reunited with their
families. Children who have lost their parents have
been entrusted to Government-registered child care
facilities. Protection teams of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF
officials are given access to ensure the safety and
security of children in IDP villages. As of today, 90 per
cent of the IDPs have been resettled and only a few
children remain in IDP villages, along with their
families. Those who remain have freedom of
movement. De-mining and the completion of
reconstruction work will enable those families to return
to their places of origin very soon.

My Government has demonstrated its serious
commitment to a process of accountability to look into
whether any violations of international norms might
have taken place during the conflict and to work
towards reconciliation through a process of restorative
justice. Last month, we announced the appointment of
a commission of inquiry, comprising eminent persons,
who will look into all aspects of the conflict. The
commission has since moved swiftly to get on with its
task.

Our Government considers its responsibility for
the protection of children and the promotion of their
welfare a high priority. It is imperative for the State to
ensure that children are not in danger and to prevent
them from being used as accessories to violence. As a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocols, Sri Lanka provides
for the well-being of children, with free education and
free health care. We have established the National
Child Protection Authority, with wide-ranging powers
to deal with all issues that affect the well-being of our
children. We also have a separate ministry that focuses
on providing the resources to implement programmes
aimed at securing the rights of children.

The Secretary-General's report pursuant to
resolution 1882 (2009) has rather vaguely and
incoherently outlined the criteria for de-listing groups
in its annexes. While the practice of recruiting children
is abominable and is unreservedly condemned, it is
important to give confidence and build trust in
post-conflict societies by de-listing groups that have
released children in their custody, rather than dawdling
over technical aspects of the criteria.

Therefore, we suggest that the criteria for
de-listing be clarified so that the groups that have
already complied with the resolutions or have ceased
recruitment can be quickly de-listed. We recognize the
need for continued engagement by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in post-conflict societies
to ensure long-term peace and stability and with a view
to ensuring that there is no re-recruitment or
resurgence of violence.

We condemn, in the strongest possible terms, rape
and other grave sexual violence against children in
armed conflict. There should be no place for such
grave violations. We must find effective means to
ensure that all actors abide by such principles.
Throughout the conflict in Sri Lanka, our disciplined
security forces ensured that there were no incidents of
that nature.

It is pertinent to recall that the primary obligation
for complying with the resolutions lies with Member
States themselves. We need to set higher standards for
ourselves, inasmuch as we expect non-State actors to
do so. We urge all Member States to sign the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and to comply
with the relevant United Nations resolutions.

We urge the Security Council to consider targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of grave
violations. The Secretary-General's report highlights
the fact that persistent violators need to be dealt with in
order to enforce our commitment to protecting
children. Initiatives of the Security Council to address
the issue of children and armed conflict and efforts by
the Council Working Group on the subject must be
made to focus more on the real issues underlying the
recruitment of children. Tangible international action,
as opposed to mere expressions of concern, is needed.

My delegation appreciates the contribution of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and her Office. We remain
committed to continuing our close cooperation with the
Special Representative and with United Nations
agencies including UNICEF.

