Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): First and foremost, I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and assure you of
my delegation's full support.

I thank Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their reports (S/2019/417, annexes I and II) and
briefings today. We congratulate Judge Agius on his
recent appointment as the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. That
transition of leadership is an opportune time to
reflect on the legacy of the Mechanism over the past
seven years. From our perspective, that legacy can be
summarized in four points.

First, 11 genocide convicts were released before the
end of their sentences. Secondly, none of the remaining
eight fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for crimes committed
during the genocide against the Tutsi has been arrested
or brought before the court. Thirdly, 23 genocide
convicts sentenced by the ICTR have appealed their
sentences and have either been acquitted or seen their
sentences significantly reduced after retrial. Fourthly,
nine genocide convicts released or acquitted by the
court currently live comfortable live in Arusha and
their living allowances and accommodation are paid
from the budget of the Mechanism. That is, in sum, the
appalling legacy of the previous leadership. I wish to
elaborate on some of those points.

With regard to the early release of genocide
convicts, at his sole discretion the former President of
the Mechanism imposed an arbitral set of criteria for
the early release of genocide convicts upon or soon
after having served two-thirds of their sentences. None
of the applications for early release, with the exception
of three cases in 2018, has ever been reported to the
Government of Rwanda, the representatives of genocide
survivors, the communities in which they committed
crimes or witnesses, who provided evidence of the
crimes committed, at great personal risk.

The grounds on which early release applications
were lodged, considered and approved have also been
withheld from the Government of Rwanda, genocide
survivors and other relevant stakeholders. In the future,
we very much expect meaningful cooperation with the
Government of Rwanda and all relevant stakeholders
prior to the consideration of applications for early
release. On that point, we wish to sincerely thank all
members of the Council that have emphasized the
importance of having clear criteria in the spirit and
letter of resolution 2422 (2018).

In all cases of early release but one, decisions
were made without conditions. The only case to which
conditions were attached was that of Mr. Aloys Simba,
a former lieutenant colonel who organized large-scale
killings in the south of Rwanda and whose early
release was sneaked through by the former President
of the Mechanism, a week before the end of his tenure
as President of the court. It is also worth noting that
genocide convicts who were granted early release
never expressed a shred of remorse for the crimes they
committed during the genocide and, since their release,
several of them have joined associations denying the
genocide or promoting the genocide ideology. And yet,
they were considered by the Mechanism on the basis
of reports received from prisons that they had been
rehabilitated because they had demonstrated good
behaviour, such as regularly attending prison mass
services or participating in gardening - none of which,
members will agree, is relevant to the crimes of which
they were convicted.
We expect the President of the Mechanism to
implement the spirit and letter of resolution 2422 (2018),
adopted last year, and put in place clear conditions
to any early release as a matter of agency and the
prerequisite for considering new applications. It is only
in doing so that we can make it costly for those released
if they were to engage in activities promoting genocide
ideology in the future.

With regard to fugitives still at large, the Office
of the Prosecutor has noted in several of its reports
that progress in locating, tracking and arresting the
remaining eight indicted fugitives has been hampered
by the failure of some Member States and other
relevant authorities to cooperate with the requests.
Furthermore, the Prosecutor General of the Republic
of Rwanda has also sent out 1,000 indictments to more
than 34 countries around the world, requesting their
cooperation in arresting and prosecuting individuals
who have been indicted or in transferring them to
Rwanda to face justice.

We echo the call made by the Office ofthe Prosecutor
to all Members to adhere to their international legal
obligations and provide the assistance needed to locate
and apprehend genocide fugitives. We thank Member
States that have cooperated - in particular Canada,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Germany, Malawi, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden
and the United States of America - in the transfer
to Rwanda or prosecution in their national courts
of genocide convicts. We urge all Member States, in
particular members of the Council, to walk the walk of
commitment to international law, the rule of law and
justice, either by prosecuting the individuals indicted
and living on their territory or by transferring them to
Rwanda to face prosecution.

In particular, we call for the arrest or trial of Dr.
Vincent Bajinya, Emmanuel Nteziryayo, Charles
Munyaneza, Celestin Ugirashebuja and Celestin
Mutabaruka, who are still living freely in the United
Kingdom. We also call for the cooperation of South
Africa in arresting Mr. Kayishema Fulgence, who is
still living in South Africa, despite several calls for
cooperation from the Prosecutor. We welcome France's
efforts in bringing fugitives who took refuge in France to
justice and encourage them to continue those efforts, in
particular, with the cases of Dr. Sosthene Munyemana,
Dr. Eugene Rwamucyo, Dr. Marcel Bivugabagabo and
Dr. Charles Twagira, who are also still living in France.

The Prosecutor reported a very concerning trend of
systematic retrials and appeals, where witnesses have
been pressured or corrupted to change their positions.
A case in point is the multi-accused contempt case
in the Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al. trial.
We commend the Office of the Prosecutor in the case
Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware of genocide
convict Mr. Ngirabatware, where it was established
that witnesses were corrupted in contempt of court.
That, however, is far from being an isolated case. All
previous retrials have been subject to similar practices.

With regard to the release of genocide convicts,
as was mentioned by the President, Judge Agius, nine
convicts released or acquitted by the court still live in
Arusha at the expense of Member States, including
Rwanda, as their living costs and accommodation are
paid through Members' assessed contributions to the
Mechanism's budget. That in itself symbolizes the
tragic irony of the international justice system. Some
Member States find it difficult to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor in bringing to book those who
committed the most atrocious crimes, and yet find it
normal that their taxpayers' money is used to offer
living allowances to those released many years after
their acquittal. In some cases, living expenses and
allowances have been paid by the ICTR - and later, by
the Mechanism - for more than a decade. In one case,
these allowances have been paid for 15 years. Rwanda
believes that they are unjustified and should simply
be stopped.

In conclusion, the four points I have outlined reflect
Rwanda's assessment of the poor performance of the
Mechanism over the past seven years and its failure to
deliver on its core mission to complete the unfinished
work of the former ICTR and ICTY. Rwanda expects
an improved performance and meaningful cooperation
with the Mechanism under the leadership of Judge
Agius. We are encouraged by his constructive dialogue
and engagement with all stakeholders, including my
Government, since he took office six months ago. We
also call on Member States hosting genocide fugitives
to cooperate more effectively with the Office of the
Prosecutor in order to hold them to account for the
crimes committed in the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda.

To end on a more positive note, in today's Rwanda
genocide survivors and perpetrators live side by side, on
the same hills and in the same communities, in peaceful
coexistence. The delivery ofjustice in Rwanda has been
central to making this possible by fighting the culture
of impunity, bringing communities back together and
rebuilding the social fabric destroyed in 1994.
