Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Yesterday, the Council had
the opportunity to meet with the Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and with the Secretary
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Today's meeting with the Foreign Minister of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia emphasizes
that the issues affecting peace and security in the
Balkans must be dealt with in a regional context.

Allow me to welcome Mr. Kerim and to thank
him for outlining his Government's plan of action
aimed at preventing a further deterioration of the
situation. I extend to him my country's sincere
condolences for the loss of the lives of the three
Macedonian soldiers that occurred as a result of the
violence along his country's border with Kosovo.

Last Friday, my delegation joined other members
of the Council in the condemnation of the recent
Violence by extremists seeking to undermine stability
and security in the region. At that time, the Council
welcomed the initial steps taken by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) to control the border and urged KFOR and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to consider further steps in this regard. We are
therefore pleased to note the close cooperation between
KFOR and the Government of Macedonia that has
emerged in the past few days, aimed at preventing
further escalation of the violence. We note, too, the
assistance being provided by other Governments and
international organizations.

The new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Kosovo, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, has also held
meetings with officials of Macedonia to offer support
for the Government's attempts to reduce tensions along
the border. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNMIK have pledged to do all
that is possible to help to stabilize the situation. We
encourage the Government of Macedonia to continue
this close collaboration and to seek a political solution
to the tensions.

We note the Foreign Minister's suggestions
regarding additional measures to be taken to prevent
further escalation and we look forward to future
discussions of this matter. It is essential that future
action to reduce tensions along the border be
undertaken, bearing in mind the ultimate goal of
reconciliation. We continue to hope for the peaceful
coexistence of the various ethnic groups in the Balkan
region, an environment of peace and stability and their
integration into the wider European community.

Jamaica joins in supporting the statement which
you, Mr. President, will make on behalf of the Council.

