Mr. Saint-Hilaire (Haiti) (spoke in French):
I welcome the adoption of resolution 2476 (2019),
creating a United Nations special political mission,
which will take over from the United Nations Mission
for the Support of Justice in Haiti as of 16 October.

This second transition within the space of two years
is taking place in a national context that continues to
be fragile. However, the creation of a United Nations
mission other than a peacekeeping operation in Haiti is
without a doubt a step in the right direction. It is also
the option favoured by the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, during the strategic
assessment conducted in January.

The Republic of Haiti has been facing major
difficulties for some time now, but the situation is not a
threat to regional peace and security.

The second preambular paragraph of the
resolution - which is reprised in all Council resolutions
on the situation in Haiti - will finally find its true
meaning in the context of the special political mission.
Like the people of Haiti themselves, the Security
Council has always declared itself firmly committed to
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of the Republic of Haiti.

In spite of everything, the Haitian people remain
deeply attached to the glorious moments of their
history and to the noble ideals of the founding fathers
of national independence. Having said that, I will limit
myself to a few brief observations.

First, the special political mission is in keeping with
the parameters defined in the letter dated 13 May 2019
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/387).

Secondly, I have taken note of the main
responsibilities assigned to the special political mission.
The mission's work will focus more on strategic
advice to the Haitian authorities in the areas set out in
paragraph 1 of resolution 2476 (2019).

Thirdly, the United Nations must strive, as part of
this mission, to work concretely in the interests of all
Haitians by promoting stability, justice, human rights,
the rule of law, democracy and sustainable development.

I remind Council members that a safe and stable
environment cannot be built in a context of poverty,
hunger, social inequality and, worst of all, difficulties
in accessing financing for the implementation of
essential reforms. In that regard, the United Nations
should pursue its efforts to help the Haitian authorities
take swift and decisive action to improve the living
conditions of the entire Haitian population, including
the most vulnerable groups.

We would have liked to see a special political
mission commensurate with the challenges facing our
country, which include political difficulties requiring
constructive, authentic and inclusive dialogue among
all strata of Haitian society; social, economic and
financial difficulties requiring the mobilization of
adequate financial resources; threats to security in
light of the increasing number of acts of violence,
the spread of firearms and the proliferation of armed
gangs; difficulties in reviving national production
and food security, as there are still fears of food
riots; humanitarian difficulties, including the fight
against cholera; and environmental challenges, given
the country's vulnerability to natural disasters and
climate change.

I remain hopeful that the special political mission
will have adequate financial means to be able to
provide concrete assistance to the Haitian authorities
in overcoming this multidimensional crisis. Only then
will we be able to speak of the real impact of the United
Nations presence on stability, security, strengthening
institutions and sustainable development in Haiti.

I strongly encourage all members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council,
specifically members of the latter's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, to engage in strategic discussions with
a view to ensuring the United Nations presence in Haiti
is integrated, balanced, respectful of national priorities
and working in synergy with the three inextricably
linked pillars of the Organization.

I conclude by saying that the due implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will
undoubtedly spearhead our efforts to achieve national
security and stability.

The meeting rose at10.35 am.
