Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency for
organizing today's open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. This is the second open debate
on the subject since Kuwait assumed the presidency
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We welcome the
institutionalization of that very commendable practice.

My delegation would like to express its appreciation
for the considerable work undertaken over the years by
the Informal Working Group. The note by the President

(S/2017/507, annex) known as note 507 has in itself
made a significant contribution to developing the
Council's working methods.

I would also like to commend Ms. Karin Landgren
and Mr. James Cockayne for their very informative,
enlightening, comprehensive and focused briefings.
I invite Council members to reflect further on
their contributions.

Articles 24, 25 and 26 of the Charter of the United
Nations grant the Security Council considerable powers
and privileges, which it cannot exercise without adopting
an effective and efficient approach. The Council must
in particular support the development of its working
methods by ensuring the proper implementation of its
mandate. Needless to say, such methods concern all
States Members of the United Nations, including both
permanent and non-permanent members of the Council.

In addition, the catalytic role of the 10 non-permanent
members of the Council, in particular, has been
decisive in more than one respect. I would like to
thank my brother Ambassador Matjila in that regard
for his relevant statement earlier on behalf of the
non-permanent Council members. Their proposals
are indeed very specific and are derived from their
participation in, and contribution to, the daily work of
the Security Council. We ask that their proposals be
duly considered and reflected upon.

Morocco acknowledges the tangible efforts made
in recent years and welcomes the positive developments
in improving the functioning of the Council and in
enhancing its effectiveness and inclusiveness. Indeed,
greater openness and more frequent interaction with
the non-permanent members of the Council, elections
of the Chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies
and the standardized use of new technologies are
significant advances.

Similarly, interactions with the Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission and of its country-
specific configurations would benefit from further
institutionalization. Morocco also welcomes the fact
that the Council has taken into account the proposals
and recommendations of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
Morocco has the honour to chair.

Such new practices help improve the transparency,

credibility and quality of the Council's work. They also
enable it to benefit from the diversity of positions and
views of the States Members of the United Nations
because the process of improving the Council's
working methods is unrestrained, evolving and above
all ongoing. Moreover, in the quest for transparency
and efficiency and to strengthen the authority of the
Council, it is crucial to take into account the current
global international context in any debate relating to
the Council's working methods.

The Kingdom ofMorocco attaches great importance
to developing preventive diplomacy, in line with the
requirements for rapid and effective action to maintain
international peace and security, and to promoting
political solutions to disputes and providing the support
of the international community for measures taken by
the Security Council.

As a troop-contributing country, the Kingdom of
Morocco can attest to the lasting repercussions of the
Security Council's efforts to prevent conflicts, maintain
peace and settle disputes peacefully, in particular in our
continent of Africa. Troop-contributing countries have
considerable first-hand knowledge of the field, which
is why the Council's interaction with contributing
countries is not only enriching but indeed essential.
Ultimately, consolidating cooperation with troop-
contributing countries will be a significant contribution
to improving the Council's work.

In conclusion, we should not lose sight of the fact
that discussions on improving the working methods of
the Security Council are part of an overall vision of the
reform of the United Nations architecture. It is for that
reason that Morocco welcomes the fact that the Kuwaiti
presidency has convened the first debate on the issue.
We hope that it will not be the last.

