Mr. Bessho (Japan): We appreciate the presidency's
swift convening of this urgent briefing, which was
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea, France, the United Kingdom and Japan. We also
appreciate the briefing by Mr. Feltman.

Less than a week ago, the members of the Security
Council gathered to condemn the launch of a ballistic
missile by North Korea, which flew over Japan (see S/PV.8034). Yesterday, North Korea announced that
it had succeeded in miniaturizing a nuclear warhead
that could be attached to an intercontinental ballistic
missile. Only hours later, North Korea conducted
its sixth nuclear test. Seen together, it is clear how
belligerent and dangerous North Korea's actions are
and how it is not a problem merely for North Korea's
neighbours, but for the entire international community.
The Security Council must waste no time in ending
such an outrageous and unacceptable challenge to the
security and safety of the world.

With regard to nuclear testing, North Korea is the
only country to have conducted nuclear tests in the
twenty-first century. Almost exactly one year ago,
North Korea conducted its fifth nuclear test, and the
members of the Council were united in expressing their
condemnation in the strongest terms (see S/PV.7821).
The international community urged North Korea to
stop, but North Korea poured precious resources into
enhancing its nuclear capabilities. As a result, the sixth
nuclear test exhibited an explosive magnitude of force
far greater than the previous one, and has raised the
threat to an unprecedented level.

Concerning missile launches, the Security Council
adopted a stern presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/16)
less than a week ago. I will not repeat the discussion (see S/PV.8034), but let me just remind Council members
that missile launches and nuclear tests are part and
parcel of North Korea's nuclear development. Taken
holistically, the threat that it poses truly has entered a
new level, which is more grave and imminent.

The nuclear test by North Korea is a clear violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and a
brazen challenge to the international disarmament and
non-proliferation regime based on the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It also violates
the J apan-Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Pyongyang Declaration, as well as the Joint Statement
of the Fourth Round of the Six-Party Talks.

Japan strongly condemns North Korea and has
directly lodged a protest against North Korea. Japan
welcomes the fact that many countries in the world,
members of the Council and Secretary-General Guterres
have already issued statements strongly condemning
North Korea, but, beyond condemnation, the Security
Council must act to stop North Korea from continuing
down this road. We should make it clear to the North
Koreans that continuing their current policy will entail
serious consequences. We must put the maximum
amount of pressure on North Korea to change its policy.

It continues to be critically important for all
Member States to faithfully implement the relevant
existing resolutions, which have been unanimously
adopted, including resolutions 2270 (2016), 2321 (2016),
2356 (2017) and 2371 (2017), but that is not sufficient.
Japan stresses the need for the Council to adopt swiftly
a new resolution with further robust sanction measures.
In paragraph 29 of resolution 2371 (2017), the Security
Council expressed its "determination to take further
significant measures in the event of a further DPRK
nuclear test or launch." The Council must act on in
accordance with that affirmation.

Japan is looking forward to continuing to work
closely with all the members of the Council on this
ever-more urgent and grave threat to the peace and
security of the world.

