Mr. Van Schalkwyk (South Africa): My delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. We also thank the briefers for the
comprehensive briefings, which have highlighted
a number of key issues that still require our firm
commitment. I would like to focus on two key issues,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the political situation in the
Sudan. However, at the outset I want to note that South
Africa deplores the loss of innocent lives that took
place in the past few days in Zalingei. We express our
condolences to the families of the deceased and wish
the injured a speedy recovery.

Turning to UNAMID, we would like to express our
appreciation to Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and the UNAMID
team for all their efforts in difficult conditions, which
have so far resulted in the drawdown of 4,000 troops.

We also welcome UNAMID's continued work with
national and local authorities, as well as with the United
Nations country team and other partners, to facilitate
mediation and address the underlying issues of access
to land and resources. While noting the significant
progress that has been made in the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in Darfur, we are concerned about
the security challenges that persist, as well as the human

rights violations highlighted in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General (S/2019/445). The violence against
civilians is particularly unacceptable. Furthermore,
women and children continue to be the most vulnerable
members of the population and the most affected
by sexual violence, which is still a weapon of war in
the conflict.
With regard to the proposed drawdown, we would
like to reiterate the decision of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union of 13 June. It is our view
that in line with the strategic assessment of UNAMID
of 1 June, and given the unfolding situation in the
Sudan, the drawdown and liquidation process should
be carried out in a responsible manner, and UNAMID
troops should be relocated to the remaining team sites
that have been identified as security hotspots until
such time as the situation is stabilized. It should be
systematic, taking into account the security conditions
on the ground and in the Sudan as a whole. It should also
ensure that no vacuum is created, which could hamper
the progress already made as well as undermining the
protection of civilians. We support UNAMID in making
continued efforts to address the security concerns of
the local communities and internally displaced persons,
particularly given the current volatile situation.

Perhaps it is time to ask some questions. Should
we stick to the original drawdown time frames? Should
we not reassess the situation and then recalibrate? The
situation has evolved. It is not the same in the centre
of the Sudan, and we cannot proceed as if nothing has
happened. Darfur is also part ofthe greater Sudan and is
implicated in that regard. There is too much contestation
of power and too much mistrust. An assessment of
the drawdown is urgently needed, and the Security
Council should reject the Transitional Military Council
decree on handing over its team sites to the Rapid
Support Forces. We should call on the Transitional
Military Council to rescind that decision immediately
and without conditions and to allow UNAMID to hand
over identified assets to civilian entities.

With regard to the attacks on UNAMID and United
Nations agencies and the looting of their property, we
want to reiterate our reminder to the Republic of the
Sudan of its primary responsibility to provide protection
to both the civilian population and United Nations
property, and we call on the Sudan to investigate and
bring to account the people who have been committing
those crimes.

With regard to the political situation, too many
people have lost their lives in the political circumstances
that have created so much uncertainty. In that regard,
in line with the communique of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union (AU) of 13 June and the
3 June press statement by the three African members of
the Security Council, we strongly condemn and lament
the tragic and unjustified loss of life and remind the
transitional authorities in the Sudan of their obligation
to protect civilians and respect their fundamental rights.
We urge the Transitional Military Council to return
to the internal dialogue with the aim of responding
swiftly and effectively to the legitimate aspirations
of the Sudanese people, as well as to the framework
established by the African Union. We underline the
primacy of African-led initiatives in the quest for
a lasting solution to the crisis in the Sudan. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, Chair of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, to bring the parties back
to the negotiating table in an approach consistent with
that of the AU communique of 6 June. It is key that
the Sudanese chart their own path to peace, devoid of
interference, and that is also vital to ensuring that the
substantial progress in peacebuilding that has been
achieved in Darfur is not reversed. We also welcome all
other efforts being undertaken at a bilateral level.

South Africa furthermore stresses how important
it is that UNAMID continue to provide technical and
logistical assistance to the Sudan's Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission in
disarming and demobilizing armed combatants. We
urge the Transitional Military Council, the Declaration
of Freedom and Change forces and the country's
political parties to engage in constructive dialogue with
a view to restoring peace and stability in the Sudan.
Given the volatile state of the region, that is also vital
to regional stability. The Sudan remains a key strategic
country on the continent, and it is bordered by seven
countries - Egypt, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Libya. Instability
in the Sudan will have a negative effect in the region.

In conclusion, the socioeconomic challenges in
the Sudan are part of the root causes of the broader
challenges it faces. We should therefore focus our
support on economic development and home in on
financial mobilization to support the country in its
economic recovery. We commend the countries that
have contributed in that regard.

