Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Panama
is taking the floor, first, to place clearly on record the
importance of the situation in Haiti for our country.
Secondly, we wish to thank the countries of the region
that have devoted efforts and contributed troops to
Haiti - including Brazil, Peru, Argentina, Uruguay,
Bolivia, Paraguay, Chile, Ecuador and Guatemala -
and, in particular, the countries outside the region that
are doing so, including Sri Lanka, Nepal and Jordan.

Panama also wishes to express its appreciation
for the efforts made by the delegation of Peru and
Ambassador Voto-Bernales in the process of
negotiating this resolution on Haiti. I believe that the
document finally adopted will make an important
contribution to the development and pacification
processes in Haiti.

Panama regrets that the extension provided for in
the resolution was for only eight months, when the
Secretary-General, the Group of Friends of Haiti and
Haiti itself were hoping that the extension would be for
12 months. In the view of Panama, 12 months should
have been allocated to a comprehensive assessment of
Haiti's development. Haiti will need not only internal
3
management by Haitians of their political and
economic processes - which is paramount - but also
the support of the United Nations and the countries of
the region. Such support will have to continue not only
for 12 months, but for many more. During that period,
I am confident that the actions of the Government of
Haiti will make progress in such a way as to enable the
Security Council to change the Mission's configuration
in keeping with that progress.

I would like to give one clear example. I hope
that over the coming months or years we will be able to
reduce the number of military personnel and increase
the number of police and to reduce the number of
security personnel and increase the number of
personnel who have more to do with institution-
building. I also trust that at some point during that
phase the Peacebuilding Commission will step in to
assist Haiti with its development, and that soon
afterwards the Security Council will be able to
complete its tasks there.

In that regard, however, it seems to us that it
would have been appropriate to extend the mandate for
12 months - particularly given what Ambassador
Voto-Bernales was able to achieve in the negotiations
regarding commitments vis-a-vis the Government of
Haiti with respect to development and institution-
building.

