Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Polish
presidency for organizing this important interactive
discussion, including the very informative briefings
by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders. We express our appreciation for their
insights and commend them for their heroic service.
The Kazakh delegation will make general observations
and then ask specific questions with regard to
individual missions.

Just a few hours ago, many Member States
commemorated, together with the Secretary-General
and the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
a very important occasion - the seventy-third
anniversary of the victory day in the Second World War
by attending an exhibition at Headquarters, organized
by nine countries from my region. As the Secretary-
General mentioned in the opening ceremony,
"Today's commemoration has more meaning
than in any of the previous years. We see a world
in which conflict is proliferating. We see a world in
which so many wars are taking place. So, I believe
it is absolutely essential to remind us all of the
lessons of the Second World War."

We also regret that so many conflicts and wars
are taking place today, especially in Africa and
particularly in Darfur, Mali and South Sudan, which
we are considering today. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council of the initiative led by my county to
elaborate a joint programme to stop all violent conflicts
by the United Nations centenary in 2045, which is
mentioned in the Council's first presidential statement
adopted this year (S/PRST/2018/1).

Our peacekeeping forces remain a most valuable
tool. At the same time, the challenge is to use them to
create the necessary conditions for political solutions
and inclusive negotiations and to implement peace
agreements. Above all, we should foster strong and
effective cooperation among Governments and between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU),
especially the AU High-level Implementation Panel
and, wherever possible, bring in subregional groups,
like the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
or selective countries with influence. Other helpful
activities could include arm- collection campaigns and
the resettlement oflarge numbers ofinternally displaced
persons, without which there can be no durable peace.

We must also ensure security sector reform to
generally improve security situations and to bring
about an overall reduction in criminal activities.
The successful process of reconfiguring the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
should be an example for other missions too. The
challenge before us is to accelerate the peacebuilding
mandate, including taking a more proactive role in
capacity-building, strengthening governance and
improving quick-impact and community stabilization
measures, while also working closely with United
Nations country teams, primarily through planned
multi-year strategic frameworks.
We also commend all the missions on implementing
their mandated tasks under very difficult circumstances.
We support the Secretary-General's independent review
reports of the missions, his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative on the basis of the Santos Cruz report, and his
good offices. It is in that context that we would like to
ask the following questions.

First, how can we modify mandates to enable the
resumption of capacity-building and training in the
State's armed forces and institutions through a long-
term security sector reform programme? Secondly, what
must we do in order to stop the ongoing military actions
of armed groups and militias, and the widespread
violence, all of which lead to severe economic decline,
an escalation of the humanitarian crisis and severe food
insecurity for millions, the vast majority of whom are
also displaced? Thirdly, despite the Secretary-General's
action plan, recommendations and best intentions, the
challenges seem insurmountable. Development takes
time, but how can we initiate comprehensive strategies
for economic development and building resilience from
the very beginning? Fourthly, how can we achieve
intercommunal reconciliation and build confidence
among local populations?

Finally, we all know how badly we need improved
predeployment and in-mission training, more efficient
strategies and better equipment and surveillance
capabilities. Last but not least, however, how do
we bridge the capability gap? Based on the Force
Commanders' experience in the field, what are their
suggestions for possible and feasible ways of addressing
those gaps?

