Mr. Kamau: First, allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, for your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for February 2016, as well as to commend you
on the manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council. I thank you for organizing this timely open
debate ofthe Security Council on peacebuilding and for
circulating an informative concept note (S/2016/104, annex) to guide us. I also thank you for the initiative
of inviting me to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.

We at the Peacebuilding Commission welcome
very much not only the opportunity to be here but also
the concept note that you, Sir, circulated for our debate
today. The note clearly spells out some of the crucial
challenges that peacebuilding is facing and why we
must redouble our efforts at better peacebuilding within
the collective United Nations family. We agree with
your note that the Security Council and the General
Assembly have acknowledged, for some time now, that
the Peacebuilding Commission can contribute to the
prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, as acknowledged by the
landmark resolution 2171 (2014) on conflict prevention,
adopted in 2014. The Peacebuilding Commission and
its configurations continue to work in that vein, and we
remain thankful for the support and acknowledgement
we receive from the Council in that regard.

This debate comes at a crucial moment. As you,
Mr. President, point out in your concept note, the reviews
of the peacebuilding architecture under consideration
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly
call upon Member States to see peacebuilding in
a broader perspective and to face it with greater
determination. The review of the peacebuilding
architecture is currently in its final stages, and the
United Nations is being called to re-examine its
entire approach to peacebuilding in the context of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), which we all adopted in
2015, while remaining true to the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. I shall highlight
some of salient elements of the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture that I
believe deserve the particular attention of the Council
and of the wider membership.

First, the report of the Advisory Group of Experts,
entitled "Challenge of sustaining peace", reiterates
the need for a comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention and sustainable peace. In my understanding,
the report does not introduce a new concept but merely
restates what we all know needs to be done to achieve
lasting peace - the main purpose for which the United
Nations was created. Its key message is a lesson we have
all learned over the years, namely, that investments in
the prevention of the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict are considerably less
expensive and more sustainable than merely reacting
to crises.

Secondly, the current review comes at a time
when there have been increasing calls pressing for
the need to address the fragmentation in the United
Nations system's efforts and a growing unanimity on
the importance of building coherence in our collective
efforts across the peace and security, development
and human rights engagement of the United Nations
at the intergovernmental and operational levels. The
Peacebuilding Commission, in its advisory role to the
Security Council, stands ready to serve as a bridge
between the Security Council and other principal
intergovernmental organizations, with a view to
strengthening the collaboration and enhancing the
impact of their collective peacebuilding work in
the world.

Thirdly, building lasting peace requires predictable,
sustained and adequate financing to address the root
causes of conflict. According to the report of the
Advisory Group, while countries emerging from
conflict require significant financing over extended
periods, funding is often channelled into short-term
emergency responses that would produce immediate
tangible results. That dilemma often invites the obvious
question of whether there could be a reduced need for
emergency conflict responses if peacebuilding and
prevention efforts were prioritized. The United Nations
experience shows the critical role that peacebuilding
efforts and the Peacebuilding Commission can
play in the mobilization of long-term and sustained
international support to critical national capacity needs.

The role of the Peacebuilding Fund in providing
financing to countries at their request has evidently
been important, but remains, by far, limited in its
impact. Clearly, the Fund needs to be enhanced.
Currently, multi-donor pooled funds for peacebuilding
seem to be the single most attractive option for
peacebuilding. However, we would like to call upon all
Member States, including non-traditional donors and
other partners, to consider making or increasing their
multi-year commitments to pooled funds in support of
sustainable peace.

Furthermore, all financing-related proposals in the
report of the Advisory Group, including those aimed
at appropriately resourcing peacebuilding programmes
during transitions, need to be comprehensively
considered by Member States during the current
review. We need to address the predictability and
sustainability of financing. We must consider all the
viable options available to maximize the potential and
the predictability of the Peacebuilding Fund.

The importance of enhanced partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
with international financial institutions, in building
peace cannot be overemphasized. The African Union
and European Union (EU) in particular are among
the strategic partners, as Africa remains important
to the United Nations peacebuilding efforts. We shall
work closely with the African Union, the EU and other
regional organizations to ensure that peacebuilding
initiatives are not only regionally owned and reflect
the interests and needs of local populations, but are
also regionally anchored and internationally supported
based on each other's comparative advantages. The
importance of strengthening World Bank-United
Nations collaboration as a way to promote sustainable
peace and channel resources to peacebuilding is
something we intend to deepen alongside collaboration
with regional financial institutions such as the African
Development Bank.

But while Africa continues to be the priority
destination for peacebuilding activities, we would not
wish to create the impression here that only Africa is
crying out for peacebuilding interventions. Anyone
who reads the daily newspapers knows that Africa has
no monopoly on violence and the absence of peace, on
the contrary. As time moves on, we will need to ask
ourselves what more the Peacebuilding Commission
can and could do in other parts of the world to deepen
the roots of peace and help stop violence.

As we work together to operationalize the outcome
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture, we shall
need to develop the links between our collective efforts
to build sustainable peace and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. In doing so, the Peacebuilding
Commission, working with the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the United Nations Development Group, will
continue to look for ways to entrench its peacebuilding
efforts in the relevant aspects of the work of the United
Nations and the upcoming quadrennial comprehensive
policy review, which presents a very good opportunity
to deepen that relationship.

In conclusion, I am fully aware of the high
expectations for a more effective Peacebuilding
Commission. The Peacebuilding Commission will work
to leverage the collective weight of its membership,
particularly with the members of the Security Council,
and to bring together partners, regional organizations,
UnitedNations system actors, academia, civil society and
non-governmental organizations, including women's
organizations, to contribute to greater coherence and
commitment to building sustainable peace. Together we
will be able to, first, mobilize attention to drivers and
root causes of conflicts that contribute to preventing
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of conflicts; secondly, bring greater focus and priority
to the regional dimension of building sustainable peace
and provide a platform to promote the perspectives
of regional actors; and, thirdly, but not least, provide
political support to the practical integration of security,
political, human rights and developmental responses
over medium- to long-term engagements.

