Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We wish to start by
acknowledging France's contribution on the front
line of efforts to protect civilians in Mali, the Central
African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire and elsewhere. We also
thank the President of the Central African Republic
and we particularly welcome the remarks about his
Government's commitment to national reconciliation.
New Zealand has learned from our own experience how
important this is to long-term stability.

Twenty-two years ago this week, the Council
adopted its first explicit protection of civilians mandate
in resolution 925 (1994) relating to Rwanda. Tragically,
in spite of this resolution, nothing significant was
done to stop the subsequent genocide. We have come
a long way since that historic failure, and today United

Nations peacekeepers play a decisive role in protecting
civilians, saving many thousands oflives and delivering
many more from the threat of violence. Their work is
difficult, and many peacekeepers have paid the ultimate
price. We pay tribute to their commitment and their
sacrifice. Today I wish to focus on four areas where
New Zealand believes action is needed to improve
United Nations performance.

First, protection mandates need to be clear, realistic
and part of a coherent political strategy. We need to
avoid exposing our peacekeepers to unacceptable levels
ofrisk, or setting expectations that they cannot fill. New
Zealand echoes the call by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations for more sequencing and
prioritization of mandates. These need to be grounded
in clear strategies for addressing the factors that make
civilians vulnerable in the first place. Political solutions
will always deliver more for protection of civilians than
boots on the ground will.

If we are honest, we have not seen Council practice
improve much since these recommendations were made.
Mandating remains a relatively pro forma exercise, often
without much consultation or policy deliberation on the
key implementation challenges. Recent adjustments
to the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the
South Sudan were a more positive experience in terms
of prioritization and phasing, but we would like to see
more of this.

Secondly, we need to build better understanding
among all stakeholders of how protection mandates
should be carried out. Progress has been made in
developing protection strategies, clear doctrine and
operating procedures, but coordination is still lacking
across political, humanitarian, military, human rights
and development actors. The experience in South Sudan
has highlighted many serious challenges, including
cooperation with humanitarian actors, questions of
mission authority and host-State relations.

We believe that protection of civilians sites should
never be a strategy of first choice. They should be
employed only in extreme circumstances, as we saw
in South Sudan, or when the mission is genuinely
unable to provide more proactive protection further
afield. New Zealand has pushed for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to report on lessons learned
from the protection of civilians sites in South Sudan
and we look forward to acting on the findings from
the report.

Meaningful consultations with stakeholders are
also essential for making sure mandates are fit-for-
purpose and effectively implemented. Engagement
with troop and police contributors is critical. It is
unreasonable to expect countries to take on the difficult
and dangerous job of protecting civilians while
excluding them from key discussions. New Zealand has
been working over the past year to improve the quality
of Council engagement with contributing countries and
the Secretariat. Through the informal, off-the-record
format, these triangular consultations give Council
members a deeper understanding of the realities on the
ground, and they help contributing countries to better
understand the Council's approach. We believe that
over time they will mean better mandates and more
effective implementation. New Zealand has facilitated
these consultations with four missions so far and we
are working with Council colleagues and contributing
countries to make them an established and consistent
feature of the Council.

Thirdly, decision-makers at all levels need to
receive better, more timely and reliable information
on emerging threats and protection needs. This
requires close engagement with local populations
and an understanding of why and how civilians are
being targeted. It requires relevant information to
be systematically gathered, collated, analysed and
provided to those who need it, whether that be area-
level commanders or the Council itself. To ensure that
key challenges and risks to civilians are understood
and effectively managed, the Council requires better,
unfiltered reporting. The Secretariat should be more
open regarding the difficult policy and operational
choices facing missions.

Mechanisms, such as the one New Zealand helped
establish last year for the Council to monitor the
operational risks and protection challenges faced by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, can help in
this regard, but they need to be expanded. We hope that
we can move forward on practical steps to ensure the
Council is regularly informed of key risks to civilians
and United Nations personnel across all missions. This
is an essential complement to the Council's existing
tools for situational awareness.

Finally, protection mandates must be backed by
the necessary political will to enable them to succeed.
For the Council and the General Assembly, this means
providing missions with the resources and political
support to carry out their mandates. For contributing
countries, it means ensuring deployed personnel have
a clear understanding of their mandated tasks and
are trained, equipped and empowered to implement
them effectively. It also means being restrained
and transparent in imposing caveats and respecting
the United Nations chain of command and mission
leadership. The protection of civilians would also
benefit enormously from a more systematic approach
to reviewing implementation at the mission level. The
Council needs to know in what areas and by whom
protection mandates are being implemented effectively
and where they need to be improved.

During our remaining time on the Council, New
Zealand wants to achieve practical progress in these
areas. If we succeed, we will be more likely to generate
the political will needed to protect civilians in crises.
Let us make sure we do.

