Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is good to see you
presiding over this meeting today, Sir. My delegation
would like to congratulate you for your courage in
selecting such an important topic for us to discuss. I
must say, before I get to my remarks, that I truly regret
that some of your colleagues, when it came to the time
for us to join in this dialogue on this important issue,
were unable to be here. We do realize that there are
many meetings going on around the United Nations,
but we still hold the hope that this Chamber will
become a true dialogue Chamber where we can also
come, contribute the little that we contribute and be
heard in the spirit of dialogue that we hope this
Chamber will continue to have.

Again, thank you for tackling this very, very
important theme. Above all, thank you for the thought-
provoking paper your delegation sent to us to serve as a
basis for discussion for today's debate. We thought it
was also innovative that you had the courage to put
your ideas on paper and to provoke us in a creative
way, finding ways to deal with this matter.

In our View, the theme of the debate is important
because it suggests a critical issue with which States
Members of the United Nations have been grappling
for the last decade. It is true that this body has been
faced with fundamental changes in the nature of
conflicts, which has necessitated a shift in the Council
and the broader United Nations approach to the task of
maintaining international peace and security. The
whole question of whether the United Nations is able to
attract troop contributions for peacekeeping from
certain countries may have something to do with the
theme of today's discussion.

As a result, we have come to witness that the
United Nations primary instrument for maintaining
peace and security- peacekeeping- has come to
take on a broader and more complex range of tasks
instead of the traditional military interposing between
warring factions. In his seminal report of 1992, which
was called "An Agenda for Peace", former Secretary-
General Boutros-Ghali captured this change, arguing
that:

"Peacemaking and peacekeeping operations,
to be truly successful, must come to include
comprehensive efforts to identify and support
structures which will tend to advance a sense
of confidence and well-being among people."
(S/24H], para. 55)

In our view, what this point suggests is that the
energies and resources of the international community
should be mobilized and organized to address not only
the symptoms of crises and conflicts, but their root
causes, including the political, economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions. It further requires that efforts
to resolve conflicts should be viewed as long-term
endeavours which include a significant investment in
peace-building.

The discussion paper before us poses an
important question regarding the scope and nature of
Security Council mandates in responding to complex
conflicts. South Africa's own policy paper guiding its
participation in international peace missions argues that
Security Council mandates should be linked to concrete
political solutions and that the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation should not be seen as an end in
itself. In other words, we need a clear commitment to
the prevention of conflicts before they degenerate into
full-fledged civil wars. This is important, as, like that
of many countries, our participation in peace missions
should not and cannot be open-ended. We would make
bold to say that a credible exit strategy is inextricably
linked to any well-planned project to build sustainable
and durable peace.

In addressing the questions raised in your
discussion paper, Sir, my delegation would like to put
forward the following points.

First, my delegation has strongly welcomed the
recent debate of the Security Council on the issue of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as an
important element of post-conflict peace-building.
However, this aspect is but one of several elements of a
more comprehensive concept of peace-building that
require our urgent attention. The Brahimi report
recommendations on the need to develop a permanent
capacity in the United Nations for peace-building
requires the urgent attention of Member States.

Secondly, the comprehensive scope and long-term
nature of peace-building activities impose the need to
consider the limits of the involvement of the Security
Council in such activities. The implementation of the
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel on this matter
must also address the involvement of other components
of the United Nations system, including the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other
United Nations programmes and agencies.

Thirdly, related to all this are the responsibilities
attached to peace-building activities in today's complex
conflict environments. In our view, these tasks
transcend the abilities and resource capacities of any
one particular department or agency within the United
Nations system. Consequently, the Organization is
obliged to undertake its efforts in a coordinated
manner.

For that reason, we welcome the intention of the
Secretary-General to institute integrated mission task
forces to plan, at an early stage, for peace operations
which will facilitate the smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building.

In conclusion, my delegation would like
congratulate the Security Council on having adopted its
resolution 1327 (2000), mapping out its response to the
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel. The time has
now arrived to follow words with action. In that regard,
the important issue of political will and commitment
becomes critical. We raise this issue because there has
been tremendous criticism, and rightly so, about the
commitment gap on the part of those with the greatest
means when dealing with conflicts in Africa. The
resolution which the Council adopted on the Brahimi
Panel report must now be followed up by concrete
action to invest in sustainable and durable peace in the
many conflict situations in Africa, the most urgent of
which is Sierra Leone.

Now is the time to engage in the pursuit of
national interest defined in terms of promoting global
solidarity and not in terms of what is vital to our
immediate needs. Otherwise our efforts to promote and
sustain an effective and strong Organization will be
rendered useless. This, in short, requires a commitment
to become and remain involved in the field, and, side
by side with developing countries, to resolve conflicts
and establish lasting peace.

