Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): First,
allow me to commend the work of the Security Council
and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to protect children affected by armed conflict
with a view to ending the grave violations against
them. My delegation would also like to commend
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for their dedication and
continued efforts in addressing the plight of children in
armed conflict. We also welcome the renewed mandate
of the Special Representative.

The Republic of Korea appreciates the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/158), which covers 15
situations on the agenda of the Security Council and
five other areas of concern in a comprehensive way,
including a section on rape and other grave forms of
sexual violence against children during times of
conflict.

The information on compliance and progress in
ending the recruitment and use of children contained in
the report shows that there has been progress in some
countries, such as Cote d'Ivoire. However, in some
situations, child recruitment remains an issue of serious
concern.

Only nine out of 63 armed groups listed in the
annexes of the report have signed action plans to stop
the recruitment of child soldiers. As emphasized in the
Secretary-General's report, concerned Member States
should allow contact between the United Nations and
non-State parties to prepare action plans without
prejudice to the political and legal status of those
armed groups. Dealing with persistent violators also
remains a critical issue that must be addressed with a
sense of urgency.

Within the Secretary-General's report, 19
persistent perpetrators have been identified, increasing
the number from the 16 listed in last year's report.
Many of these residual perpetrators have also been
responsible for committing other grave violations, such
as rape and sexual violence against children. The
Security Council needs to stand resolute and apply
targeted measures to these persistent perpetrators. One
way to facilitate the real use of targeted measures is to
establish systematic communications between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the relevant sanctions committees.

The delegation of the Republic of Korea, like
those of many other Member States, is disturbed by the
continuing deplorable situation of sexual violence
against children in armed conflict. The Secretary-
General's report gives us a worrisome picture,
especially of the situations in Burundi, Chad, the
Central African Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Somalia and
the Sudan. There is universal consensus that
widespread and systematic sexual violence against
children in armed conflicts are grave crimes, as stated
in the Secretary-General's report. Unless the Security
Council and the international community respond
strongly to these violations, such troubling cases will
continue.

This morning, we had a truly invaluable
opportunity to confirm the atrocity of sexual violence
against children through the firsthand account of an
eyewitness. In this context, my delegation strongly
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Security Council adopt an incremental
approach by first including rape and other grave sexual
violence as an additional criterion for inclusion in the
annexes, along with the recruitment and use of
children. We emphasize that a priority step to
strengthen child protection on the ground is to expand
the trigger of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to include grave sexual violence.

Addressing sexual violence is an important
system-wide priority of the United Nations. As such,
resolutions 1612 (2005), 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
should be implemented in a mutually reinforcing
manner, with a View to maximizing the synergy effect.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
mainstreaming of the issue of children in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. The work

of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs in developing policy
directives and guidance is significant. We encourage
the further integration of children's concerns into all
mission planning instruments and processes, including
the deployment of child protection advisers to all
relevant missions.

Finally, my delegation hopes that our open debate
today testifies to our strong commitment to this critical
issue, not through our numerous verbal statements, but
by taking concrete and resolute action to ensure the
protection of children exposed to and suffering from
armed conflict. There is a wide range of actions that
the Security Council can and should take. Some of the
urgent actions, such as expanding the trigger of the
monitoring and response mechanism to include rape
and other grave sexual violence, will require a new
resolution. In this vein, we strongly support the
immediate commencement of serious work by the
Council members with a View to adopting such a
resolution as soon as possible. Safeguarding the rights
of the next generation of vulnerable children in global
conflict zones is in our hands. Now is the time to act.

