Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would like to felicitate
you, Mr. President, and the Belgian delegation for your
skilful handling of the Council's work during this
month. Let me also express our appreciation to
Ambassador Le Luong Minh and his team for Viet
Nam's successful presidency in July.

The holding of this open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council is a welcome step.
The group of five small nations, which has made the
issue of working methods its forte, merits our
appreciation for seeking this debate. We also thank
others who supported the initiative.

In carrying out its duties under the Charter, the
Security Council acts on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations. It is therefore only appropriate
for the Council to know and understand how the
general membership perceives its work and the
methods it employs to carry out that work. The
efficiency and transparency of the Council's work and
its decision-making process are issues of great interest
and importance to a large majority of the United
Nations membership. The improvement of working
methods is the part of the Security Council reform
issue on which there is almost complete consensus
among Member States, irrespective of their positions
on the other aspects, such as an increase in the
membership.

Pakistan fully endorses the comprehensive
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. We hope that the
proposals set out in that statement, along with other
proposals made during this debate, will be given due
consideration. I would like to take this opportunity to
share a few thoughts.

Having watched the Security Council from both
inside and outside, one can sense and appreciate the
important work that it performs and the heavy
responsibility that it carries. The Council has a wide-
ranging agenda and is increasingly assuming a larger
role in the management of international relations. Its
scope of action extends from pre-conflict peacemaking
to conflict management, peacekeeping and post-
conflict consolidation. It is the only body that can
make binding decisions and obligations and take
enforcement action. Directly or indirectly, its work
concerns and affects all Member States, who in turn are
logically expected to follow and assess its work.

No doubt, there has been some improvement in
the working methods of the Council, and that is to be
welcomed. But it is not enough. Unfortunately, among
the general membership there remains widespread
dissatisfaction about the Council's work and its
decisions. The main objective of those measures in
enhancing the effectiveness and legitimacy of the
Council is thus not being achieved. We are not sure
whether the answer is in identifying a new set of
measures. If we could only implement the existing
ones, it might suffice.

It is interesting to note that many of the measures
mentioned in document S/2006/507 and other
proposals made in the past and in today's debate
regarding the working methods of the Council emanate
directly from the United Nations Charter and its
provisions relating to the Security Council and other
principal organs. An example is Article 24, which, inter
alia, requires that in discharging its duties the Security
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. It also requires the
Council to submit annual and, when necessary, special
reports to the General Assembly for its consideration.
Articles 31 and 32 provide for the participation of
non-members of the Council directly concerned with
an issue in the Council's discussions.

There are other proposals that simply seek the
implementation of the Council's own rules of
procedure, which, by the way, remain provisional to
date: rule 48, for example, which states that unless it
decides otherwise, the Security Council shall meet in
public. Provisions for the pacific settlement of
disputes, and enforcement measures when required, as
well as cooperation with regional arrangements are all
mentioned in the Charter. Enhancing the relationship
with troop-contributing countries is an objective
contained in Council's own resolution 1353 (2001).
The General Assembly's Open-Ended Working Group
on Security Council Reform has also deliberated
extensively on these issues in the context of the
so-called cluster II issues, and has made several agreed
recommendations.
Others have spoken on many of these issues, and
I do not want to be repetitive. The crux of the matter is
that these provisions, which are mostly agreed
provisions, are not being faithfully implemented. In
some cases, they are even misinterpreted and misused
or abused. That has a direct negative bearing on the
Council's efficiency, effectiveness and legitimacy.
Thus, we are often faced with questions as to whether
the Council is effective in carrying out its core
mandate, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security. Has it acted in accordance with the
Charter? Did it reflect the views and interests of the
membership? Did it adequately engage and consult the
Member States directly concerned by an issue? A
review of the Council's agenda and dynamics provides
answers to many of those questions.

In recent years, the Council has been relatively
effective in addressing internal crises. Its record has,
however, been less impressive in resolving inter-State
conflicts. In fact, the Council does not deal directly
with some of the major conflicts and threats to
international peace and security. Some other major
unresolved issues, including in our own region, have
lain idle on the agenda of the Council. However, on the
ground, those are live issues. They pose a threat to
international peace and security. Even on some
important issues, which are on its active agenda, such
as the Middle East, the role of the Council has been
sidelined and viewed by many as ineffective and
partisan.

The determination of the Council's agenda
depends to a large extent on the positions and priorities
of the permanent members and major Powers. We have
witnessed inaction and delay in the Council, even in
the face of the most obvious acts of aggression and
breaches of peace. On the other hand, there is
proaction, even interference in the internal affairs of
sovereign States, even in the absence of a clear threat
to international peace and security. Double standards
and selectivity, including in the implementation of the
Council's own resolutions, threats and the use of force
and other forms of coercion are equally disquieting.

The provisions for the pacific settlement of
disputes remain grossly under-utilized. In contrast,
there is a dangerous tendency to have recourse - too
often and too soon - to measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter. That trend has even created the
impression, though incorrect, that non-Chapter VII
provisions are of a lesser value or are not binding.
As regards the format of Council's open and
closed meetings, there are arguments on the need to
balance confidentiality and efficiency on the one hand
and inclusiveness and transparency on the other.
Irrespective of the preferences of Member States, we
are nowhere close to the coveted balance. It was
acknowledged in the Council's open debate on working
methods 14 years ago that the public meetings had
become more of a formality and everything was
discussed and agreed beforehand in the informal or
closed consultations. The current situation is no
different. The Council remains a closed club. Informal
consultations apart, the Council's real work and
decision-making transpires often in smaller and more
secretive conclaves, which in some cases exclude even
some members of the Council.

It is therefore not surprising that, despite a number
of public meetings, there has been little tangible
improvement in transparency and understanding of the
decision-making process of the Council. While we are far
from implementing Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter, in
the case of informal consultations, there have also been
instances in which the most directly concerned parties
were denied participation in open meetings.

Increasing interaction between the Security
Council and the general membership is a key objective.
The Council's interaction and coordination with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission is vital for a
comprehensive United Nations approach to peace and
development. As the leading troop-contributing
country, Pakistan has a particular interest in enhancing
the troop-contributing countries' engagement with the
Council and the Secretariat. As others have noted,
those consultation mechanisms should involve a
timely, two-way exchange of information and views,
which should form part of the input for the Council's
decision-making.

While we preserve the central role of the United
Nations, the relationship and interaction with regional
organizations can and should also be promoted in
accordance with the Charter. The Council's enhanced
interaction with the African Union is a good example.
The objective of such partnerships should be to
promote coordination and coherence in policies in
order to pursue the collective objectives of peace and
security.
Enhanced cooperation with regional
organizations also strengthens the concept of regional
representation in the Council. That has great potential
to ensure wider representation of Member States in the
Council. It would also have a positive bearing on the
working methods, since regional representation would
pursue larger group interests in the Council rather than
individual interests.

We are seeking a comprehensive reform of the
Council. The real objective of improving the working
methods is to have a Council that is more transparent,
democratic, representative and effective, thus
enhancing its legitimacy and credibility. The central
and crucial question is whether we can achieve those
objectives by enlarging the coterie of the powerful few,
or by strengthening the democratic representation, role
and influence of the general membership of the United
Nations in the Security Council. We believe the latter is
the right and the only feasible approach. The concepts
of permanency, privilege and special status should have
no place in today's United Nations. The best way of
ensuring the accountability of the Council to the
general membership of the United Nations is through
the addition of non-permanent elected members,
subject to a periodic democratic test by their peers and
the General Assembly.

The United Nations is an indispensable
instrument for the promotion of our shared goals of
peace, development and human rights. We can attain
those goals by following the essence of the Charter,
which is cooperative multilateralism. Sustainable peace
and security can only be achieved when principles have
primacy over power. The world needs a Security
Council that does not always mirror power realities,
but that can also stand up for the weak and the
powerless with moral authority and credibility.

