Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing. We have taken note of
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2012/818). We thank His Excellency Mr. Ivan Mrkie
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

Pakistan believes that UNMIK continues to play a
vital role in ensuring stability in Kosovo. All constituents
of the international presence in Kosovo must maintain
neutrality while executing their respective mandates.

We are encouraged by the positive tone of the report
of the Secretary-General concerning developments
during the latest reporting period. We particularly
appreciate the commitment demonstrated by the parties
to engage with one another and resolve their differences
through peaceful means.

In that regard, the signing by Serbia ofthe technical
protocol on the implementation of the agreement on
the joint management of crossings and the resolution
of the impasse caused by differing interpretations
concerning Kosovo's participation in regional meetings
are important developments.

We also note with satisfaction the progress made
in the implementation of the other agreements, as
highlighted in the report. Full implementation of all
agreements reached in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue will help to build mutual trust and confidence
and pave the way to addressing other outstanding issues.
We look forward to the resumption of the dialogue at
the earliest.

The overall security situation in Kosovo has
remained stable during the past three months. However,
tensions continue to prevail in the north, where some
serious incidents have occurred. Such occurrences have
the potential to undermine the security and stability of
the territory, as well as having a negative effect on the
political process. The challenges and tensions in the
relations between Pristina and northern Kosovo can
best be addressed through dialogue.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
recurrence of the targeting of minorities. Such incidents
breed a sense of insecurity among potential returnees.
The incidents should be properly investigated, and the
perpetrators must be brought to justice.

The creation of conditions for the peaceful
integration of minority communities and sustainable

returns is essential for building the foundation for
long-term reconciliation among communities. Acts of
vandalism against cultural and religious heritage sites
are unacceptable and need to be addressed effectively.
We call upon all parties to pursue the path of dialogue
and engagement for the sake of lasting peace in Kosovo
and the region.

The recent developments noted by the Secretary-
General underscore that the parties are able to overcome
obstacles and are willing to move forward. It is therefore
essential to maintain the positive momentum.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his team for their
contribution to the security and stability of Kosovo.

