Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting at such short notice. Malaysia,
together with New Zealand, Senegal and Venezuela as
sponsors of draft resolution 8/2016/1100, on the issue of
illegal Israeli settlements, have called for this meeting
to put the draft to a vote. As representatives of various
regional groupings at the United Nations - the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, the Group of Western European
and other States, the Group of African States and the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States - we
are bound by similar aims and a sense of responsibility
to take effective action on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, especially on the issue of settlements.

In numerous Council meetings on Palestine, and at
the Arria Formula meeting on settlements in October,
we listened to the repeated calls of Council members,
the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and representatives of
civil society and other United Nations Member States
for urgent Council action to halt settlement activities
and reverse the negative trends that are threatening
peace and the viability of the two-State solution. The
latest, unprecedented attempt of the Israeli Parliament
to legalize outposts on private Palestinian lands added
further urgency to the need for the Council to send
a clear signal on the issue of settlements. Malaysia
acknowledges the efforts made by Egypt and the
Arab League to engage in consultations with Council
members over the past two months on this issue. We
fully support their efforts, and we share their aim for
Council action. We have also observed an emerging
consensus among Council members on the issue of
settlements. We thus believe that it is urgent for the
Council to seize the opportunity for effective Council
action without any further delay.

The draft resolution being put to the vote today
(S/2016/1100) calls for the cessation of all Israeli
settlement activities and for affirmative steps to reverse
the negative trends on the ground that are endangering
the two-State solution. It also calls for immediate
steps to prevent all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, and calls for accountability. The
text further urges all parties to intensify their efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East and to end Israeli occupation.

On the implementation of the draft resolution, the
text is requesting the Secretary-General to report the
Council every three months.

We realize that some Council members may have
legitimate concerns as to the short period of time in
which the draft was officially circulated, put into
blue and submitted for adoption. In normal and ideal
circumstances, we, too, would have preferred a more
transparent and inclusive process. However, we realize
that this is anything but a normal situation and that
we need to tread carefully in view of the sensitivity of
the issue.

Exceptional circumstances require bold action and
exceptional measures. Ultimately, our aim is to bridge
the gap in the respective positions of Council members
in order to reach a consensus. The last time the Council
adopted a resolution on settlements was more than 36
years ago. Since then, the situation on the ground has
worsened to the point where the very prospect of a two-
State solution is now in question. There is no doubt
that this falls under the responsibility of the Security
Council under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We thus appeal to all Council members not to lose
this opportunity for peace and to exercise our legal,
political and moral responsibility to vote in support of
the draft resolution, which is based on previous Council
resolutions and the values and principles of the United
Nations Charter, international law and international
standards of human rights. The time for action is now,
to prove our long-held commitment and to reinforce
the fact that the two-State solution is not merely an
empty slogan.

