Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

With trust and faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, Myanmar joined
the Organization soon after its independence in April
1948. As a responsible member of the United Nations
and a party to many international conventions,
including human rights instruments, we have always
been in full compliance with international law and
fulfilled its obligations. We strongly believe in the rule
of law. The strengthening of international law and the
primacy ofjustice are key to maintaining international
peace and security. The Charter has entrusted the
Security Council and the International Court of Justice
with primary responsibility for upholding justice and
international law, in order to keep the world safe and
secure so that we can all live in peace and prosperity.

We firmly believe that in discharging its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security by safeguarding international law, the Council
should be guided by the principles of universality,
objectivity and non-discrimination. However, we have
recently been deeply alarmed by the growing signs
that some Western Powers and other groups are using
international law and international humanitarian law as
a tool to serve their political purposes. A total disregard
for sovereignty and territorial integrity, and contempt
for a nation's dignity, will not serve the United Nations
in its noble objective of maintaining global peace and
security. In recent months and days we have witnessed
many incidents where international norms have been
threatened. Some of the countries advocating for the
protection of human rights and calling for punitive
action against alleged perpetrators of human rights
violations are those that have been committing far
worse human rights abuses under the protection of their
powerful patrons. Such hypocrisy, double standards
and politicization of humanitarian crises should be
avoided in our pursuit of justice and the rule of law.

The issue of Rakhine state has been framed and
orchestrated in a way designed to escalate it into an
international issue in order to justify severe action by
the Security Council. However, that scenario could
not be further from the truth. Rather than promoting
provocative one-sided narratives, advocating retribution
and creating misunderstanding and mistrust among
different communities, we should rather be promoting
understanding, peace and reconciliation. We should
work together immediately to alleviate the plight of all
the people affected by the violence in Rakhine state.
The Security Council should encourage Bangladesh to
cooperate immediately and fully with Myanmar in order
to implement bilateral arrangements for beginning the
repatriation process as soon as possible.

All States Members of the United Nations,
regardless of their size or power, are equally obliged
to abide fully by the principles and purposes of the
Charter in letter and spirit. Only then will we be able
to enjoy peace, security, human rights and social and
economic development, as envisioned by the founding
fathers of our Organization.

