First, I align myself with the statement by Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union (EU) to the United Nations, (annex XVIII). I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and dedication to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Throughout his briefing, he showed the sympathy that he has for the country. It was wonderful that he ended on a positive note, citing the example of students that demonstrate and fight against the division. Unfortunately, in many schools in Bosnia and Herzegovina the children are divided according to their religious adherence and go to school in the morning or in the afternoon accordingly. Overcoming that is something very positive. It also sends a message of hope. At the same time, I echo the regret that High Representative Valentin Inzko also expressed about the fact that many well-educated young people leave the country frustrated. They look for better opportunities. I am very happy that there is a good Minister of Justice from Bosnia and Herzegovina in Austria, but would it not be wonderful to have had that young person stay in, or return to, Bosnia and Herzegovina and be in the service of his home country? What are the reasons - frustration, corruption, a lack of economic perspectives and deficits in judicial reform? It is very sad to hear about the incapacity to investigate the murders that the High Representative cited. Coming back to the positive side, it is very good that we have the local elections on 15 November, and those of us who have been in Mostar can assess the symbolic importance of elections in this central, historic city of Mostar. It is good that leaders agree on this, but we need to continue to build on that. In particular, we have to ensure that irregularities with regard to the voter registration are corrected. Cooperation among politicians needs to go beyond those elections. They need to actually implement the reforms that were laid out in the EU Commission's opinion. The Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has committed itself to that opinion. We must see that those commitments are implemented. We welcome the work of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a very important instrument. It was created in Dayton by international judges. Germany was very happy to contribute a highly respected judge to the Constitutional Court. On the other hand, we regret the verbal attacks on and defamation against the Court and the judges. We are of the opinion that the authority of the Court cannot be questioned. Talking about defamation, I was really depressed by what the High Representative and other speakers said about incendiary speeches. There continues to be a divisive, negative rhetoric. The existing divisions are sometimes even deepened and make reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina increasingly difficult. The glorification of war criminals is something terrible. As High Representative Valentin Inzko said, to name a dormitory after a convicted war criminal and to organize a mass for a war criminal are simply abominable. I support what High Representative Valentin Inzko suggested about having Bosnia and Herzegovina adopt a genocide denial law. In that context, the clear indications of a value-based foreign policy in Bosnia and Herzegovina are a positive development, as we have witnessed in the Third Committee. I echo what High Representative Valentin Inzko said on resolution 1325 (2000). It is very good that there is a national action plan in preparation. Again, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. It cannot be that women are marginalized in political decision-making. We are not anywhere close to the 40 per cent. So, in that respect, more really has to be done. The question of whether it is better to have a robust or a hands-off approach is not to be resolved today. But I think the answer has also to be given in the light of the glorification of war criminals. Let me end with one aspect that just came across my table this morning. On the situation of human rights defenders, Ms. Mary Lawlor, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, called on the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to investigate a smear campaign and death threats against women human rights defenders working for the rights of refugees and migrants. She said, "Instead of criminalizing migration and human rights defenders who help migrants, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina must guarantee the human rights of all individuals without regard for their nationality or immigration status." She spoke out after an online hate campaign intensified against Ms. Zehida Bihorac, an elementary school teacher and woman human rights defender. She works in the north-west of the country in Una-Sana canton, which borders EU member State Croatia. Since 2018, she has been giving humanitarian help to refugees, migrants and asylum seekers. I would like to end by echoing the appeal of the United Nations Special Rapporteur with regard to the situation of human rights defenders.
