Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia joins in the condemnation
of the terrorist attack that took place in Manchester
yesterday. Our thoughts and sympathies are with the
families of the victims, and we wish a speedy recovery
to the injured. We offer our sincere solidarity to the
people and the Government of the United Kingdom.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia thanks the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
briefing. We take this opportunity to offer our support
to the Head of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, Mr. Edmond Mulet, in the work and
functions he recently assumed.

We take note of the work done to date by the Fact-
finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) with regard to the events that took place in
September 2016 in Um-Housh and on 4 April 2017 in
Khan Shaykhun in the Syrian Arab Republic.

With respect to the confirmed use of mustard gas
and sarin in the incidents reported, Bolivia expresses
its firm and absolute condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons or chemical elements as weapons,
which is unjustifiable and criminal wherever, whenever
and by whomever it is committed because it is a
serious violation of human rights, international law and
international peace and security. Those responsible for
these criminal acts should be duly investigated, brought
to justice and punished with the greatest rigour.

We reiterate the obligation of all States to fight the
proliferation of chemical weapons in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, which
affirms that the complete and effective prohibition of
the development, production, acquisition, stockpiling,
retention, transfer and use of chemical weapons and
their destruction represent a necessary step towards
the fulfilment and strengthening of the principles and
purposes of Charter of the United Nations.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
as it carries out its tasks in accordance with its mandate
and undertakes its work in the most methodical, technical
and faithful way possible through an independent,
impartial, complete and conclusive investigation.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the only option
for resolving the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
and preventing further casualities is through an
inclusive political transition led by the Syrian people,
in respect for their sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.

