Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico,
like other members, thanks President Renate Winter
and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone for the detailed information they have
provided to the Council on the work of the Special
Court, its successes and the challenges ahead. We also
welcome the presence of the representative of Sierra
Leone in the Council.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone is a pioneer
and exemplar in the field of international criminal
justice. It has made significant contributions to the
development of international jurisprudence and made
decisions of great importance to the international
community. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the
most important work of the Court has been the
extremely positive effect its work has had on the
people in Sierra Leone, first because it showed the
population that the worst violations of international
humanitarian law of which they were victims
throughout most of the previous decade will not go
unpunished. It also reconfirmed the theory that, if
09-40569
peace and reconciliation are to be achieved, they must
be accompanied by justice.

Secondly, the Court has done essential work at
the national level and, we hope, beyond its borders to
build a culture of dissuasion and prevention of the most
serious crimes, and to strengthen institutional capacity
in Sierra Leone based on a criminal justice system in
conformity with international standards. In brief, the
work of the Special Court for Sierra Leone has made a
decisive contribution to the transition to peace and the
rule of law and has been critical to ongoing efforts to
ensure national reconciliation and reconstruction.

My delegation listened closely to the information
provided to the Council on the completion of all the
Court's legal proceedings in Freetown by October. We
are also following the trial of the former President of
Liberia, Charles Taylor, in The Hague. On the latter
point, of particular importance is the enormous
contribution, for which we are extremely grateful,
made by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to the
development of international justice by setting limits
on the immunity of a head of State before an
international court.

President Winter also gave us estimates contained
in the completion strategy recently adopted by the
Management Committee of the Special Court for the
conclusion of the Court's legal activities. She also
identified some of the challenges the Court will face in
carrying out its residual functions, such as the
management of archives, the protection of witnesses,
and the execution of sentences, among others. Without
a doubt, those functions and tasks must be supported
by the international community.

At the same time, my delegation has taken due
note of the urgent needs facing the Special Court, in
particular with regard to financing its activities.
Mexico has supported the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, in particular in the light of its results.
In most recent years, my country has made a modest
contribution to financing the work of the Court. That
was the result of an enormous effort on the part of the
Mexican Government, but it was done in the conviction
that it is important to combat impunity with regard to
the commission of the most serious crimes against
humanity.

Once again, Mexico thanks President Winter and
Prosecutor Rapp for their timely appearance before the
Council and assures them that it will continue to follow
developments in the work of the Court with great
interest.

