Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): First, I should like to add
my voice to those who have expressed appreciation to
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their very comprehensive and lucid
briefings on the work of the Tribunals. We commend

the ICTY and ICTR for their steady progress in
implementing their completion strategies in spite of
daunting challenges. It is encouraging that they have
remained firmly committed to expediting their
proceedings, while complying with due process
standards.

It is a matter of deep concern that the work of the
Tribunals has been fraught with delays. Staff
constraints, especially the loss of highly experienced
personnel, have continuously undermined the
expeditious and efficient completion of the Tribunals'
mandates. Indeed, we cannot overemphasize the urgent
need for measures to support staff retention as well as
recruitment, particularly at this critical stage in the
Tribunals' life. We believe that only concerted action
will reduce the rate of staff attrition.

We also note that efficient cooperation with all
Member States with the Tribunals will be crucial for
the success of the completion strategy. Such
cooperation will, we believe, ensure the arrest of the
remaining fugitives, the referral of cases to national
jurisdictions, the transfer of convicts for the execution
of their sentences and the relocation of acquitted
persons, as well as of those who have served their
sentences.

It is distressing that some fugitives have
remained at large. We urge all States to cooperate with
the Tribunals to ensure that those fugitives are
apprehended and brought to justice.

We note with satisfaction the increased referrals
of cases to national jurisdictions during the reporting
period. The expected result is a reduction in the overall
workload of the Tribunals. It is a positive development
that the Tribunals have continued to make Vigorous
efforts to strengthen the capacity of national
jurisdictions in the prosecution and trial of violations
of international humanitarian law. In the same vein, we
commend the efforts by the ICTR to establish a
response mechanism for mutual legal assistance
requests from national prosecuting authorities. Such
capacity-building activities must be intensified, since
they will serve as precedents to guide the activities of
national authorities.

We commend the ICTY and the ICTR for their
efforts to improve awareness of their work through
outreach programmes. In addition to providing
information of their achievements, we believe that such
activities serve to highlight the challenges that the
Tribunals encounter in implementing their completion
strategies. They also support the fight against impunity
with regard to genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

We encourage the ICTR to sustain its trainer-
training programme in view of the Tribunal's role in
promoting self-sustaining knowledge transfer to
national authorities. We support efforts to establish
sustainable reference centres of information and
archives on the activities of the Tribunals as part of
their outreach activities.
Let me take this opportunity to commend the
Council's Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, led by Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
for its sterling work. We believe that it has set the
pattern for attaining justice.

