Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I wish to extend my
delegation's profound appreciation and congratulations to
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, for
undertaking his bold initiative to Visit Baghdad and for
concluding an agreement with the Iraqi Government on 23
February 1998 which has profound implications for
international peace and security. The Secretary-General had
prepared his Visit well, with the unanimous support of the
Security Council and with the encouragement and prayers
of the entire international community. Malaysia warmly
welcomes the agreement concluded between the Secretary-
General and the Government of Iraq, which has averted
what we believe would have been an unnecessary and
senseless military attack on Iraq that would inevitably have
resulted in the tragic loss of innocent lives and the
destruction of properties.

The Secretary-General, in accomplishing his mission,
has, in the words of my Foreign Minister in his letter to the
Secretary-General late today,

"reaffirmed the authority of the office of the United
Nations Secretary-General as well as restored, at a
very critical time, mutual trust and understanding
between and among Member States as well as respect
for international law and the dignity and sovereignty
of Member States, and not only prevented a senseless
military conflict but also returned the United Nations
to its proper place at the forefront of international
diplomacy."

Malaysia draws a great sense of relief and gratification
from the fact that in the end, wisdom, common sense and
constructive, creative diplomacy by all concerned - and
particularly by the Secretary-General - have prevailed
over the initial temptation to use force.

Malaysia served in the Council in 1990, when the
invasion of Kuwait took place. Together with other
members of the Security Council, we supported Security
Council resolution 678 (1990) calling for the withdrawal of
all Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Today's Council meeting
takes place amid developments precipitated by the crisis
over full access by the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) to all suspected weapons-of-mass-destruction
sites in Iraq and Iraq's full compliance with all Security
Council resolutions. Malaysia joins the rest of the
international community in calling on Iraq to honour all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including the
resolution just adopted, unequivocally and without
reservations, while at the same time calling on the
Council to respect the sovereignty, dignity and territorial
integrity of Iraq.

It is Malaysia's fervent hope that the Memorandum
of Understanding signed by the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and by the Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. T ariq Aziz, and the resolution just adopted will be
upheld by all the parties concerned, thereby resolving
once and for all the dispute between Iraq and the Security
Council over the issue of UNSCOM's access to these
suspected weapons-of-mass-destruction sites in Iraq.
Malaysia further hopes that following this latest
agreement and the adoption of today's resolution, there
will no longer be any necessity or excuse for military
action against Iraq and that there will be no further
misunderstanding on this issue, which, should it
unfortunately arise again, must be resolved through
diplomacy rather than the use of force. This, to my
delegation, is the only acceptable and civilized way in
which relations between nations should be conducted,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations. In our
view, the use of bombs in these circumstances, however
smart these bombs may be, would indeed be a sad failure
of diplomacy and an unwillingness to use it to its utmost
limits.

Malaysia continues to be profoundly concerned at
the desperate plight of the long-suffering people of Iraq,
many of whom are experiencing the debilitating effects of
the seven years of sanctions imposed on them by the
international community. We therefore implore members
of the Council, in the name of humanity, not to mete out
further punishment to the hapless Iraqi people and to
ensure the smooth implementation of Council resolution
986 (1995) as well as resolution 1153 (1998), which was
adopted recently. We hope with that with the full
implementation of this latest agreement, Iraq will be able
to see the longed-for light at the end of the tunnel.

Malaysia warmly welcomes and strongly supports
the recent decision of the Council to double the
oil-for-food programme as a practical arrangement to
avoid further deterioration of the current humanitarian
situation in Iraq. It is Malaysia's hope that this will bring
an additional measure of relief to alleviate the plight of
the people of Iraq and ensure that they are allowed to

 

benefit from their rich natural resources, as set out in the
provisions of Security Council resolution 986 (1995). It
remains our hope and prayer that with the resolution of the
current differences between the international community
and Iraq, the sanctions on that country will be lifted in the
near future.
