Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225) and Special Representative Sandra Honore
for her briefing.

Regarding the political process in Haiti, Spain
echoes the Secretary-General's call to all Haitian
stakeholders, especially the President and the National
Assembly, to work together and implement the political
agreement of 5 February by the agreed deadlines.

In a political situation as volatile as that experienced
by Haiti, it is particularly relevant that the international
community send this message in a firm and unanimous
manner. In that regard, it is important to point out that
the Prime Minister and the transitional Government
designated by President Privert are not consensual and
have not been confirmed by the National Assembly. The
international community has made significant efforts
to assist reconstruction and stabilization in Haiti,
particularly in support of elections. If those efforts are
not to have been in vain, it is essential that we firmly
demand that Haitian politicians adopt a responsible
attitude as they pursue the electoral process.

Spain has specifically provided political and
financial support to the elections in Haiti, providing
financial and human resources to the electoral missions
of the Organization of American States and the
European Union. In that regard, we deeply regret that
the current electoral process has fallen into the current
impasse, as Haiti is undermining the consolidation of
its democratic institutions.

I would now like to refer to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Spain
thanks MINUSTAH for its excellent work. Its presence
is a factor for stability and deterrence, and it is
particularly important in the current context of political
uncertainty. We take good note of the intention of the
Secretary-General to submit recommendations to the
Security Council on the future of MINUSTAH before
the expiration of its mandate in October. In keeping
with resolution 2243 (2015), these recommendations
must be based on the strategic assessment mission
to be carried out once the electoral process has been
concluded 90 days after the new President is sworn in
and, ideally, after the formation of a new Government.
Spain stresses that these recommendations, in addition
to being based on the results of the assessment mission,
must address the political and institutional situation
of the country and evaluate their impact on stability
and security in Haiti. Any assessment of the role and
the presence of the United Nations in Haiti once the
mandate of MINUSTAH expires should be part of that
political and security context and take into account the
potential impact of the Mission's eventual exit.

Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by the observer of the
European Union.

