Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
country Norway, member of the European Economic
06-41819
Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
align themselves with this statement.

Mr. President, let me first thank you for having
led the recent Security Council mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for your
briefing on the results of the mission. We share the
assessment of the situation that you presented to the
Council on 16 June.

We are indeed at a critical juncture in the history
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The holding
of the first free elections in 45 years represents a
milestone marking the end of the transition period.
These elections must fulfil the earnest desire of the
Congolese people to select their representatives, at
different levels of the democratic institutions, in free,
fair and transparent elections.

We fully support the electoral calendar set by the
Independent Electoral Commission for the presidential
and legislative elections. We urge all political forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage in the
electoral campaign in a spirit of peace and
reconciliation and to hold a responsible debate. We
believe that, in order to create a favourable climate for
the elections, all possible measures must be taken to
ensure respect for freedom of expression, including
through fair access to the media. At the same time, it is
crucial that the media display a responsible attitude.
The EU condemns all appeals to hatred and
xenophobia. The negative messages of the pre-election
campaign on the subject of congolite' must not be
repeated.

Successful elections require sufficient security.
While it is first and foremost the responsibility of the
large Congolese police force and the new integrated
units of the army, supported by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), to provide security, the EU,
upon a request by the United Nations and supported by
the Congolese authorities, has decided to deploy an EU
military operation in support of MONUC. The Security
Council authorized that operation by resolution 1671
(2006) of 25 April, and the EU Council of Ministers
officially took the decision to launch the operation on
12 June. In addition, the police assistance mission in
Kinshasa (EUPOL KINSHASA) is being reinforced
during the election period to help the Congolese police
forces coordinate their activities. We will thus be in a
position to make a significant contribution to creating a
more secure environment for the elections. However, it
remains the responsibility of the Congolese authorities
to ensure the protection of all the candidates,
preventing attempts at harassment or at restricting their
mobility throughout the Republic.

Successful elections also require sufficient
resources. The European Union and its member States
have to date provided some €250 million -
approximately $320 million - or nearly 80 per cent of
the overall cost of the elections. We have full trust in
MONUC's ability to support the Congolese authorities
effectively in the organization of the elections.
Furthermore, in order to verify the correct conduct of
the elections and to create trust in the results of the
elections, the European Union is deploying a large
election observation mission. The mission will liaise
closely with other international observer missions, in
particular those from the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community.

However, successful elections mark only the
beginning of the long and arduous process of recovery
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nobody
should be fooled into believing that the inauguration of
a new President and the swearing-in of the members of
parliament will be the end of this process. Equally,
continued strong support by the international
community will be necessary long after the elections.

In our View, the following elements are crucial
for the long-term success of our common efforts to
stabilize the Democratic Republic of the Congo. First,
it is important that the election results be accepted by
all political players. Conditions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are such that all those who wish
to do so will be able to participate. The European
Union therefore calls on all the political parties, even
those which have chosen not to take part in the
elections, to undertake to respect the verdict of the
polls. The real test of the success of the democratic
process will be the way in which the election results
are handled and the way in which the majority deals
with the minority. Everyone should look to the future
in a spirit of tolerance and reconciliation, a future in
which all political forces must participate in the
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Secondly, security has to be effective in the
whole territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Important progress has been achieved in the

field of security-sector reform, with the process of
army integration under way. Since June 2005, the
European Union has supported defence reform through
its mission of assistance for security-sector reform
which provides advice and assistance to the Congolese
authorities. A key project in this framework addresses
the chain of payments, aiming at ensuring that monthly
pay reaches the soldiers. Furthermore, the European
Union has helped in achieving important results in the
formation of the Integrated Police Unit in Kinshasa,
through, inter alia, its civilian police mission, EUPOL
KINSHASA.

However, much still needs to be done, and
therefore the European Union is currently drafting a
strategy in order to support security-sector reform in
the post-election period. The EU urges the Congolese
authorities to pursue further army integration as a
matter of urgency and to remedy the problems related
to command, discipline and, in particular, impunity, as
well as those concerning financial management and
social support.

The related problem of illegal armed groups in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to
remain at the centre of attention after the elections. We
welcome the increased attention the Security Council
has recently paid to the regional dimensions of this
problem. The EU stresses the crucial role neighbouring
countries can play and underlines the need for strict
enforcement of the arms embargo. In that regard, we
welcome the Secretary-General's report (S/2006/310)
on a strategy to deal with the problems of armed
groups operating in the region. We encourage the
Secretariat to continue its work in this field, including
on the specific problem of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA).

We welcome the firm action taken by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to combat impunity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and hope also
that there will soon be progress in apprehending the
leaders of the LRA. We also commend MONUC's role
in the disarmament of illegal armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. MONUC
has paid a heavy tribute in human lives. We expect that
MONUC will continue to play its fundamental role for
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo after
the elections, long enough to ensure a proper security
environment in the eastern provinces.
Thirdly, economic development is key to the
long-term success of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The country is rich in natural resources which,
if illegal exploitation is halted and if these resources
are managed transparently, should provide ample
income to bring about a degree of prosperity for the
people.

Since the Pretoria and Sun City Agreements, the
international community has been an indispensable
partner of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is
important that the international community remain
committed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
beyond the election period and that it be given the
opportunity to do so. The European Union and its
member States are among the main development
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Since 2002, programmes under the Cotonou Agreement
have been funded with some €750 million. For the next
indicative programme, from 2008 to 2013, the
European Commission will aim to build on the election
process with, inter alia, support for poverty reduction,
governance, judicial reform and security-sector reform.
In this regard, the European Union expects the new
President and Government to govern in the interests of
all Congolese and to stand ready to engage with the
international community in a fair and transparent
dialogue on governance.

The year 2006 might well be the most significant
year for the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
independence. The successful holding of the elections
will be the first, decisive step in the construction of a
new, brighter future for the people. That in turn
successful elections will also greatly contribute to
peace and development in the whole region of the
Great Lakes. Together, we have a responsibility to help
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
achieve this goal and to stand by them in support of the
authorities emerging from the elections for a long time
after the actual election period. The EU stands ready to
remain a part of any future engagement by the
international community in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to that end.

