Mr. Cohen (United States): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his sobering briefing.

The timing of this meeting is especially important.
On Friday, we heard the Syrian representative issue a
chilling warning, in crystal clear terms, that the regime
will "fully recover Idlib when we deem it necessary."
(S/PV8383, p. 15). Later that day, we saw reports of
regime strikes on areas inside the Idlib zone.

What that means is that the window of opportunity
to prevent the slaughter of millions of Syrian civilians
living in Idlib, created by Turkey and Russia's
agreement on a demilitarized zone, is closing. And
it can close fast. Once that window closes, as Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock reminded us this morning,
a catastrophic humanitarian crisis will be on our hands.
Civilians will die. Thousands will be displaced. We
have seen this over and over again in this year alone
with the Russian and the regime's offensives in eastern
Ghouta, Yarmouk and Dara'a, and now Idlib.

While we were encouraged by the United Nations
assessment that Turkey and Russia's creation of a
demilitarized zone in Idlib contributed to a reduction
of violence in the past month, we are gravely concerned
about the scale of the humanitarian crisis we would face
if and when Al-Assad decides that the Idlib ceasefire
has outlived its usefulness to him. That would likely be
the largest catastrophe yet in this already devastating
conflict. Syria and Russia have shown that they feel
absolutely no obligation to uphold de-escalation zones
in eastern Ghouta, Dara'a or even Idlib, based on recent
developments. We cannot trust them to uphold the
military agreement or basic humanitarian principles
in Syria.

The best way to ensure that the Council can prevent
another humanitarian tragedy from unfolding in Idlib
and the countryside in Syria is to show genuine and
urgent movement towards a political solution to the
crisis, fully consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).
The United States and the other members of the small
group - Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, and the United Kingdom - are exerting every
ounce of diplomatic effort to see the constitutional
committee launch as quickly as possible, while one
other Council member seeks to invoke what is has
called "artificial deadlines" to prolong the dangerous
status quo. But I think we all agree that, to support
the political effort, the Organization's work to prepare
for the worst in Idlib remains absolutely essential.
The United States applauds the heroic efforts of the
United Nations and its partners for their brave work
to preposition humanitarian aid in Idlib and to ensure
that the international community is prepared to respond
should the regime break the ceasefire and trigger a
humanitarian catastrophe.

The United States urges Russia and Turkey to make
this ceasefire agreement durable, and for Russia to
prevent the Syrian regime from launching any military
offensive into Idlib. Provocations and disinformation
by Damascus must stop, including the regime's and one
Council member's continued attempts to falsely accuse
the brave humanitarian first responders - the White
Helmets - of planning chemical-weapons attacks
in Idlib province. That is especially ridiculous given
that independent mechanisms created in the Security
Council have found the Syrian regime to be the party
guilty of chemical-weapons use in Syria.

Returning to the issue of humanitarian access, it
is no surprise that sustained humanitarian access from
Damascus remains elusive in far too many parts of
Syria. For the 3 million people living in Idlib alone,
cross-border humanitarian assistance is a vital lifeline.
United Nations cross-border deliveries are authorized
by resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017), and must
be enabled by the parties to the conflict. To that end,
the United States strongly supports the Secretary-
General's assessment noted in the September report
(S/2018/845) that the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism of the United
Nations, as set forward by resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions, is vital for some 5 million
Syrians who currently depend on those cross-border
humanitarian deliveries.

In other areas like Rukban, the Syrian Government
has kept civilians under siege by denying humanitarian
aid to the camp. While we look forward to the arrival
of a joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent
convoy reaching Rukban, we need to be clear that this
is only a first step in addressing the dire humanitarian
conditions people in Rukban face every day.

The United States has offered the United Nations
all the necessary security assurances to allow that
delivery to proceed. But a one-time delivery is not
good enough. A one-time delivery does not allow
for safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained access.
Moscow and Damascus must ensure that the United
Nations has regular and unimpeded access to provide
humanitarian assistance to Rukban and all areas in
need throughout Syria.

As the Secretary-General's report also notes,
yet another month has gone by with no uptick in
humanitarian access, even to territories that are now
under regime control. Despite shifting battle lines and
territorial control, there has been no improvement in
the ability ofrelief organizations to reach those in need.

That is why the United States fully supports the
United Nations assessment that conditions in Syria are
not yet conducive to large-scale refugee returns. The
Al-Assad regime continues to do little to demonstrate
its willingness to create security and humanitarian
conditions on the ground that would allow people to
feel safe voluntarily returning to their homes. Reported
conditions of continued insecurity and regime reprisals,
arbitrary arrests and disappearances, such as in the
south-west of Syria, demonstrate that the international
standards for refugee returns - and indeed, the removal
of the cause of well-founded fears of persecution that
led refugees to flee in the first place - have not yet
been met.

Without the verifiable repeal of Law 10 and other
similar laws, Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) face credible fears over their ability to
return to their homes and rebuild their lives in safety
and dignity, without prejudice to the demographic
makeup of Syria. Syrian refugees and IDPs must be
allowed to make their own decisions about returns
that are safe, free and informed, and not premature or
under pressure.

The United States is the leading donor of
humanitarian assistance for the Syrian response,
providing more than $9 billion in aid throughout Syria
and to neighbouring countries, which have hosted
more than 5.6 million Syrian refugees since the start
of the crisis. The United States is proud of its long-
standing and significant support for the people of Syria.
However, the responsibility for the safety, dignity and
well-being of Syrians belongs first and foremost to
the Syrian authorities, not to Syria's neighbours, the
international community or donors. We therefore call
on the Syrian regime to uphold its most basic obligations
to the Syrian people under international law, as well as
their obligations to the Council, including by allowing
for sustained humanitarian access to territories under
their control. The regime's excuses have never been
acceptable, but absent of the most basic signs of
progress, those excuses are increasingly implausible.

Finally, I want to reiterate that we must move
forward with the formation of the constitutional
committee as quickly as possible as a first step towards
an irreversible political transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). This is not an artificial deadline.
The years of suffering of millions of refugees and IDPs
argue strongly that the parties and the United Nations
must seize the closing window of opportunity provided
by the Idlib ceasefire and act now. We are talking about
saving people's lives. A timeline that does so as quickly
as possible is not an artificial deadline; it is a moral
necessity and precisely why we have the Council and
the United Nations and why it is essential to act now.
The constitutional committee represents an important
opportunity to improve humanitarian conditions
throughout Syria by securing an end to the conflict.
We have no time to lose. We must not tolerate the
imposition of more artificial delays. We must see that
committee launched. Shame on us all if we do not now
expend every effort to prevent another humanitarian
tragedy in Syria.

