Ms. Adnin (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Russian
Federation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would like to
also express my delegation's appreciation to you for
convening this important open debate and for the
well-written and thought-provoking concept note
(S/2014/384, annex) prepared for this event.

My delegation believes that this debate provides
an excellent opportunity to exchange views and raise
awareness on new developments affecting United
Nations peacekeepers in the field today. Indeed, our
discussion today is timely in the light of the recent
commemoration of the memorial International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers on 29 May 2014. As
a regular contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Malaysia has committed a total of 932
personnel serving in 7 missions. Since 1960, Malaysia
has participated in 30 such missions, with a total
commitment of 29,000 personnel to date.

United Nations peacekeeping has seen an
exponential growth in both size and scope since
the 1990s. At present, the Council has authorized
16 peacekeeping operations across the globe, with
around 116,000 personnel from more than 120 countries,
who are often deployed at great personal risk. The sheer
number of peacekeeping missions and the number of
personnel deployed demonstrates the international
community's continued reliance on the United Nations
as the central pillar for maintaining international
peace and security. As such, it may be concluded that
peacekeeping operations are a significant and critical
component of the international community's efforts
in confronting crisis and bringing peace, stability and
reconciliation to war-torn countries around the world.

Over the years, the scope of activities undertaken
by United Nations peacekeepers has also evolved,
from traditional peacekeeping work to more robust
and multidimensional operations involving a broad
spectrum of activities. As the scope of peacekeeping
activities becomes more complex and multidimensional,
our blue helmets are confronted with new threats and
challenges. Among others, such challenges include
ambushes and attacks on peacekeeping convoys and the
hostage-taking of Blue Helmets in some conflict zones.

As a troop-contributing country, Malaysia is
concerned by such developments. In particular, we are
concerned by the seeming regularity of such incidents,
which appear to have become a new modus operandi for
certain armed groups in several conflict zones. Against
such disturbing developments, my delegation notes
the Security Council's decision to deploy the Force
Intervention Brigade in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In our view, that deployment could represent
one possible solution to the dilemma increasingly face
by United Nations peacekeeping missions. We further
note that the Council's authorization for the Brigade to
use all necessary measures to avoid violent attacks is
an important evolution of the peacekeeping mandate,
which could help to ensure the safety and security of
Blue Helmets.

Those measures, however, need to be carried out
with clear mandates and proper training. On that note,
Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its support for resolution
2086 (2013), which in our view provides a comprehensive
blueprint and guidance for a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping operations. My delegation notes that
the resolution covers a large spectrum of means to
address multiple challenges and tasks, which not only
aims to enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
efforts, but also peacebuilding and other conflict
prevention efforts. In that connection, Malaysia shares
the view that all peacekeepers should be provided with
proper equipment, security perimeters and vehicles that
would allow them to operate safely.

My delegation also believes that, as and when
the need arises, inter-mission cooperation could be
considered in order to temporarily fill critical gaps, so
as to effectively respond to unforeseen events in certain
peacekeeping operations. For instance, a small-scale
temporary deployment of personnel and equipment
from the closest or neighbouring missions to an existing
mission faced with an unexpected demand for such
resources could yield positive results.

Malaysia also shares the view that the emergence
of new military technologies should continue to benefit
peacekeeping operations. For example, the use of
modern technology, such as unmanned aerial vehicles,
could significantly improve the situational awareness
of peacekeepers, which in turn would enhance their
safety and security. In addition, the use of other modern
technology and devices, such as geographic imaging
systems, satellite imagery and ground surveillance
radar could be utilized in peacekeeping operations
to strengthen monitoring and surveillance capacities
and their abilities to implement the mandates of their
respective missions. We are of the view, however,
that the use of technology in peacekeeping operations
should also take into account the principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.

The issue of financing peacekeeping operations
has become one of the major challenges at the United
Nations. Not all troop-contributing countries are in a
position to be equipped with modern technologies and
devices. In addition, most modern equipment has to
be procured from private companies. Such a practice
could lead to a double-edged sword as there is potential
that some confidential information could be leaked to a
third party. In that regard, Malaysia believes that there
is a need to study how best to address that issue. We
are of the view that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations could consider establishing a mechanism
to verify and ensure that all confidential data and
information is restricted to relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies.

At the same time, my delegation also holds the view
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should
adopt a more comprehensive and effective approach
to generate resources to meet the demands of the new
multidimensional mandates. In view of the increasing
need for such mandates, the United Nations requires
an adequate and optimum level of forces, as well as
equipment in order to operate effectively and efficiently.
As a Member State that strongly supports the United
Nations peacekeeping role, Malaysia supports all
efforts for transparent triangular cooperation between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to continue working together with all
partners and stakeholders in our collective effort to
advance the cause of international peace and security
through the United Nations peacekeeping agenda.

