Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the situation in Rakhine state in
Myanmar. We share his concern about the serious
worsening of the situation in the region, which was
provoked first and foremost by fighters of the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army. We resolutely condemn
their armed attempts to undermine efforts to stabilize
the situation in Rakhine state. We are concerned about
the mass exodus of Muslim, Buddhist and Hindu
refugees, as well as the ensuing humanitarian crisis.
We empathize with those who find themselves in
such a difficult situation and those whose rights have
been violated.

At the same time, the information that we are
receiving indicates that the situation in Rakhine state is
far from unequivocal. In recent days, evidence has been
received of the involvement of fighters of the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army in the massacre of civilians.
Moreover, caches of improvised explosive devices have
been discovered. There is evidence that the extremists
have forced members of Myanmar's Hindu community
in border villages to leave their homes and migrate to
the territory of neighbouring Bangladesh in the same
stream as Muslims. Furthermore, there is evidence of
arson attacks on entire villages carried out by terrorists.
Photographs confiscated from detained militants were
apparently intended to contribute to reports to the
leadership of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
or its foreign sponsors. Those data back up statements
made earlier by the authorities of Naypyitaw that the
initiators of the outbreak of violence in Rakhine state
sought to maximize the scale of the humanitarian
catastrophe and shift all blame for it to the Government.

We appreciate the efforts of the Myanmar
authorities to resolve the situation in Rakhine state
and support the dialogue with relevant United Nations
agencies and human rights bodies, including the work
initiated by the Naypyitaw, in cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, in order to organize humanitarian assistance
to the affected population. We note the readiness of the
Myanmar authorities to repatriate refugees from the
territory of Bangladesh on the basis of the procedures
provided for by the bilateral agreement with that
country of 1993, and to send the current lists of leaders
and fighters of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
to the Bangladesh side, INTERPOL and United Nations
specialized bodies. The authorities of Myanmar have
invited the Bangladesh side to begin negotiations
between ministers responsible for security issues and
intensify contacts through the ministries of foreign
affairs. We think that would prove useful.

We pay tribute to the efforts of the Government of
Bangladesh, which has shown solidarity and sheltered
hundreds of thousands of refugees from Myanmar.
We hope for the solid support of the international
community in resolving the humanitarian crisis. These
people should receive assistance. The leadership of
Myanmar has begun to implement the recommendations
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired
by Mr. Kofi Annan, and established an Implementation
Committee that has already held two meetings.

I wish to stress that excessive pressure on Naypyitaw
in the current situation can only aggravate the situation
in and around the country. We maintain our unchanging
position that there is no alternative to resolving the
existing problems in Rakhine state except through
political means and a dialogue between representatives
of all nationalities and faiths. We call on the parties
involved and external stakeholders to demonstrate
restraint and objectivity in their assessment of ongoing
events. We need to be very precise in using terms like
"genocide" and "ethnic cleansing".

It is important to focus on practical assistance to
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh in their
search for a solution to the complex and difficult problem
at hand, in the spirit of equality and mutual respect. It
is necessary to stop the violence and the incitement that
fuels it. We must prevent further radicalization in the
region, which can be used by terrorists and extremists
who are already trying to establish roots in South-East

Asia. We are also concerned by how the situation might
impact regional stability.

We welcome the fact that Naypyitaw is not rejecting
interaction with the United Nations. The National
Security Adviser to the President of Myanmar, who
was in New York during the past week, invited the
Secretary-General and his Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Feltman, to visit the country in order to facilitate
the process of national reconciliation. It would be
unreasonable to squander the opportunity to tap into the
mediation efforts of the United Nations. In any case, it
is necessary to seek the constructive involvement of the
Government and representatives of all nationalities and
faiths in resolving this long-standing complex crisis.
We should not forget about the urgent task of increasing
the socioeconomic development of Rakhine state.

