Mr. Kickert (Austria): First of all, I would like to
thank Uruguay for convening this open debate. The
protection of civilians in armed conflict has always been
of great importance to Austria. We remain engaged in
efforts to strengthen the safety and security of civilians
by supporting and complementing the work of the
United Nations, including through dedicated training
courses in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

The prevention and peaceful solution of conflicts
remains the most effective method for ensuring the
safety and well-being of civilians and strengthening
human security. In that context, women's participation
in conflict prevention, management and resolution is
crucial for achieving inclusive and sustainable peace. At
the same time, we continue to witness the perpetration
of the most heinous violations against women and
children on a large scale, including sexual and gender-
based violence. Austria therefore fully supports the
efforts to enhance the effective implementation of the
agenda on women and peace and security, including the
recommendations contained in the October 2015 global
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
entitled Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace, and the agenda on children and
armed conflict, which should be taken into account
when addressing the protection of civilians.

We fully support the recommendations on the
role of peace operations in the protection of civilians
contained in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446),
as well as the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of the HIPPO recommendations
(S/2015/682). Austria agrees that, if a peace operation
is so mandated, the protection of civilians requires
proactive operations, which may include the use of
force by uniformed personnel. Moreover, it is important
to make the protection of civilians a mission-wide
task, which requires adequate training and resources,
including early-warning and protection-of-civilians-
related technological capabilities, as well as dedicated
personnel. We welcome the inclusion of senior
protection-of-civilian advisers in all missions with such
a mandate and we encourage the Secretariat to expand
their presence.

Despite efforts by the Council and the international
community as a whole, armed conflicts still cause
immense civilian suffering around the world, further
aggravating the already dire humanitarian situation
in Syria, Yemen and South Sudan, among other
countries. To that end, it is of the utmost importance
that we end the persisting climate of impunity and
ensure accountability. We invite all members of the
Security Council to sign the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, which includes a
pledge to support timely and decisive Council action in
situations involving atrocity crimes, as well as a pledge
not to vote against Security Council resolutions aimed
at preventing or ending those crimes. Furthermore, the
crucial role of the ICC cannot be overstated, and we
call on the Council to refer situations in which crimes
under the Rome Statute may have been committed
to the Court. We also call on all States to fulfil their
obligation to fully cooperate with the ICC.

The full compliance of all parties with international
humanitarian law remains of unquestionable relevance
to the protection of civilians. In today's world,
international humanitarian law is confronted with
many serious challenges: its brutal disregard by
certain non-State actors, the destruction of cultural
heritage, and attacks against protected persons and
institutions. The growing numbers of refugees that are
currently leaving their war-torn home regions are a
direct result of the constant violations of international
humanitarian law. For many years, Austria has strongly
supported efforts towards the better implementation of
international humanitarian law and the creation of a
special mechanism for that purpose, and was actively
engaged in the process following the adoption of
conference resolution 1 adopted at the 3lst International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011.
Unfortunately, the negotiations at the 32nd International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent did not
lead to the desired result.

In 2015, 39 journalists were killed in the ongoing
conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa alone,
most of them executed by the Islamic State, while
a further 54 journalists were kidnapped. The high
number demonstrates that armed groups in the region
are ready to do whatever it takes to stifle criticism
and independent information emerging from conflict
zones. Impunity for such acts remains widespread and
fuels further violations. We call on the United Nations
to provide timely and accurate information on threats
to journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in conflict situations, which is a prerequisite
if the Council is to address the topic in a more coherent
manner, including in country-specific deliberations.

Austria also highlights the concern about the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas as a major cause
of civilian harm in many countries. In most armed
conflicts, civilian casualties from explosive weapons
in populated areas dramatically outweigh military
casualties. This is a grave humanitarian problem and a
severe challenge for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Let me close by assuring the Security Council that
Austria will continue to work closely with all interested
stakeholders to further strengthen the protection of
civilians.

