Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
As my delegation expressed when it was a member
of the Security Council, the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict is an issue to which
the international community accords considerable
importance. It is therefore appropriate for the Council
to keep it under continual review.

Civilians continue to suffer deeply the
consequences of armed conflicts, in alarming figures,
and the increasing attacks on journalists are grounds
for clear concern. Allow me, therefore, to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for bringing the issue of
protecting journalists before the Council for the third
time since 2006, when my country was also a member
and when resolution 1738 (2006) was adopted. 1 would
also like to express our gratitude for the concept note
prepared by the presidency (S/2015/307, annex) and for
the briefings by the journalists who are here with us
today, who described how they conduct their work in
situations of great danger.

Journalism is a fundamental tool for the exercise of
freedom of the press and of information that becomes
more critical in conflict and post-conflict situations,
in which it helps to effectively expose grave violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
In situations of armed conflict or their aftermath, the
lives of journalists and other media workers may be
in danger due to multiple factors, from attacks that
target them deliberately because of their profession,
to situations in which they are caught in crossfire.
Journalists, like other civilians, are exposed to such
dangers. But recently a new kind of violation of their
physical integrity has made its appearance: deliberate
attacks committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant.

Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, relating to the protection of victims of
international armed conflicts - to which Argentina
is a party - provides that journalists engaged in
dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict shall be considered as civilians. That provision
merely affirms the rule in customary international law
whereby journalists have civilian status for the purposes
of international humanitarian law. For the purposes of
the protection provided by humanitarian law, including
article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, relating to
non-international armed conflicts, journalists and their
assistants are therefore non-combatants and they and
their equipment must be protected as such.

However, it is also important to combat impunity
for attacks. In 2010, at its twenty-seventh session,
UNESCO's Intergovernmental Council of the
International Programme for the Development of
Communication asked UNESCO's Director General
for an analytical report on the safety of journalists
and impunity. That report, presented in March 2012,
proposed a plan of action for the United Nations. We
hope that the Plan ofAction on the Safety of Journalists
and the Issue of Impunity will help to strengthen
measures designed to protectjournalists in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and to reinforce the view that
accountability is essential.

Those two concerns - about impunity and respect
for international humanitarian law - are also reflected
in the Human Rights Council's resolution 21/12,
adopted in November 2012. The resolution, sponsored
by more than 50 countries, including Argentina,
firmly condemned all attacks and violence against
journalists and expressed concern about the fact that
such attacks too often go unpunished. Similarly, the
General Assembly, in its resolution 68/163, proclaimed
2 November as the International Day to End Impunity
for Crimes against Journalists, commemorated for the
first time in 2014 and sponsored by Argentina, Austria,
Costa Rica, France, Greece, Tunisia and UNESCO.

The presidency's concept note (S/2015/307, annex) outlines an undeniable aspect of contemporary
reality-that in some conflict situations there arise other
acts of extreme violence, radicalized fundamentalism
and a cruel and total disregard for human dignity
of which journalists are often victims. And they
make use of the advantages of our modern world to
spread such horror virtually. While the international
community has not yet arrived at a universally agreed-
on definition of terrorism, we can still identify the acts
that the international community should condemn. We
therefore support the condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations as one of the most serious
threats there is to international peace and security,
human dignity, peaceful coexistence, the building of
democracy and the economic and social development
of nations.

It is precisely that reality that makes the challenge we
face more serious, in part because the legal frameworks
that apply to combatants in situations of armed conflict
and in the fight against terrorism are different. It also
makes it all the more critical from the perspective of
effective protection, an issue raised in the presidency's
concept note. The fact is that peacekeeping operations
have specific mandates, and even when those mandates
include the protection of civilians, giving priority
to this particular category of civilians would require
careful review by Member States. It would also mean
incorporating the particular characteristics involved in
combating terrorism into special political missions.

It is essential that the Security Council remain
committed to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
which should include the consideration of specific
situations, such as that of journalists today, and to

promoting respect for international humanitarian
and human-rights law, as well as ending impunity for
serious violations against civilians.

