Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his briefing and
congratulate him on his exemplary leadership as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).

At our meeting in September (see S/PV.7028), we
noted the creditable efforts of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to communicate and collaborate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as a result
of the change at the head of the executive branch, which

augur well for the chances to resolve the nuclear issue.
Beyond simple communication efforts and statements
of intention, those acts are the basis on which the
historic agreement in Geneva, known as thejoint action
plan, was signed 24 November between Iran and the
P5+1 - an agreement that we would like to once again
welcome. We are pleased that the agreement not only
relaxes sanctions in exchange for a downward revision
of Iran's nuclear programme, but also introduces a new
framework for more trusting and collaborative relations
between Iran and the entire international community.

The joint statement on a cooperation framework
signed on 11 November, which includes six first practical
steps by Iran within three months, has allowed the
IAEA to inspect the Arak heavy-water production plant
on 8 December. It was an opportunity for the inspectors
to get details on the design and operation of the site,
which they had not had for over two years. We hope
that inspections of other sites under IAEA guarantees,
including the Gachin mine, will be undertaken on a
continuous basis since, as also noted by the Agency, full
respect by Iran ofits obligations is crucial to convincing
the international community of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.

We hope that Iran will demonstrate full good faith
in responding to requests of the Agency regarding all
nuclear facilities and locations outside facilities, such
as the Natanz enrichment facility, for which descriptive
information is still pending, and the Fordow fuel
facility, about which Iran must also provide additional
information.

There are still many issues on which answers are
expected from Iran. However, my country believes
that recent developments justify hopes for a diplomatic
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Moreover, as we
just mentioned, they show the new Iranian authorities'
willingness to cooperate with the P5+l and the IAEA.
All these concerted efforts of Iran, in addition to the
expected implementation of the Additional Protocol,
should help to bolster the confidence of the international
community, especially since the Iranian people have
suffered too much under the sanctions on the country's
economy, as indicated by the report of the Secretary-
General on the human rights situation in Iran for the
current year. We once again take this opportunity to
request continued serious and impartial investigations
on all pending cases, in particular the case of the ship
seized in Yemen.

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the 1737
Committee, whose work we have come to appreciate
in the two years of our membership of the Council. We
also extend our appreciation to the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) for its
constant and valuable support to the Committee in
fulfilling its mission. We particularly appreciate the
fact that it has always taken the opportunities offered
by the workshops and meetings to inform States of the
importance of implementing the measures taken by the
United Nations. We urge it to continue to practice rigor
and impartiality in its investigations.

