Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Allow me to begin by
thanking Spain for organizing this open debate on
such a timely and pertinent issue. I would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and both teams, in
New York and in Madrid, on an exemplary job done
in leading the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two
years and in the conduct of the comprehensive review
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. I would
like, however, to highlight a few aspects of significance
to my country.

Since its adoption, in 2004, resolution 1540 (2004)
has played a central role in countering the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
as the only global legally binding instrument in that
field. Nowadays, the rise of terrorism and the growing
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery by non-State actors makes
the need for its full implementation more relevant than
ever. In that regard, new scientific and technological
developments must be taken into consideration and
adequately addressed.

The results of the comprehensive review
demonstrate that, despite the achievements, a lot
remains to be done by Member States. The unanimous
adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) earlier today and
the large number of sponsors - my own country,
Bulgaria, is one of them - should be interpreted as a
reaffirmation of the commitment of Member States to
fully implement resolution 1540 (2004).

Prevention is of the essence. As the saying goes,
States need to be successful 100 per cent of the time,
while terrorists need to succeed only once. The
objective of resolution 1540 (2004) is prevention, and
measures to that end will be effective only if they are
fully implemented at all levels - national, regional
and global.

Bulgaria has been a strong supporter of resolution
1540 (2004) since its adoption. At the national level,
we have put all the necessary legislation in place in
that regard. However, having legislation in place is
not sufficient - its enforcement is of much greater
importance. Our efforts are therefore geared towards
further strengthening coordination and information
exchange among implementing agencies. Enforcing
the legislation is one of the elements that we find of
particular importance for the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Bulgaria is in the process of developing a national
strategy for countering weapons of mass destruction, in
which significant emphasis will be placed on preventing
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery by non- State actors.

The submission of national reports is another
aspect that merits attention. It is essential that all States
provide such reports. They allow for the identification
of areas that might need further strengthening and can
serve as a great tool in assessing needs for assistance. In
that regard, the newly strengthened role of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) in facilitating technical assistance could
only but be aided by national reports. Bulgaria has
submitted several reports on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including updated information
in 2015. Besides efforts at the national level, we are of
the view that improved cooperation between the 1540
Committee and the three counter-terrorism committees
would be of great benefit for achieving the objectives
of the resolution.

It is important to take into consideration other
initiatives whose objectives are also aimed at countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
whose activities contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. Bulgaria actively participates in
both initiatives, and in 2017, within the framework of
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
Bulgaria will host a seminar on developing programmes
and exercises in nuclear security.

Furthermore, the recognition of the positive role
that parliamentarians, civil society, academia and
industry play in the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is also an element to be welcomed, as
efforts to counter the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors can be successful only
if all act in concert.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Bulgaria's
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

