For three weeks, Germany and the majority of Council members have engaged constructively with Russia as facilitator of draft resolution S/2020/1054 despite our belief that the women and peace and security agenda is based on a strong normative framework and does not need more resolutions at this point. A short commemorative text would have been the better option. What we need is action and the implementation of the entire women and peace and security agenda, not more words. We have repeatedly called for the draft resolution on women and peace and security agenda to include strong language on the human rights foundation of the women and peace and security agenda, as in all previous resolutions. We have also called for the adequate reflection of the critical role of civil society, women peacebuilders and human rights defenders in implementing the women and peace and security agenda on the ground, as in previous resolutions. And we have called for a balance in the reflection of the whole women and peace and security agenda and the inclusion of the most recently agreed standards on the full, equal and meaningful participation of women, on combating sexual violence and the rights of survivors, on accountability and on women's critical role in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Unfortunately, our calls were not heeded, despite our efforts and those of a majority of Council members. We were very disappointed that the facilitator did not engage in a transparent manner despite many hours of consultations and bilateral discussions. Had the draft resolution been adopted, it would have eroded the hard-won gains of the women and peace and security agenda and watered down previous achievements on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). That is why Germany, along with nine other Council members, was forced to abstain in the voting on this draft resolution. There is no monopoly on women's human rights or women and peace and security. That agenda belongs to all women, everywhere. It is our job to make it possible for all those women to finally take their rightful place. As Danai Gurira said in yesterday's open debate: "Male-dominated rooms in the twenty-first century should be embarrassing to us all" (S/2020/1084).
