Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): As we speak here
this morning, President Arafat is under siege, with
Israeli tanks destroying his headquarters and
surrounding what remains of them.

It is a matter of grave concern, because the latest
Israeli military aggression threatens President Arafat,
elected leader of a nation, Nobel Laureate for peace
and embodiment of the Palestinian cause.

It is a matter of extreme anxiety, because the
policy pursued by Tel Aviv seems to be aimed at
destroying not only the physical infrastructure of the
Palestinian Authority, but also the entire edifice of
peace constructed through Oslo and Madrid.

It is outrageous that Israel continues to flout
resolutions of the Security Council with virtual
impunity. The Geneva Conventions are being wilfully
ignored. All norms and mores of international law are
being breached.

Israel forced a large percentage of Palestinians
out of their homes and confined them to refugee camps
or forced them into diaspora. For several decades, the
people of Palestine have been subject to massacres, to
deportation, to daily humiliation, to systematic
persecution.

More than a generation of Palestinians has seen
nothing but occupation, bombings, missiles, incursions,
demolitions, killings, arrests and humiliation. No other
nation on earth has suffered so much for so long.

Today, in a sinister reversal of values, the people
of Palestine are criminalized for their resistance, for
their struggle for self-determination and for claiming
their inalienable right to return to ancestral hearths. Yet
the free world was supposed to uphold the principles of

the Charter - the values of justice, democracy and
international law - that constitute the norms of our
civilization.

Suicide bombings are used as pretexts for attacks
on the Palestinian Authority. Despite President Arafat's
public and unequivocal condemnation of such acts.

The Palestinian Authority cannot be held
responsible for these individual actions. Experience has
amply demonstrated that the security of Israeli civilians
is enhanced neither by retaliation, nor by destroying
the Palestinian institutions.

Just the other day, the Quartet issued a
communique. It reiterates the fundamental principles of
a comprehensive settlement. It proposes a calendar. It
asks Israel to release its stranglehold of the Palestinian
economy. Obviously, the Quartet plan can be executed
only if Israel is engaged in the peace process.

Bangladesh welcomed the initiative for an
international peace conference. We urged its early
convening. To arrest the despair and desperation there
must be a process; there must be a prospect in view. We
must deny the extremists a reason. We must not allow a
void. As we have insisted on earlier occasions, the
Security Council should revisit the Secretary-General's
proposal for an international force, in favour of which
there have been indisputable arguments.

The response must be sought in the root-causes;
not by trying to make la lois des plus forts prevail. The
practice of that law has resulted in wars among nations,
bloodshed and denial of all civilized norms. The
Security Council should act to prevent imposition of
that law.
Resolving the conflict will require courage -
courage to recognize the truth and courage to defend it,
courage to confront the demand ofjustice and courage
to uphold the principles of this Organization. The path
to justice, and to peace, was laid down in Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1978). A
meaningful beginning could be the implementation of
the Security Council's own resolutions, namely, 1397
(2002) and 1402 (2002).

The Bangladesh Prime Minister Begum Khaleda
Zia has strongly condemned the Israeli attack on the
Palestinian Headquarters in Ramallah and has
expressed grave concern for the security and safety of
President Arafat. She has also said that Israel would be
solely responsible should any harm befall the
Palestinian leaders.

The Security Council needs to secure Israeli
compliance with its resolutions, to have its forces
withdraw from Palestinian territories and to end its
aggression against the people of Palestine. The
Security Council must act. It must act to meet its
Charter responsibility. It must act to save the people of
Palestine from a perpetual war waged against a people.
It must act to preserve its credibility and moral
authority.

