I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I would like to start by once again mourning the loss of life due to the tragic events in Lebanon on 4 August, which sadly included a large number of Syrian refugees and, as we have just heard, Deputy Special Envoy Matar. I would like to join others in wishing her a speedy recovery. All of this is a reminder of the magnitude of the Beirut tragedy, but also of how generous Lebanon has been in responding to the crisis in neighbouring Syria. We are deeply concerned by the escalating coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation in Syria. There are now over 1,650 confirmed cases, with cases in regime- held areas more than doubling in the first 10 days of August and those in north-east Syria also growing rapidly. We understand the actual number of cases to be far greater. The Security Council has feared a dramatic rise in cases in Syria, and it appears now that such a rise may well have begun. It remains incumbent on all of us to ensure that the necessary medical and humanitarian assistance reaches all of those in need. We are also deeply concerned at the fragile nature of the ceasefire in north- west Syria, particularly in the context of an increase in COVID-19 cases. We strongly supported the ceasefire agreed by the Presidents of Russia and Turkey on 5 March and welcomed the fact that it appeared to have been broadly holding. This granted millions of Syrians in Idlib some respite and allows hundreds of thousands to return to their homes. We are therefore concerned at the apparent erosion of the ceasefire in recent weeks, in particular an uptick in appalling attacks by extremist groups, notably on joint Russian-Turkish patrols, as well as repeated air strikes by Russian and regime forces. As I said last month (S/2020/743, annex XIII), we know what the humanitarian impact of a breakdown in the ceasefire would be: the 7 July report of the report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/ HRC/44/61) found evidence of widespread indiscriminate attacks by regime and pro- regime forces on civilians, hospitals and schools, with reasonable grounds to believe that war crimes had been committed by the regime and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. The United Kingdom therefore calls for the immediate and sustained cessation of hostilities by all parties, in line with requests by the Secretary-General and the United Nations Special Envoy. Neither Syria nor the region can cope with another entirely unnecessary humanitarian disaster on top of a significant COVID-19 outbreak. The Security Council is meeting just before the resumption of Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva. It is vital that all parties engage genuinely and properly with that process and that they refrain from reimposing unnecessary conditions like those pushed in November. The representatives of the regime and opposition and independent figures meeting in Geneva need to make progress on the real issues facing the country. All parties need to be driven by the urgency of the appalling situation in Syria. Ordinary Syrians, whether they are struggling at home or living difficult lives as refugees, do not have weeks, months or years to waste. They want the war to end and they want a negotiated political solution that enables reconciliation and reconstruction of the country. We must also remember that the Constitutional Committee is just one part of the wider political process set out in resolution 2254 (2015). Progress in the Constitutional Committee must be accompanied by immediate action on such other issues as the widespread release of political prisoners and vulnerable people; making medical care available for those in detention; and making progress in building the conditions for the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons. Now is the time to seize this opportunity. We would also like to take this opportunity to remind all actors of the importance of ensuring the meaningful participation of women in the United Nations-facilitated political process for Syria, as the Security Council made clear in resolution 2254 (2015). Finally, I would like to say a few words on sanctions. Our sanctions are targeted and impose asset freezes and travel bans against specific individuals and asset freezes on specific entities. Those targeted are responsible for human rights abuses against ordinary Syrians, such as repression, arbitrary detention and violence against demonstrators, and those who support or benefit from the Al-Assad regime, including by enriching themselves through luxury housing complexes built on land appropriated from Syrians who have fled, been arrested or killed. A separate European Union sanctions regime targets those involved in the proliferation of chemical weapons. In addition, we apply some trade and sectoral restrictions designed to limit the Al-Assad regime's ability to fund and wage war against its own people, including through the use of chemical and biological weapons. These sanctions do not apply to food, medicine, medical equipment or medical assistance. Humanitarian exemptions apply to other equipment where this is needed, further mitigating the impact of sanctions on humanitarian programmes. We will continue to work with organizations and individuals to ensure that measures do not affect humanitarian operations in Syria and that organizations and individuals are able to import non-conflict-related goods. It is not the case that our opposition to sanctions language in the recent cross- border resolution is evidence that sanctions are a problem. As we have repeatedly said, our sanctions on the Syrian regime have broad humanitarian exemptions. The reason we objected to such language in the cross-border resolution is because we do not accept any false equivalence between the disastrous effects of the regime's policies and the Chinese and Russian refusal to allow more than one cross-border crossing on the humanitarian situation in Syria and our targeted sanctions regime. The reason that the Syrian people lack the humanitarian and medical aid they need is not because of our sanctions or because of any lack of generosity on the part of the United Kingdom and other international donors. It is, am sad to say, because of the deliberate policies of the Syrian regime and its supporters to perpetuate the conflict rather than seek reconciliation, to limit humanitarian access, to cut cross- border assistance in order to make a political point, to make access to aid a political tool and to spend the State's resources not on improving the welfare of its people, but rather on waging war. To put it another way, the problem facing Syria's health sector is not sanctions but the fact that the regime is more intent on bombing hospitals than on building them.
