Mr. Seenz-Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is pleased to be here today at this
formal meeting to consider the situation in Angola in the
presence of the Vice-Minister for Territorial Administration
of Angola. We welcome him and express our appreciation
to him.

New information and events show that the current
stage in Angola is crucial and decisive to its future.
Advances in the political arena are encouraging. The basic
objectives of the Lusaka Protocol have already been met
and State administration continues to be established in the
various areas, albeit at a slow pace. UNITA has already
been legalized and has become a political party, and
security measures have been agreed upon for Mr. Savimbi
to move to Luanda. Elections will soon be conducted, and
the work of demobilization has been concluded. Radio
Vorgan has put an end to its broadcasts, and we are
awaiting the prompt initiation of the non-partisan Radio
Despertar.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that a high-level
UNITA delegation has already moved to Luanda and that,
for the first time since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol,
the warring parties are complying with what has been
agreed.

The will of President Dos Santos and of the
Government of Angola to fulfil their responsibilities has
been decisive in this whole process, and we want to
recognize that.

Nevertheless, we are concerned that UN ITA continues
to obstruct progress and to promote acts of violence. We
are likewise gravely concerned at the attacks on and
violations of property perpetrated against the personnel of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) and of other international organizations. Costa
Rica condemns these acts and appeals to UNITA to fully
join the peace efforts, which now, after years of war and
destruction, have begun a stage of consolidation.

All these elements are leading to a new situation
and, in the View of my delegation, need to be taken into
account with regard to the role played by the international
community.

Although the security situation remains difficult,
humanitarian assistance operations are continuing, and
progress in other areas has been outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General.

We would like draw attention to the grave problem
of mine-laying in Angola. This is affecting the civilian
population and international staff and hampers
humanitarian assistance. My country urgently calls for an
end to this activity.

Costa Rica supports the efforts being made by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme to provide
humanitarian assistance to the large number of internally
displaced persons and refugees, who continue to pose a
serious problem and to affect the stability of the country.

We completely agree with the approach presented by
the United Nations system which consists of ensuring a
transition from a complex situation of humanitarian
assistance to one of rehabilitation, peace-building and
development in Angola. This new peace-building stage is
extremely important, and in this respect my delegation
supports the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in connection with the necessary restructuring of
MONUA. This process of change in MONUA has clearly
been designed to prepare Angola to embark on a path of
reconstruction and rehabilitation in an integral way.

It is necessary to increase the number of civilian
police observers, as they will ensure the security of the
Angola population. Their training is vital in order for all
humanitarian, social and economic and activities can be
carried out without delay.

We would like to draw attention to the information
with regard the difficult economic situation of the
country, particularly the financial deficit. We hope for an
understanding and united attitude on the part of the

 

international community, and, in particular, a new approach
by international financial organizations.

My delegation supports the efforts made by the
Sanctions Committee established by Security Council
resolution 864 (1993), and we express our appreciation to
it. We also note with satisfaction the commitments
undertaken by neighbouring countries so that the sanctions
imposed can be effectively implemented. Those
commitments were demonstrated during a recent visit to the
region. We also commend the work being done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Beye,
which has been decisive in the Angolan peace process, and
we support his continued efforts, as well as those of all the
personnel of MONUA.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the parties to
continue to implement the Lusaka Protocol and to work
together in order to achieve the peace and stability that the
Angolan people deserve. My delegation will support the
draft resolution before us.

