Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and for chairing this debate. I would also like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.

Security sector reform (SSR) in post-conflict
countries is an important issue, and I thank the
Nigerian presidency for having organized today's
debate and for its useful concept note on this subject
(S/2011/627). Successful security sector reform is vital
for establishing enduring peace and stability in
countries that are in conflict or in a post-conflict
peacebuilding phase. On the other hand, it is usually
failure in SSR that causes some countries to remain
mired in conflict for extended periods.

The Security Council's presidential statement of
20 February 2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) and the Secretary-
General's report on security sector reform (S/2008/39),
submitted in January 2008 pursuant to that statement,
have comprehensively dealt with the complexity of this
issue. They have also identified a number of concrete
action points for implementation of security sector
reforms in conflict and post-conflict situations.

If the implementation of security sector reform is
to be successful, it is imperative to clearly recognize at
the outset that it is an internal affair of a country. As
such, the process must be led and owned by the nation
State concerned. The process must be driven by
national requirements and not by donor priorities. The
capacity-driven approach that is being adopted needs to
become an exercise in understanding and providing
what the country concerned requires rather than an
exercise in collating what donors can give.

Normative principles of security sector reform
should remain within the framework of national
consent under Chapter VI of the United Nations
Charter and should not seek to obfuscate the difference
between the provisions of Chapters VI and VII. This
will ensure that the involvement of the Council and of
the United Nations system more widely in security
sector reform remains country-specific and forms part
of a comprehensive strategy for establishment of peace
and stability. Security sector reform will fail to
consolidate the hard-earned gains of peacekeeping
unless it is based on organic growth and related to the
political, socio-economic and cultural realities of the
country concerned.

Operational issues concerning security sector
reform should take into account the fact that security is
a very broad term encompassing not just defence,
police and other law enforcement agencies but also
institutions responsible for border management,
customs, civil emergencies, the judiciary and others.
Given such a broad scope, it is necessary that the
United Nations operational plans for security sector
reform in every situation remain focused on the most
critical sectors instead of being frittered away in
peripherals.

The broad scope of this issue also calls for a
long-term strategy, integrated efforts and coordination
among different United Nations and other international
agencies involved. Country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission should have an
important role to play in assisting the concerned
country in developing such a long-term strategy and
integrating and coordinating the international efforts.

The international community should clearly
demonstrate its staying power and its commitment to
making available required resources for the full
implementation of operational plans for security sector
reform. Operational plans should also comprehensively

take into account the political, socio-economic and
cultural moorings of the country concerned, based on
the interests of the national stakeholders.

In this connection, I must underline that we have
noticed a tendency in this Council in recent months to
authorize less than optimal manpower and other
resources while expanding mandates. There have also
been calls for reviews of a mission even before that
mission is established. This tendency to ask United
Nations missions to do more with less does not augur
well for the successful implementation of operational
plans to reform the security sector on an enduring basis
in conflict and post-conflict countries on the agenda of
the Council.

We also hear arguments in favour of shortening
the mandates of United Nations missions even when
host countries favour the continued presence of the
concerned United Nations missions. The premature
drawdown or withdrawal of United Nations missions
against the wishes of the host countries before
domestic institutions are fully capable of assuming
their role risks relapse into conflict, which would
require more resources in the future.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the role of
the United Nations in security sector reform must be
based on its biggest strengths: impartiality, equity and
non-interference. Following these principles, the
United Nations system and the missions authorized by
this Council will command the respect and confidence
of all stakeholders, who in turn will cooperate with the
United Nations, leading to successful and enduring
security sector reforms.

In this connection, it is also important to
recognize that there are countries that possess wide
experience in implementing security sector capacity
development in multi-ethnic, multireligious and
multilingual societies, giving primacy to human rights
and the rule of law. In addition to uniformed services,
the United Nations should also tap the Governments of
such countries for secondment of human resources in
all areas of SSR, since their experiences are very
similar and relevant to the challenges facing the
countries on the agenda of the Security Council.
