Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for promoting this open and timely
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which is one of the most challenging issues the
international community confronts. I would like to
express my delegation's appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his thought-
provoking briefing, as well as to Mr. Jacques Forster
for his very interesting and precise contribution to our
debate this morning. Brazil is fully aware of the
indispensable and neutral humanitarian work
performed by the International Committee of the Red
Cross in this area of high concern.

Years have elapsed since the adoption of Security
Council resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000),
which underlined our profound concerns at the plight
of the civilian victims of armed conflict. Since then,
the Council has dealt with the issue of the protection of
civilians not only within its regular thematic debates
but also in tackling country-specific situations.

In the course of our discussions, much has been
said about the nature of contemporary warfare and its
heavy impact on civilians. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/740) highlights two of the
most troubling features of today's conflicts: forced
displacement and sexual violence. The reality is that
civilians in armed conflict have gone through all sorts
of hardships, including indiscriminate killings and
mutilation, as well as starvation, disease and the loss of
their livelihoods. Against that bleak background, the
work of humanitarian personnel, who bring healing to
those in need, has, in many cases, been thwarted by the
denial or the obstruction of access, poor conditions of

security and the regrettable continuous lack of
resources.

As a consequence, we have developed a set of
rules and principles that seek to limit the consequences
of armed conflict. But the international community still
falls short of ensuring a more effective application of
humanitarian law. Violations must be prevented or duly
punished. While we underscore that States bear the
primary responsibility to exercise their criminal
jurisdiction, account must be taken of the full range of
judicial mechanisms that can complement national
jurisdictions, the foremost being the International
Criminal Court. In that respect, the report of the
Secretary-General refers to the three investigations
already under way; those are very positive
developments. By bringing perpetrators to justice, the
Court will be able to provide long-term deterrence,
with a positive impact on the protection of civilians.

At the country level, capacity-building is crucial
to enhance the national legal, law enforcement and
judicial systems, as well as to develop other long-term
post-conflict initiatives. We particularly stress the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for creating a secure
environment that is sustainable. Those programmes
need to be fully provided with resources, especially in
the reintegration phase. In countries emerging from
conflict, disarming and demobilizing activities need to
be matched with actions to reintegrate former
combatants into society through employment support
and income-generation projects. My delegation
emphasizes, in that regard, the fundamental importance
of making adequate and predictable resources available
for the full completion of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes and activities.

With respect to the provision of humanitarian
assistance, we have been supportive of efforts to make
the United Nations humanitarian system more
predictable. We should aim at ensuring a more
equitable distribution of humanitarian assistance so
that aid can be allocated in a non-discriminatory,
balanced and proportionate manner.

Our delegation took note of the ideas to improve
reporting to the Security Council. But it is our
understanding that the compilation of data on issues
and trends regarding the civilian population would
concern only countries whose situations are on the
agenda of the Security Council. In addition, the
thematic discussions in the Council should be linked to
country-specific situations of which the Council is
seized.

As for the responsibility to protect, the Foreign
Minister of Brazil, Mr. Amorim, reminded us at the
opening of the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly that, while the concept does merit an
adequate place in our system,

"The United Nations was not created to
disseminate the notion that order should be
imposed by force. That extreme expedient can be
considered only when all other efforts have been
exhausted and peaceful solutions have proved not
to be viable." (A/60/PV.9, p. 5 and 6)

Furthermore, the World Summit Outcome stresses
that the General Assembly should examine the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity and assess all its ramifications, bearing in
mind the United Nations Charter. At the same time, in
the section on the use of force under the Charter of the
United Nations, the Summit Outcome reaffirms that the
relevant provisions of the Charter are sufficient to
address the full range of threats to international peace
and security.

Returning to the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council must
continue to be fully engaged, but, while remaining
seized of that issue, the Council must also recognize
the essential roles of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in the field of the
protection of civilians and must work in close
coordination with them, because those bodies are able
to address other important dimensions of the issue,
such as the critical topic of humanitarian funding.

I wish to conclude by paying tribute to the
humanitarian community: those who still provide hope
for people who are suffering all over the world.

