Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome President Touadera of the Central African
Republic to today's meeting, and thank Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous and Ambassador
Hilale for their briefings.

Thanks to the concerted efforts of the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic and
the relevant parties of the international community,
the country has concluded its political transition
and ushered in a new chapter in State-building. The
Central African Republic is now pressing ahead
with disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation efforts and security sector reform, and
working hard to restore national stability and pursue
reconciliation, with positive results. China welcomes
that development and commends the Government of
the Central African Republic for their efforts under the
stewardship of President Touadera.

Meanwhile, we must be aware that the security
situation in the country allows no complacency. There
is a long way to go in rebuilding the State, and obstacles
to achieving lasting peace and stability remain. The
issues surrounding the Central African Republic can
be resolved only through self-led inclusive political
dialogue aimed at national reconciliation and a
permanent, appropriate and sustainable solution.

The dialogue led by President Touadera has
provided a golden opportunity for the country to
achieve stability and development. All parties in the
country should act in the long-term interests of the
country and its people, settle their differences through
dialogue and consultation, and work together towards
enduring peace, stability and development in the
Central African Republic. To assist the Central African
Republic in realizing peace and development, the
international community should uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and support Africans in addressing their problems in
their own way. It should also help the African Union
(AU) and other regional and subregional organizations
play a leading role, in that regard. The United Nations,
together with the AU and other regional and subregional
organizations, should enhance their coordination with
the Government of the Central African Republic, and
must fully respect its needs and will. All mediation
efforts must go hand in hand with efforts towards
national reconciliation.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) has played an important role in
maintaining stability in the country. China supports
MINUSCA's continuing mandate. During his visit to
five African countries earlier this year, Mr. Wang Yi,
the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs, conveyed
China's goodwill and commitment to pursuing an
African policy of sincerity, practical results, affinity
and good faith; upholding the values of friendship,
justice and shared interests; and actively supporting the
cause of peace and development in Africa. Along with
the international community, China is ready to renew
its contribution to the pursuit of lasting peace, stability
and development in the Central African Republic.

