Mr. Ould Abdallah: I would like to begin by
offering my sincere condolences to all the victims of the
terrible earthquake in Haiti. I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity.

Concerning Somalia, recent well-publicized
international and regional developments have shone a
new, stronger spotlight on the country. The crisis,
which has become a tougher challenge than ever, can
no longer be ignored. Indeed, the conflict is no longer
local or even regional. It is global. Since my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6173), the
Government of Somalia has made significant progress,
despite repeated armed assaults to overthrow it by
externally funded extremists.

The Government's accomplishments include
establishing itself in the capital, drawing up a budget
for the first time in years, presenting its priorities and
plans to the international community, recruiting and
10-20953
training security forces, and keeping its political
legitimacy over violent and extremist groups. At the
same time, the Government has remained open to all
Somalis who are ready for dialogue and reconciliation.
The United Nations fully backs this peaceful approach,
which is already making progress on the ground with
some patriotic Somali groups.

After years of conflict, the situation in Somalia
will not change overnight. However, the country is
moving from being a failed State to being a fragile
State. That represents progress. To prevent the situation
from deteriorating further and spilling over into the
region and further afield, we should join the dots. In
Somalia, the international community still has some
good cards; it should play them right. That will allow it
to overcome two main challenges.

The first is the absence of a concrete commitment
and a determined international policy towards Somalia
and its present leadership. Continued hesitation and the
absence of effective action have encouraged the
extremists and, at the same time, weakened the
Government, which is frequently attacked by well-
supported extremist groups. These groups have made it
clear that their agenda is global and that Somalia is an
easy and convenient entry point.

Here, it should be understood that the extremists
responsible for the violence include many foreigners
who seek not only to overthrow the Government by
force, but also to oppose the establishment of any
authority. Their ultimate objective is either to maintain
a permanent state of anarchy or to establish a militant
State. Their ambitions go well beyond Mogadishu and
Somalia. Neither of these objectives - anarchy or a
militant regime - represents the desire of the Somali
people, whose basic wish, like that of all people the
world over, is to have peace and a Government that
protects them and delivers services.

Moreover, the objectives of the extremists pose a
real threat to the neighbouring countries, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
region and countries afar. In fact, a closer evaluation of
the situation demonstrates what we already know -
that Somalia has long been a threat not only to itself,
but also to the wider world, with piracy being only the
latest costly reminder. Even more worrying is the
extremists' deep conviction that the crisis in Somalia is
not important to the larger international community.
This perceived lack of engagement provides them with
10-20953
a strong incentive to keep fighting. As a consequence, a
line has been crossed in relation to security threats to
many countries inside and outside Africa, including
members of this Council, exposing their
vulnerabilities.

The second challenge is that, despite a massive
consensus of support for the Government from the
international community, that backing has yet to be
translated into the necessary material assistance. For
example, at the Brussels donors conference on Somalia
in April 2009, chaired by the Secretary-General, $213
million were pledged. However, what has been
disbursed is too small to have had the desired impact.
In fact, since its formation, the Government has been
operating with limited external resource disbursements.
The only direct financial contributions were made by a
small group of committed countries through a
mechanism managed by a well-known international
auditing firm. Another donor Government has
innovated with payment directly through the Central
Bank of Somalia.

Over the past 10 to 15 years, the international
community has spent more than $8 billion in various
forms of assistance for Somalia. Although this is a vast
amount, it addressed primarily the symptoms of the
crisis and may have exacerbated the overall situation.
At the same time, the Government lacks the resources
to fund even some of the most basic requirements
needed to function, such as regularly paying salaries,
including those of parliamentarians and the security
forces. By contrast, the opponents of the Government
and allied extremists receive unlimited and unchecked
financial support.

The crisis in Somalia has persisted for almost 20
years. Conditions will never be totally perfect for
intervening in an optimum way. Therefore, we cannot
afford to keep managing the status quo while waiting
for the perfect conditions. We should start somewhere.
The Djibouti Agreement provides the international
community with a practical entry point, and the
Government is the body through which to channel
resources provided by the international community.

As a contribution to the Council's debate, I would
like to propose the following recommendations as
crucial measures towards improving the situation.

The first is for the international community to
depart from the past practice of undertaking
uncoordinated efforts and individual diplomatic
3
initiatives, including the convening of reconciliation
conferences and meetings one after another. A common
policy objective must be supported. In that context, the
Djibouti Agreement should remain the means through
which the combined efforts of the Somalis and their
international partners achieve progress.

The second recommendation is to fully support
the Government. The Security Council should send a
strong and clear message to the extremists by
strengthening the Government in a practical manner.
The Government needs to be helped to gradually
become more effective in delivering services to the
population and a more able partner to the international
community. Specifically, the international community
should provide more vigorous moral, diplomatic and
financial assistance. Assistance delayed is assistance
denied. In the face of the mounting danger, sitting on
the fence is no longer an option.

Thirdly, working more closely with the
subregional organization IGAD and the African Union,
along with the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Conference, has become
imperative. The African Union Mission in Somalia
deserves, as a matter of emergency, support through an
increase of troop allowances to the international level,
their timely disbursement and payment for critical
equipment. This is not only fair and a boost to the
morale of the troops on the ground, but it will send the
right message of interest from the international
community to potential troop-contributing countries.

The fourth recommendation is that the Council
should address vigorously the role of spoilers. It should
encourage or pressure spoilers, both internal and
external, to cease supporting violence. A clear and
effective message, backed by concrete action, would
demonstrate that those who fund extremists - creating
misery for innocent civilians and violating
international law in ways that include the widespread
recruitment of child soldiers and threatening peace and
stability in the whole region - will no longer enjoy
impunity. The protection of civilians is an obligation
long ignored in Somalia.

The last recommendation I would like to make is
that these recommendations will be more effectively
implemented once the United Nations bodies working
on Somalia operate, as in other United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions, in an integrated and
harmonized manner. Security Council resolution 1863
(2009) has addressed this question. I believe the
leadership at the Secretariat will ensure that this is put
into action in the next few weeks. At the same time, the
move by the United Nations and the international
community from Nairobi to Mogadishu should be
accelerated. To help the Somalis, especially the
victims, we have to be with them on the ground.

I realize that the Security Council has numerous
critical issues to address. Somalia is only one of them.
However, failure to actively intervene to restore
stability to that country is already threatening the
effectiveness of the international community in
addition to costing vast amounts in resources. Failure
to act now in a decisive manner can only increase that
cost dramatically.

