Mr. Ryan (Ireland): The European Union (EU),
Madame, warmly welcomes your decision to mark the
high importance of today's debate by presiding over
our deliberations.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia; the candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process; potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia
and Montenegro; and the European Free Trade
Association country, Iceland, member of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.

I thank you, Madame, for providing us with an
opportunity to debate this important issue and I also
wish to express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, for their briefings.

The European Union strongly endorses the
continued commitment demonstrated by the Security
Council in giving high priority to the protection of
children in its regular dialogue on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Regrettably, young boys
and girls continue to be pulled into outright combat and
exploitation by armed forces and groups. We welcome
in particular the adoption of resolution 1460 (2003) on
30 January 2003.

The European Union also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on children and armed
conflict of 10 November 2003 and agrees that

"the annual review and debate by the Security
Council on this issue should be mainly devoted to
a comprehensive review of the state of
compliance on the ground" (5/2003/1053, para. 83).

The recommendations contained at the end of the
report warrant careful consideration, in particular when
it comes to non-compliance. Targeted measures should
be taken by the Council where insufficient progress has
been made by parties in accordance with resolutions
1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003), as proposed in the
Secretary-General's report. All relevant parts of the
United Nations system must shoulder their respective
responsibilities in a coordinated manner, both for
systematic monitoring and reporting of violations and
compliance, and for preventative and rehabilitating
actions for these child victims of armed conflict.

We reiterate again that the recruitment and use of
girls and boys in armed conflict is an atrocity that must
end, violating as it does international humanitarian law
as well as human rights law. The EU strongly urges the
States and other parties to armed conflict listed in
annexes I and II of the Secretary-General's report to
immediately stop the recruitment and/or use of girls
and boys in situations of armed conflict. In this
context, we urge States to accelerate the process of
ratification or accession to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, which includes, as a war
crime, conscripting or enlisting children under the age
of 15 or using them to participate actively in hostilities
in both international and non-international armed
conflicts. As such, we fully subscribe to the views and
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report with respect to the role of the International
Criminal Court in this arena and endorse the statement
that concrete steps should be taken to ensure the early
prosecution of persons responsible for war crimes
against children.

In the last decade, more than 2 million children
have been killed in armed conflict and more than 6
million have suffered physical mutilation. Reliable
estimates suggest that some 300,000 child soldiers are
currently engaged in war operations. Millions of
children have become orphans or have been left
homeless as a result of war. The cruel irony that, in
armed conflict, it is the innocent who are often the first
casualties remains intact.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocols set out clear legal standards
pertaining to the protection of children. The European
Union urges those States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention as a matter of priority and to
sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict.

Allow me to reflect briefly on some recent
initiatives undertaken within the European Union.
First, the General Affairs Council of the European
Union approved, on 8 December 2003, the European
Union Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict.
These Guidelines, the culmination of many months of
deliberation, were drafted in collaboration with the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, and with UNICEF and a
group of relevant non-governmental organization
experts. The implementation of these Guidelines and
their immediate, effective and sustained mainstreaming
throughout all relevant European Union policies and
actions is a priority of the European Union.

The European Union will address the short-,
medium- and long-term impact of armed conflict on
children in an effective and comprehensive manner,
making use of the variety of tools at its disposal and
building on past and ongoing activities.

These objectives will be pursued through a
number of specific initiatives, including, importantly,
the monitoring of and reporting on conflict area
situations and the continuation and development of
technical cooperation programmes for the
disarmament, rehabilitation and reinsertion into
civilian life of children.

These newly adopted Guidelines were also
discussed in Rome on 10 and 11 December 2003 in the
presence of governmental and non-governmental
organization representatives from 27 European
countries on the occasion of the European Union
Forum on Human Rights, organized by the Italian
Presidency of the European Union and the European
Commission. The Forum elaborated a number of
proposals aimed at preventing the trafficking and
sexual exploitation of minors and their involvement in
armed conflict. The European Union has already
indicated that it will attach priority to children and
armed conflict under the European Union's human
rights agenda in the next six months.

Secondly, I would like to mention the European
Union Council conclusions on cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations on crisis
management, specifically on the protection of civilians
in European Union-led crisis management operations,
which call for mainstreaming a strong child protection
perspective in European Union-led crisis management
operations.

The European Union also applauds the efforts of
the Secretary-General and the Council to integrate
child protection advisers into United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building operations. The
European Parliament has also played a prominent role
in the protection of children affected by conflict. At its
most recent meeting in October 2003, the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group-European Union Joint
Parliamentary Assembly adopted a resolution on the
rights of children and child soldiers in particular.

The European Union continues actively to
support and work closely with the Office of the Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
actors, including non-governmental organizations,
aimed at relieving, to the greatest extent possible, the
suffering of children in situations of armed conflict and
ensuring that those responsible for horrific crimes are
held accountable. We look forward to receiving and
giving due consideration to the Secretary-General's
comprehensive assessment of the scope and
effectiveness of the United Nations system's response,
including recommendations for strengthening,
mainstreaming, integrating and sustaining activities in
relation to children affected by armed conflict.

Addressing the issue of children victimized in
armed conflict must increasingly take place
collectively at national, regional and international
levels. Momentum generated must not be lost. The
Security Council will shortly begin deliberations on a
new draft resolution. It is our hope that a new draft
resolution - among other things - will result in a
continuation of the list of all parties to armed conflict
that recruit or use soldiers in violation of international
obligations in all situations. Guidance from the Council
on how to strengthen further monitoring and evaluation
of the situation of children in armed conflict would
also be useful. We hope that many of the concerns
articulated today will resonate in these ongoing
deliberations and will find voice in the draft resolution
to follow.

