Mr. Dang Dinh Quy (Viet Nam): Viet Nam aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Philippines on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.

Despite many efforts, prolonged and relapsed
conflicts exist in many places in the world. One of
the most important reasons for that reality is the lack
of awareness or underestimation of the importance
of reconciliation and the lack of investment in
reconciliation. While we fully agree that reconciliation
fundamentally is about building or rebuilding
relationships, we are of the view that reconciliation
processes should be conducted with a great sense of
tolerance, in a comprehensive manner and at all levels.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, reconciliation must be nationally driven and
owned. The parties concerned, who know best the
root causes of conflicts, should be the main initiators
and actors of reconciliation. Furthermore, the success
of reconciliation hinges on trust and long-term goals,
which can be achieved only though a comprehensive
approach to addressing, among others, political, social,
economic, cultural and justice issues.

Secondly, regional organizations, the best actors in
reinforcing the strategic trust and mutual confidence
among countries of a region, can be good parties
to reconciliation processes. For example, the high
contracting parties to the 1976 Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia agreed to constitute
a High Council to provide the parties to disputes
with recommendations on the appropriate means of
settling such disputes, including reconciliation. Upon
agreement of the parties to dispute, the High Council
can also constitute a conciliation committee.

Thirdly, the United Nations should play a
supportive role in reconciliation by advocating for
normative change and promoting awareness. It must
also enhance coordination and synergies within
the United Nations system, as well as partnerships
between the United Nations and other players, with due
attention to encouraging the broader participation of all
stakeholders. The United Nations can and should assist
regional organizations and countries in strengthening
their capacity for reconciliation and help share best
practices among regions and countries.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment
to persistently pursuing the peaceful resolution of
disputes and conflicts, with a view to achieving
sustainable peace.

