Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

Since the last public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, the international community
has made a number of positive efforts to stop violence
and terrorism and prevent the loss of innocent
Palestinian and Israeli lives. The "quartet" met in
Washington for the second time in less than a month to
exchange views on a conflict that demands to be
addressed both in an urgent manner and with a longer-
term perspective.

These international efforts have already brought
about positive changes on the ground, in particular the
non-violent resolution of the situation at the
headquarters of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah
and the end of the isolation of President Arafat. The
European Union expects that the personal security and
freedom of movement of the recognized and elected
leader of the Palestinian people will be fully respected
and guaranteed. We welcome the most recent security
arrangements brokered by the United States, the United
Kingdom and both parties. President Arafat must make
use of his freedom to exercise political leadership of
the Palestinian Authority and of his people, and do all
in his power to suppress terrorism. Both parties should
build on this modest measure of agreement, stop the
violence and embark on dialogue.

The European Union, working together with the
United Nations, the United States and the Russian
Federation, is committed to helping to bring about a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East. We stand ready to assist the parties in
implementing their agreements and to take part in an
international peace conference that involves all of the
players and takes into account previous agreements.
Yesterday, the "quartet" expressed its readiness to
begin preparations for a conference, to take place this
summer, that would address security, economic and
humanitarian issues, as well as consider the political
way forward.

Despite all of these positive efforts, the European
Union remains extremely concerned at the unresolved
stand-off at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.
After a month, contacts between both parties to resolve
the stand-off have produced few results. The risk of
open confrontation persists, and the Palestinian civilian
population of Bethlehem continues to live under
curfew and military occupation.

The European Union reiterates the need for
concerted and sustained international action to
implement the joint declaration of the "quartet" of 10
April 2002 and, in particular, to ensure the immediate
and full implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002). In this regard, we call on Israel to
immediately halt all of its military operations in the
Palestinian territories. We call for an immediate,
meaningful and effective ceasefire and for the
immediate and complete withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all Palestinian cities and other areas under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. Security Council
resolutions must be implemented fully and
immediately.

The European Union deplores the fact that yet
another Security Council resolution has not been fully
implemented. The Union fully supported the efforts of
the Secretary-General to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1405 (2002) and stressed the importance of
his initiative to obtain accurate information regarding
the events in the Jenin refugee camp by sending a fact-
finding team. We deplore the fact that, in the light of
the announcement of the Government of Israel of 30
April, the team will not be able to proceed to the area
and begin its mission.

We are convinced - and share the view
expressed by the Secretary-General in his letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council on 1
May - that the team would have provided an accurate,
fair and professional account of the events. We reiterate
our support of the Secretary-General for the analysis
and conclusions reflected in that letter and most
strongly deplore the failure of the Government of Israel
to cooperate with the fact-finding team. Israel says that
it has nothing to hide, but - to use Secretary-General's
words - the long shadow cast by recent events in the
Jenin refugee camp will remain. We recall the
obligation of all Members of the United Nations to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the Charter.

The Union reiterates its condemnation of violence
and terrorism and expects the Palestinian Authority to
act decisively, within its capacity, to stop terror and
dismantle its infrastructures, and to put an end to
incitement to violence. Terrorist attacks, including
suicide bombings, must end immediately. They are
immoral and illegal and do serious harm to the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.

The European Union is very concerned about the
destruction of the basic structures of the Palestinian
Authority. Such actions are unacceptable and
counterproductive. They diminish the capacity of the
Palestinian Authority to enforce the rule of law and
may lead to a dangerous security vacuum and, in the
longer term, to even greater risk for the security of
Israel. At the same time, the unprecedented damage
caused by the recent Israeli military operations to
Palestinian civil infrastructure and private property and
the disruption of basic social services, which play no
role whatever from a security point of view, cannot be
justified on the basis of Israel's legitimate fight against
terrorism. These actions in violation of international
law must end immediately. The European Union urges
the Government of Israel to put an end to these
practices and reserves the right to claim reparations in
the appropriate forums.

In these circumstances, we call on Israel to put an
immediate end to the economic strangulation of the
Palestinian territories, the tight closures, the
restrictions, the checkpoints, the isolation and
confinement of the population and the severe
limitations imposed on the movement of people and
goods. The military operations of recent weeks have
further aggravated the dramatic deterioration of living
conditions and the economy in the Palestinian
territories.

The European Union is gravely concerned about
the humanitarian crisis in the Palestinian territories. It
is absolutely unacceptable that humanitarian and
medical organizations and personnel continue to
confront restrictions in performing their work and in
accessing those populations in need. Israel must allow
them full and unimpeded access. Israel must fully
comply with international humanitarian principles,
including the United Nations conventions on the
protection of civilians in times of war, and refrain from
the excessive use of force. Extrajudicial killings must
stop. It must extend its fullest possible cooperation to
humanitarian agencies and organizations, in conformity
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law.

The political plans and goals aimed at putting an
end to a conflict to which there can be no military
solution have already been established very clearly.
These are Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and the principle of land for peace, which
formed the basis of the Madrid Conference of 1991; the
creation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State and security guarantees for the State
of Israel, as spelled out in resolution 1397 (2002); and
the support of the League of Arab States for Crown
Prince Abdullah's peace initiative.

The joint statement of the "quartet" of 10 April
shows that there is a clear path towards the resumption
of negotiations on a political settlement, based on the
full and immediate implementation of resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) and of the Tenet plan and the
Mitchell recommendations. As was reiterated yesterday

in Washington, immediate and parallel movement
towards tangible political progress in the short term,
and a series of specific steps leading to permanent
peace, are absolutely necessary.

The European Union remains convinced that an
impartial monitoring mechanism on the ground is
essential to the process of restoring mutual confidence
and making progress on both the political and security
fronts. We stand ready to participate in such a
mechanism. We welcome the Secretary-General's
views regarding the sending of a multinational force to
the Middle East, and we are encouraged by ongoing
discussions on this issue in the Security Council.

As we recently indicated at the informal meeting
of donors of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, which
was held in Oslo on 24 and 25 April, the European
Union will continue to make a full and substantial
economic contribution to peace-building in the region
with the aim of improving the living conditions of the
Palestinian people, consolidating and supporting the
Palestinian Authority through efforts that include
rebuilding its infrastructure, security and governance
capacity, providing humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinians and assisting with economic and
institutional reconstruction.

