Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
situation in Somalia is grave. It poses a real threat to
peace and security in the Horn of Africa and is causing
terrible suffering among the Somali population. The
situation requires an integrated approach on the part of
the international community to address all the various
aspects of the crisis. In that context, I thank Special
Representative Mr. Ould Abdallah for his detailed
report on the latest developments in that country and
for his recommendations for strengthening the action
of the international community. I also thank the
representative of Somalia for his contribution to the
debate.

At the political level, the appointment of the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, has opened a
new window of opportunity for progress in the
transition process. We encourage the Prime Minister to
invite all political forces, inside Somalia or out, that
renounce violence and accept the Transitional Federal
Charter as the framework for the restoration of peace in
Somalia to participate in an inclusive political process.
The Transitional Federal Government is primarily
responsible for implementing the conclusions of the
National Reconciliation Congress and for establishing
a road map for completing the transitional period. That
includes preparations for a constitutional referendum
and for elections by 2009, in accordance with the
Transitional Federal Charter.

The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, as the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Holmes, recently reminded
the Council. There is no indication that this trend will

reverse itself. The urgency of the crisis has even
prompted dozens of non-governmental organizations to
appeal to the international community. A growing
portion of the population is dependent on assistance,
which, however, is facing serious problems of access.
All parties, and the Transitional Federal Institutions in
particular, are duty-bound to protect the population,
respect international humanitarian law, facilitate access
to those in need, and promote the return of displaced
persons to their areas of origin.

Incidents similar to that of 4 December, when the
closure of land and maritime access points to
humanitarian assistance was announced and
subsequently retracted, must absolutely be avoided. We
must also find a speedy solution, together with the
Somali authorities, to the thorny problem of people
being made to pay for the right to cross checkpoints.
We expect the new Prime Minister to reaffirm his
Government's commitment to the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and to do all in his power to
end impunity in the country.

The essential prerequisite for lasting
improvement, however, remains the stabilization of
security. All parties are duty-bound to put an
immediate end to acts of violence and to implement a
ceasefire that will allow the launching of a genuine
political process. Belgium endorses the Secretary-
General's analysis that the dispatch of a peacekeeping
force cannot be envisaged in the current circumstances.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
remains the sole available option for facilitating the
withdrawal of foreign forces from that country.
Belgium expresses its support for AMISOM. and for the
countries that contribute to it. We reiterate the need to
strengthen AMISOM, particularly in financial terms,
and encourage the United Nations, in cooperation with
the African Union, to consider new forms of support
for that force, be it in technical assistance or the design
of operations, and to implement them post-haste.
Belgium is also committed to that approach.

We are well aware that the United Nations has a
responsibility to protect with respect to the people of
Somalia and has to maintain its credibility in the eyes
of international public opinion. Belgium therefore fully
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Ould Abdallah to increase the coordination of
international activities in Somalia by developing a
comprehensive plan of action, in particular in support
of the transition process and the security sector in

Somalia. We especially support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia be strengthened. We are also willing
to listen to those who propose feasible and appropriate
solutions to halting the cycle of violence and to
stemming the crisis in Somalia, convinced that the
international community must pursue and increase its
commitment to that course.

