Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Thank you so
much, Sir, for convening today's meeting. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Augustine Mahiga for his briefing.

Pakistan welcomes Somalia's progress over the past
few critical months. Given the courage and resilience of
the Somali people, such progress is no surprise to us.
The people of Somalia have braved all difficulties to
draw the transition to a close.

The presidential and parliamentary elections and
the Prime Minister's nomination herald a new political
dispensation, which reflects the aspirations of the
Somali people. Somalia is on the cusp of a new chapter
in its history. We congratulate President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud on his election and wish him and his
Government success.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has helped create a stable and secure environment for
meaningful political progress. Recent successes by
AMISOM. and the Somali Security Forces have enabled
pro-Government forces to gain control over all major
Somali cities. Peace and security in Somali urban
centres will create salutary conditions for economic
and political progress.

The capture of the strategic port of Kismayo last
month is a major step towards eliminating piracy off
the coast of Somalia. Pakistan has been a victim of
piracy. We support adding the maritime component
to AMISOM. for preventing piracy. The component
will reinforce the efforts of the international naval
forces in the Gulf of Aden and adjacent waters. We
must not forget the plight of hostages held by pirates.
A comprehensive approach to ending piracy entails
addressing its root causes, particularly illegal fishing
and dumping of toxic waste in Somali waters.

AMISOM. still faces asymmetric conflict with
terrorists and extremists. The ongoing assessment of
AMISOM. must therefore take into account the different
challenges the Mission faces. Its role will obviously
be determined by the situation on the ground. In the
meantime, we urge the international community to
ensure political and financial support for the Mission.
That is necessary to secure the gains made so far and to
prevent a possible relapse of the conflict. We must not
be complacent.

In many ways, AMISOM. operations are a good
example of successful cooperation between a regional
organization and the United Nations. Africa's collective
and consensual response to its security challenges is
very impressive. We commend the AMISOM. troop-
contributing countries for their resilience and valour,
and the African Union Peace and Security Council for
its sagacity and resolve. We endorse the African Union
request to extend the AMISOM. support package.

Special Representative Mahiga and Commissioner
Lamamra have cautioned that daunting challenges
lie ahead in Somalia. A clear demarcation of goals
and objectives is necessary to sustain the current
momentum of progress. Last month, the Security
Council commissioned the Secretary-General to review
the future of the United Nations presence and underlined
the need for an integrated strategic approach.

We believe that three considerations should guide us
on the subject. First, the review must take into account
the need for national ownership and must accommodate
evolving national priorities. The Somali Government
is now in a position to articulate those priorities
and lead the discourse. Secondly, it is important to
develop an interface between the Secretary-General's
review process and the initiatives of the African
Union. Thirdly, the United Nations presence should
be geared towards safeguarding territorial integrity
and federalism in Somalia. Different interpretations
of border demarcation and revenue-sharing among the
federating units should not alter the shared commitment
for a strong and united Somalia.

Pakistan and Somalia have strong links going back
in history. We have contributed to the peacekeeping
efforts in Somalia. Now is the time for peacebuilding.
We will do whatever we can to help the Somali
Government accomplish that task. Our bonds with
Somalia will grow even stronger in the years to come.
We will continue to support Somalia bilaterally, as well
as in our capacity as a member of the Security Council,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation contact group
on Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We assure the new
Government of Somalia of our fullest support.
