Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): In his report on the work of
the Organization, the Secretary-General rightly stated that

"Taking prevention more seriously will help to
ensure that there are fewer wars and less consequential
disasters to cope with in the first place." (A/54/l, paragraph 21)

In fact, the Carnegie Foundation has put this into
perspective. It has estimated that the cost to the
international community of the seven major wars in the
1990s - not including Kosovo - was $199 billion, and
that this was in addition to the cost to the countries actually
at war. More important, it has been concluded that most of
these wars could have been averted if more attention had
been paid to prevention.

My opening remarks are aimed at demonstrating the
importance of preventing armed conflict and the
significance of today's meeting in turn. My delegation
commends you, Mr. President, for having arranged this
important open debate.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council. However, the prevention of conflict and its
recurrence requires a multifaceted approach by the Security
Council and other principal organs. In Africa, for the most
part, the causes of armed conflict remain poverty and
underdevelopment. Hence, as the Security Council considers
its role in the prevention of armed conflicts to be within its
primary responsibility, the principles and provisions of the
Charter must be adhered to.

Today, internal wars continue to take a heavy toll on
civilian populations, especially the most vulnerable. Early
warning is therefore the best way to avert tragedies in
different parts of the world. The Security Council must
continue to work to preserve peace at all times, irrespective
of the fragility of the peace or the geographical location.
Where peace agreements have been secured, the Security
Council must act swiftly to assist in consolidating the
peace by facilitating implementation of those agreements.
Delayed action is delayed peace and prolonged suffering.
More often than not, peace between adversaries is
inherently fragile and thus needs to be nurtured to
longevity.

In Sierra Leone, swift action by the Security Council
under the appropriate and adequate mandate would have
the saved lives and limbs of thousands of innocent
civilians. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
peace remains fragile, as in many other conflict situations,
not only may a prolonged delay in deploying military
observers to preserve the peace achieved by the
peacemakers unravel the achievements of the regional
peace process; but the recurrence of conflict holds real
possibilities of engulfing the major part of the continent.
Therefore, for peace to become real in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring countries, the
Security Council should show the same resolve, urgency
and commitment towards African situations as it has and
continues to do towards others.

In the African situations and elsewhere, the
Secretary-General has shown his determination to use his
good offices to address armed conflict where it exists and
my delegation commends him for that. Indeed, the
Security Council's work is in part facilitated by the good
offices of the Secretary-General. Fact-finding missions
through the Secretary-General's office, such as the
mission of his Special Envoy to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other relevant African States, have
proven useful in enhancing the understanding and
appreciation of that situation by the Security Council in
particular. Similarly, the Security Council's mission to
Jakarta and Dili this year - which I had the honour to
lead - clearly demonstrated the usefulness of such
missions. The Council should therefore utilize this type of
mission whenever feasible. In this connection, I wish to
thank my colleagues, in particular Ambassador
Holbrooke, for their kind words addressed to me. Let me
also state that the mission's success was the result of the
collective effort of all the members of the Security
Council, including you, Sir.

However, in the end and to a great extent, it is the
willingness of the Security Council to take appropriate
action and the trust, confidence and cooperation between
the Secretary-General and the Security Council that will
determine whether armed conflict can be prevented or
whether lives have to be lost first before action is taken.
Equally important are the readiness and the willingness of

 

those primarily involved to prevent armed conflict and to
resort to peaceful means.

At their last Summit in Algiers before the new
millennium, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
heads of State and Government reaffirmed their resolve

"to make the OAU the vital instrument of their
collective action both within Africa and in relation to
the rest of the world".

In that respect, they declared that the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution is a
valuable asset for the African continent which must be
nurtured and consolidated. The heads of State and
Government made it very clear that this Mechanism, which
symbolizes the concerted resolve of the African continent
to fully assume its responsibilities, does not release the
United Nations from its obligations under the Charter as far
as the maintenance of international peace and security is
concerned. It is therefore important for the Security Council
in particular to assist the OAU in its early-warning
capacities.

Regional arrangements can contribute to the
maintenance of peace only if their actions are consistent
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. It is in
this context that we welcome the expanding relationship
between the United Nations and the OAU, especially in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacemaking and conflict
resolution. The tendency to undertake peace enforcement
without specific mandate from the Security Council and
without acting in accordance with the United Nations
Charter should be discouraged, as it undermines the
credibility of the Council and diminishes its role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In order to prevent conflict, a sound understanding of
the underlying factors is necessary. For example, in Africa,
the accumulation, through illicit trafficking, of small arms
and light and heavy weapons, inter alia, needs to be
prevented. Therefore, the relevant recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa need to be implemented.

In this decade, sanctions have been used more
frequently, though with mixed results. Namibia supports the
view that, before sanctions are imposed, their scope and
purpose should be defined and their duration clearly
specified in the resolution imposing them. Resolving
problems arising from the application of sanctions must rest
with the United Nations, under whose name they are
imposed. We expect a solution to this problem to be
found urgently. Furthermore, it is our strong belief that,
once sanctions are imposed, there should be no selectivity
on the part of the Security Council in implementing them.
In this connection, we commend the tireless efforts of
Ambassador Fowler to ensure that sanctions imposed
against UNITA are fully implemented.

We have a real chance to ensure together that armed
conflict is prevented and present conflict contained. But
conflict is prevented by people and it is only logical that
those who are entrusted to prevent conflict be safe and
secure. This cannot be overemphasized. Furthermore,
competition among United Nations Members and regional
organizations cannot prevent conflict, nor can it enhance
peacekeeping and peacemaking. The success of any
peacekeeping operation rests on the pillar of consensus
among all States members of the Security Council. The
United Nations peacekeeping operations are indeed an
essential component of the role of the Security Council in
maintaining peace and security in the world. In addition,
changing times and circumstances dictate that the
international community needs a revitalized Security
Council. We remain convinced that the presence of the
African States in both categories of membership in the
Security Council will help Africa to participate
meaningfully in the prevention of armed conflict,
particularly in Africa.

It is in this context that the OAU Assembly of
Heads of State and Government in Algiers declared:

"We reaffirm our commitment to respect for the
major role and responsibilities of the United Nations
and its Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In this connection,
we once again call for a genuine democratization of
international relations based on the active
participation and balanced consideration of the
legitimate concerns of all nations. We call, in
particular, for the democratization of the United
Nations and its Security Council and the recognition
of Africa's legitimate place within this organ."

Words of intention alone are never enough. For the
Security Council to play its role in the prevention of
conflict, a strong political commitment from all Member
States, complemented by adequate provision of financial
resources, is key. Political commitment and allocation of
adequate financial resources are integral parts of effective

 

prevention of armed conflict and maintenance of
international peace and security.

