Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by conveying my gratitude to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe and Mr. Craig Boyd for their briefings. The
Transitional Federal Government has held fast in the
face of the attacks against it and has even retaken land,
in particular in Mogadishu. It has the full support of
the French authorities.

However, the situation remains very unstable.
The deadly attack on 17 September against the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) reminded us
that the insurgent forces still have strength. Moreover,
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate, and
now 3.7 million people, or half of the Somali
population, depend on international humanitarian aid.
At the same time, repeated attacks against the United
Nations and the non-governmental organizations make
humanitarian work increasingly difficult and dangerous.
Nine humanitarian workers have lost their lives
working alongside the Somali population in 2009.
Thirteen others are being held against their will.

This difficult situation requires a renewed
commitment by the international community. In his
most recent report (S/2009/503), the Secretary-General
recalls his incremental approach, which focuses first on
support for the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM. That strategy, which the Security Council
backed in resolutions 1863 (2009) and 1872 (2009), is
not in question. It is clear that neither security
conditions in the field nor positions held by various
stakeholders make it possible to deploy a United
Nations force. But the international community must
act with greater resolve within this framework.

Here, I shall touch on four issues. First, full
support is urgently needed for the Transitional Federal
Government. In April, during the Brussels Conference
we collectively committed ourselves to provide such
support. That support must be political and financial,
but also operational and specific. That is why France,
within the framework of resolution 1872 (2009), is
training a Somali battalion in Djibouti: 150 soldiers
have already been trained and have returned to
Somalia, and a further 350 have just begun the training
programme. On 29 September, as noted by my Austrian
colleague, European Union Defence Ministers stated
their interest in a European training mission to take
place in a third country. France welcomes the interest
recently shown by Germany and the Russian
Federation with respect to initiatives of that kind.

The Republic of Djibouti, for its part, is carrying
out similar training activities. Here, I play tribute to
Djibouti for its endeavours with respect to Somalia.
There is a need to help the Transitional Federal
Government strengthen the cohesiveness, discipline
and effectiveness of its forces, which, as my colleague
from Burkina Faso has stressed, are facing foreign
fighters who are among the most extreme. By restoring
basic public services in areas where it can ensure
security, the Transitional Federal Government will be
able to retain positive momentum. AMISOM, to be
sure, has an essential role to play in training troops in
Somalia and in helping ensure that troops trained
abroad get the follow-up they need and that they are
used in the optimal way.

It is absolutely necessary to back the Transitional
Federal Government, in spite of the risks involved. In
that context, my thoughts are with the French official
who was kidnapped in Mogadishu on 14 July, and who
is still being held in Somalia.

Secondly, we must, in parallel, continue to
support AMISOM. Like some of the colleagues who
have spoken before me, I pay tribute to bravery of the
troops from Burundi and Uganda, who every day carry
out dangerous work in an outstanding manner. France
once again extends its condolences to the Governments
of Uganda and Burundi on the losses they suffered as a
result of the heinous attack on 17 September against
the AMISOM. force headquarters.

International assistance must continue, to ensure
that the African Union can achieve its objective of
deploying 8,000 troops. The European Union - the
largest financial partner of the African Union - is
playing an active role. France has done significant
work in the area of training AMISOM. contingents and
it evacuated to Nairobi soldiers injured in the
17 September attack. I thank Mr. Boyd and his team for
having set up the logistical support package.

I wish, thirdly, to speak of the political aspect.
France welcomes the untiring efforts of President
Sharif in reaching out to groups not yet involved in the
reconciliation process. It is important for the Somali
Government to take every opportunity to continue to
expand the political space in Somalia. Only a political
solution will ultimately enable it to guarantee security
and stability there. Here, we note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, to develop missions to
Mogadishu, carried out by the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.

With respect to those who reject all dialogue,
France echoes the Secretary-General's appeal to States,
organizations and individuals in a position to do so to
encourage them to join the peace process.

Finally, like most of my colleagues, I have
already stressed how difficult it is to deliver
international assistance to Somalia. In that context, it is
important that the international community remain
mobilized to combat the piracy that poses a threat to,
inter alia, vessels of the World Food Programme. Naval
assets have been deployed by many States and
organizations, including, first and foremost, the
European Union with its Operation Atalanta. In
addition, as my Japanese colleague mentioned, the
members of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia are working to complement military action
with civilian action, in order to help countries in the
region bring arrested pirates to justice. France

welcomes the Contact Group's decision to ask the
Secretary-General to establish a trust fund for such
purposes.

In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, and his team and to assure them of the
full support of France.

