Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
expresses appreciation to Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura for his update and commend him on his
determined spirit, commitment and leadership. We also
welcome our colleague, Ambassador of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Mr. Bashar Ja'afari.

My delegation would like to make the following
observations and recommendations. With regard to
the chemical weapons situation, the developments of
the past week have a direct bearing on the political
track. We therefore call on all sides to work towards
a compromise so that the political process can move
forward. We welcome and support the multifaceted
diplomacy being conducted by Mr. De Mistura. We
note the efforts made by the United Nations and Mr. De
Mistura to settle the Syrian conflict and especially to
encourage the participation of almost all major Syrian
opposition groups in the fifth round of the Geneva talks.
That direction alone will lead to a peaceful solution
and end the conflict in Syria. We are optimistic that
at the fifth round of talks in Geneva, held from 23 to
31 March, this time the negotiators were able to move
from discussing formal and procedural issues to the
substantive and political aspects of future peace talks.
We believe that relieving the political situation will
enhance our political objectives.

The crisis in Syria is still unfolding and has an impact
on the entire region. Kazakhstan therefore believes that
the regional approach, involving neighbouring countries
should be considered to prevent further deterioration.
In that regard, my country calls on all countries in the
Middle East and the Gulf region to join the guarantor
countries in doing everything possible to ensure that
the ceasefire regime is respected and observed by all
parties and to support the guarantors.

The Astana process is important for achieving
confidence-building measures and we call on all parties
to work together to achieve a political settlement.
Kazakhstan is deeply concerned about the situation
surrounding the use of chemical weapons in Syrian.
For the sake of the future of the Syrian people, Astana
calls on all members of the Security Council to remain
as united as when they adopted resolution 2336 (2016)
last December, and demonstrate the same solidarity in
moving towards a political settlement, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), adopted in November 2015.

Kazakhstan welcomes the Declaration of the
28th Summit of the League of Arab States, which is
aimed at contributing to a peaceful resolution of the
Syrian crisis and acknowledges the enormous efforts
of the League. We are grateful to the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, and His Majesty King Abdullah II
in particular, for hosting 1.3 million Syrian refugees,
and we call on the international community to support
Jordan and the other countries that have accepted
Syrian refugees.

Kazakhstan urges all sides to ensure as
soon as possible that the United Nations and its
implementing partners have unrestricted access,
without preconditions, to Syria's besieged areas. It is
essential that humanitarian assistance be able to reach
people promptly if they are to receive medical care and
whatever they need to survive.

