Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to join those who have conveyed condolences to
you upon the unfortunate air accident in your country
yesterday. We welcome the valuable information on
Afghanistan provided by Mr. Jean Arnault, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We share his
concern about the deteriorating security situation in the
country: attacks against international humanitarian
personnel, United Nations agencies, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Afghan
provisional government are grave and deplorable. We
regret, for example, that Medecins sans frontieres has
been obliged to close down its operations in this
country, after having worked there for 24 years, as a
result of attacks which have led to the death of five of
its workers. Another focus of destabilization has been
an increase in violent clashes among factions,
particularly those that we have heard of recently in
Herat, Badghis and in the district of Shinda, among
others.

The security situation has a direct impact on
many aspects of the political process and the very
stability of the transitional Government, as well as on
economic growth and development. This is why
NATO's contribution is so important as have been
Operation Enduring Freedom, the provincial
reconstruction teams and the support to reform the
security sector. Nevertheless, the Council should study
additional alternatives to deal with these tremendous
challenges.

Members of the monitoring team from the
Security Council's Sanctions Committee on Al Qaeda
and the Taliban that I am chairing made a recent Visit
to Afghanistan where a series of meetings were held
with representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the Ministry of the Interior, the National Security
Council, the Board on National Security, as well as
with Mr. Arnault and with personnel from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

Many of the points made in the report of the
Secretary-General were observed by our panel of
experts as well. In particular, I should like to
emphasize that, as observed in the report, the Taliban
continues to constitute a real threat to the
reconstruction and stability of the country, and
containing this organization is crucial. I recommend
that you read the initial report prepared by our team
which will be distributed today as an official document.

With regard to the holding of national presidential
elections we would like to emphasize the progress that
has been made. Recently, information has been
provided regarding the effort entailed in this attempt
and we never could have imagined even just a few
months ago that more than 10 million voters would
have been registered in which women represent 41 per
cent. We praise the difficult work achieved by the
hundreds of electoral workers that are committed to
support this important process in reconstructing the
country. We also find it very painful to learn about the
attacks against such workers.

Despite the progress that has been made in the
electoral process which fills us with hope that we will
continue to make headway in implementing the Bonn
Agreement, we nevertheless must stress how concerned
we are that it became possible to assure the necessary
security conditions to ensure free and just elections, in
View of the series of threats that have been issued by
the Taliban. We agree with what was said in the report
that it is indispensable for there to be a clear-cut
increase in international assistance in the security field.

Among the challenges that have been mentioned
by previous speakers and which still persist are delays
in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and
the troubling increase in the elicit cultivation of
poppies and of drug trafficking in general. We know
that this has made it possible to finance many of the
groups and factions that are responsible for such
attacks and raids that have occurred in recent days and
months.

We would like to emphasize the courage, the
effort and the enthusiasm to press ahead in the
reconstruction of the State, as demonstrated by the
Afghan people, as well as by the Government of
President Karzai, despite all the difficulties. Finally, we
would like to praise the excellent and devoted work
carried out by Mr. Jean Arnault and his team in
UNAMA and we wish them great success in their
undertaking.
