The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document S/ 1999/ 1175.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1999/ 1189, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/l999/1189) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by Show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1276 (1999).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized to
make the following complementary statement on behalf of
the Security Council:

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/1999/1175) states, in paragraph
10:

'Despite the present quiet in the Israeli-
Syrian sector, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be potentially dangerous and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem can be reached:

That statement of the Secretary-General reflects the
View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.

