Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
join you, Mr. President, and our colleagues around the
table in expressing my shock and deep sadness at the
sudden death of Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. We would
like to express our heartfelt condolences to his family
and his colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Cote
d'Ivoire and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and our
thoughts are with them at this tragic time. Bernard had
a distinguished career in the service of his country, and
that was very much reflected in his approach on the
Security Council. He always made time for dialogue
with us. He was keen to hear other perspectives and
ready to share his own experience. His contributions
to our deliberations were always thoughtful, considered
and insightful, and our discussions here will be all the
poorer as a result of his absence. C6te d'Ivoire has lost
one of its finest diplomats, and we have lost a dear
friend and colleague.

Let me now turn to Colombia. 1 too would like
to thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
valuable briefing to the Council. I want to assure him
of Sweden's continued firm support for his efforts and
the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. I also acknowledge and welcome the
presence of Mr. Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President
of Colombia, and Maria Holguin Cuellar, Colombia's
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank them and President Santos
Calderon for their personal commitment to the
peace process.
We commend both parties' firm commitment to
peace, as well as their efforts to overcome challenges
in the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace between the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
Government of Colombia. Last year saw the successful
laying down of arms and the conversion of FARC-EP
into a political party. The congressional elections held
on 11 March this year were the most inclusive and least
violent in decades, demonstrating how peace is already
benefiting Colombia and Colombians.

Recognizing and addressing the legacy of conflict
is essential to reconciliation and to building a peaceful
future. We welcome the fact that the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace has begun its crucial work. It was designed and
agreed on with the priority objective of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and no relapse into conflict.
We hope that its procedures will be rapidly agreed on.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l8/279), threats, violence and killings of human
rights defenders, community leaders, FARC-EP
members and their families have continued. Needless
to say, this is deeply worrying and underscores the
importance of ensuring that the State can fill the power
vacuum and safeguard the rule of law and respect for
human rights throughout the country.

The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of former FARC-EP members is vital.
That includes ensuring progress on the application
of amnesty provisions, productive projects and the
key issue of access to land for reintegration. In that
regard, we hope that the decree allowing former
combatants access to land to will be approved as soon
as possible. A sustained effort from all parts of the
Government in support of the wider Peace Agreement,
including comprehensive rural reform, is needed so
that the Agreement can begin delivering tangible
peace dividends for all Colombians as soon as possible.
Ensuring a stronger presence of civilian authorities
and agencies providing goods and services to conflict-
affected communities will be helpful in that regard.

Women played an important role in making peace
in Colombia. The gender perspective must now be
mainstreamed in all aspects of the implementation,
and not least in the areas of reintegration and security.
We call on the parties to ensure that protection
efforts cover the specific challenges regarding the
protection of women, including measures for enhanced
prevention and responses to gender-based violence, as
recommended in the Secretary-General's report.

We welcome the resumption of talks between the
Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional,
and reiterate that the United Nations and the Security
Council must stand ready to assist the parties in
monitoring a renewed ceasefire. Sweden, as a member
of the group of countries for support, accompaniment
and cooperation at the negotiating table, will assist the
process as much as it can.

Colombia also demonstrates how a united Security
Council can contribute to peace. At this critical time
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
United Nations and Colombia's international partners
must continue to lend their full support to the parties.
Colombia's Peace Agreement represents the culmination
of a historic process that has brought an end to more
than 50 years of conflict and violence. It shows that
even the most entrenched conflicts can be brought to
an end through dialogue and diplomacy, setting an
irreversible course for peace. By remaining committed
to the Peace Agreement, the parties are keeping faith
with the hopes and aspirations of the Colombian people
for the future of their country. We must continue to do
all we can to support them in that.

