Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me begin by commending
your country, Sir, for convening this important debate,
which provides us with an opportunity to exchange
views on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I

believe that in the past months we have come closer to
wholeheartedly embracing a progressive protection-of-
civilians agenda.

The Council may recall that, on 14 May, 20 new
troop- and police-contributing countries pledged their
unwavering commitment to protecting civilians by
supporting the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians. Their affirmation validates the prioritization
of protection of civilian mandates. As we tread forward,
we will continue to seek the support of countries, like
France, that bear witness to the important role the
Kigali Principles can play in the field. When lives are
at stake, we must act.

The plight of civilians is increasing, which means
that our actions must not simply match but exceed
the needs on the ground for long-term changes to
materialize. It is not the armed actors or rebels, or even
factions that most suffer in today's conflicts, bur rather
civilians. It is not the towns that have been plummeted
or the waterlines that have been shut off that most
devastate a community; rather, it is the loss ofinnocent
lives, of neighbours, ofloved ones who could have been
you, or me, or anyone here in the Chamber.

The violence facing civilians is growing in
magnitude, intensity and frequency, while the majority
of our actions in response remain the same. I believe
that in adhering to the Kigali Principles we can
implement the changes needed to see a real impact.
That, in turn, will prove to civilians that their needs
can be met and surpassed with sound, effective and
consistent peacekeeping.

On a strategic level, there are necessary
improvements to our peacekeeping missions that can
produce clear and achievable mandates.

First, we should produce clear and achievable
mandates. That requires thoroughly assessing the needs
on the ground and then pairing them appropriately
with the roles and responsibilities of peacekeepers.
Embedding phased and sequenced mandates into the
process will ensure that the protection of civilians
remains a top priority and is not constrained by other
tasks or a lack of adequate resources.

Secondly, the Security Council must oversee that
all phases of the mandate include political solutions that
will allow the country to move forward, guaranteeing
that a relapse is not imminent. If prevention work is
coupled with a substantial and consistent investment
in understanding the root causes of conflicts, we can
stop history from repeating itself and once and for all
eliminate the reopening of historic wounds.

Thirdly, peacekeepers have a right to clear and
intelligible tasks that ensure the effective and thorough
protection of civilians. That will also aid peacekeepers
in comprehending how and why perpetrators may
attack civilians, so that their responses can be
intelligent and tailored. We can all attest to hearing
stories of peacekeepers who have been spread too thin
or who are ill-equipped to protect civilians. Although
their intentions are selfless and courageous, we are not
doing our jobs correctly if they are on the ground with
only those two values to shield them from threats and
other dangers.

Fourthly, we fully subscribe to applicable and
contemporary training during predeployment and
in-mission that includes the protection of civilians
and sexual exploitation and abuse. If peacekeepers
are properly trained on sexual exploitation and abuse,
a culture will develop among peacekeepers that seek
for them to exercise good judgment and holds them
completely accountable for any misconduct.

Fifthly, mission leadership must also be
strengthened so that an effective chain of command can
develop and respond to any threat or danger to civilians.
That undeniably empowers uniformed peacekeepers to
take the necessary measures to save lives rather than
fearing the consequences of misjudged actions.

That leads me to one of the most important points
of the debate, namely, the unimpeded use of force. A
pattern of not intervening when civilians are under
attack must not and cannot become the norm. As one of
the Kigali Principles denotes, troops should be

"prepared to use force to protect civilians, as
necessary and consistent with the mandate."

That includes a show of deterrence to the
inter-positioning of forces between armed actors
and civilians. Clarity behind that principle will
allow peacekeepers to discern and respond to
armed violence. We owe it to peacekeepers and the
civilians whose lives are at stake to have a clear and
synchronized understanding of the use of force by
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Civilians expect peacekeepers to use force when
their lives are threatened. When armed violence
escalates, we must act. That proactive stance to
peacekeeping will reap many benefits, including
preventing future conflicts or further escalation of
current ones.

Lastly, we must become more centred if we are to
undertake missions with mandates that seek to protect
people. We must dispose of the old ways that hindered our
thinking and halted decision-making or decision-taking
that could have saved lives. Let us also inspire our
peacekeepers to continue engaging with civilians to
fortify their relationship with and trust in us. This will
result in the collection of data and other intelligence
that is invaluable to any peacekeeping mission.

Rwanda, as a top troop- and police-contributing
country, and as a nation that witnessed first-hand
the grave shortcomings of the United Nations, let me
caution against not taking action. Remaining silent is
a response. It conveys either complete disinterest or
complete apathy. We have gathered here today to take
stock of what is needed to succeed. Under the auspices
of the recommendations of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, the Secretary-General's
subsequent report and the best practices embedded in
the Kigali Principles, the way forward has been paved
for us.

Now is the time to act and respond strategically and
swiftly. We welcome all those gathered here today that
have yet to endorse the Kigali Principles to join us in
subscribing to them. The way forward may be filled
with uncertainties and new challenges that attempt to
rob us of our faith and values. Let us not allow for either.
Let us move in a manner that speaks to our strengths.
Today, let us choose a way forward that most effectively
protects the lives of all civilians, for, as His Excellency
President Paul Kagame has said, "The central purpose
of peace operations is the protection of civilians. This
cannot be said often enough".

