Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing and for his
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).

Today's briefing follows the latest International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) report on
Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and
relevant provisions of Security Council resolutions in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. On 24 May, the Director
General of the IAEA reported that Iran was not
implementing a number of its legally binding
obligations: suspension of enrichment- and heavy-
water-related activities and clarification of the
remaining outstanding issues that have given rise to
concerns, particularly about the possible military
dimensions of its nuclear programme.

We are particularly concerned about the possible
military dimensions. In its report, the IAEA said that
the Agency had received further information about
undisclosed nuclear-related activities involving Iranian
military organizations, including activities related to
the development of a nuclear payload for a missile. We
urge Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA to clarify
the outstanding issues and provide additional
information, as well as to grant access to the relevant
locations, equipment, documentation and persons, as
requested by the IAEA. In addition, Iran continues to
enrich uranium to nearly 20 per cent at the Pilot Fuel
Enrichment Plant. At the same time, it continues to
refuse to provide the Agency with information on the
chronology and purpose of the Fordow Fuel
Enrichment Plant under construction near Qom.
Furthermore, Iran had informed the Agency that it
planned to begin feeding nuclear material into cascades
by this summer. Instead of building confidence within
the international community, Iran is moving in exactly
the opposite direction. The most recent reports on
satellite launches by Iran underline once more that Iran
refuses to abide by the Council's resolutions.

The dual-track strategy offers two ways forward.
We continue to be ready to engage Iran in meaningful
negotiations about its nuclear programme. This would
be our preferred choice. Unfortunately, given Iran's
unwillingness to talk about its nuclear programme, and
against the background of Iran's setting unacceptable
preconditions for talks, we have no choice other than
following up on the pressure track to move Iran back to
the negotiation table. Germany fully supports the
proper implementation of what the Council decided on,
using four rounds of sanctions. On 9 June, the Council
adopted resolution 1984 (2011) and extended the
mandate of the Iran Panel of Experts. Germany
welcomes the renewal of the mandate, and I would like

to express our full appreciation for the Panel's
excellent work. We are convinced that the eight highly
qualified experts have set the right priorities by
carefully examining the many cases of Violations and
by reporting thoroughly on those accidents. We also
support the Panel's outreach activities and ask them to
continue their work in that vein.

On 7 May the Panel provided us with a
comprehensive final report. Germany fully supports
this useful report. The detailed analysis it contains,
plus the valuable practical recommendations, provides
very good guidance to Member States. My delegation
is disappointed that the report has yet to be published
and distributed to the broader United Nations
membership. For the sake of the transparency of the
Council's work, my delegation has formally requested
the publication of the final report in accordance with
the standing procedure of publishing the final reports
of expert groups.

Let me highlight three messages that the report is
sending. First, a number of recommendations focus on
updating designations. Germany believes that the
complex package deal that we achieved in resolution
1929 (2010) has to be adapted to the constantly
changing environment in Iran. The current designation
list includes the names of people who are no longer in
official positions with the Iran Revolutionary Guards,
for example, and new people are occupying those
posts. In order to keep pace with developments on the
ground, we should add designations accordingly.

Secondly, the report recommends that we
designate specific and well-known sanctions violators.
I would like to recall that resolution 1929 (2010), in
paragraph 26, recalls that the Iran Sanctions
Committee may designate individuals and entities who
are assisting in violating sanctions provisions or in
evading existing measures.

Thirdly, let me point out the many cases of
weapons exports from Iran to other countries, in
particular Syria. We call on all Member States to
carefully implement the weapons embargo. Weapon
deliveries to volatile regions in the Middle East and
elsewhere come with strong destabilizing effects.
Germany would like to ask the Panel of Experts to
prepare an assessment of the patterns of the many
weapon export violation cases in order to better
understand and prevent them in the future.

As the E3+3 pointed out in a joint statement at
the latest Board of Governors meeting in Vienna, on 8
June, we have attempted to engage Iran in a
constructive dialogue on the basis of reciprocity and a
step-by-step approach that might lead to a solution to
the confidence crisis that exists with respect to Iran's
nuclear programme. We reaffirm our unity of purpose
and collective determination through direct diplomacy.
We call on Iran to respond in a positive and
constructive spirit.

