Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Zarif
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2012/818). We welcome the participation of
Mr. Ivan Mrkic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
in today's meeting and agree with his assessment. We
have closely followed the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj and
note his carefully selected comments and references to
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

In discussing the legality or illegality of the events
in Kosovo we need to bear in mind the illegality of
a unilateral declaration of independence. Russia's
position of non-recognition of the unilateral declaration
of independence by Kosovo remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force and
legally binding in terms of any international basis for a
Kosovo settlement.

In that context, we note the decision of the
participants of the so-calied International Steering
Group that was set up to bypass the Security Council
in order to implement decisions that have not been
approved by the Council. What we are referring to here
is the Ahtisaari plan on the completion of the period of
controlled independence of Kosovo, which is merely a
political curiosity. No one entity is in a position to take
a decision in place of the Security Council.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should remain the main
international presence in Kosovo and should carry
out its work fully in the province. In that regard, we
are concerned by the cut in funding to the Mission's
administration in Mitrovica.

We view the launching of dialogue at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina, and the
negotiation process as a whole, as a viable instrument
for stabilizing the situation and for the political and
diplomatic settlement of controversial issues, including
the protection of Serbian cultural and religious heritage
sites in the province. Dialogue is the only instrument
capable of solving the thorny problems in the province,
including in northern Mitrovica.

We are concerned that the situation in Kosovo
remains highly tense. There has been no decrease in
inter-ethnic incidents, some of which were mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General.

Another source of concern is Pristina's attempts
to establish control over Serb-populated districts of
Kosovo. The fact that Pristina opened a municipal
administration in northern Mitrovica has provoked
new incidents. That also pertains to the practice of the
Kosovo police of detaining cars with number plates
issued in Serbia, a practice that has been supported by
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). It also pertains to the ban on the use of
Serbian driver's licences. There are serious problems
with respect to the freedom of movement of Serbians
in the territory of Kosovo. It is unacceptable for those
actions by Kosovo Albanians to be allowed by the
international presences, which should clearly be guided
by their mandates. Their activities should be status-
neutral.

The difficult situation in the province is illustrated
by the problem of the return of refugees; there has been
no progress towards finding a solution in that respect.
According to the report of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in Kosovo, only
22,200 out of 235,000 Serbian refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have tried to return to their
former homes, and only 4,000 of those have remained.
There has been an increased drain of Serbs from the
province to other regions of Serbia. Another egregious
phenomenon is the pillaging of homes earmarked for
IDPs, the seizure of property and damage to religious
and cultural heritage sites.

There is a widespread practice of unjustly accusing
returnees of having been involved in crimes during the
period of conflict in the 1990s. A difficult inter-ethnic
situation has arisen recently in Brdjani, in the
northern part of Kosovo Mitrovica. On 19 November,
it degenerated into an exchange of fire, started by the
Kosovars in response to protests by the Serbs against
the non-consensual building of homes for Albanians.
It seems to us that the Kosovar Albanians are striving
to change the ethnic makeup of the population and
to squeeze the Serbs out of the northern part of the
town. The consequences of this are unpredictable. We
underscore that the adoption of any decision regarding
the north of Kosovo should take into account the views
of the local Serbian population. We urge Mr. Zarif to
give a fundamental assessment of the situation and to
take an active stance in line with his mandate.

The international presences in Pristina should step
up their efforts to develop inter-ethnic dialogue and to
build trust, without which prospects for a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo are unrealistic. Oil has also been
poured onto the fire by the ruling of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on the Croatian
generals. The promotion of radical elements clearly
will not promote inter-ethnic reconciliation across the
whole of the former Yugoslavia, including Kosovo.

We look forward to the results of EULEX's
investigation of the cases identified by Dick Marty, of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
concerning organ trafficking. We would like to draw
the Security Council's attention to the fact that criminal
proceedings have been reopened in a case regarding
the participation in the murder and torture of civilians
of one of the leaders of the Kosovo Liberation Army,
Mr. Limaj.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is acting on the basis of
the Security Council's mandate, and it bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of security in the
province. Any change to its function and format must
be approved by the Council. We hope that NATO will
recognize the potential implications of the transfer
of responsibilities from KFOR to Pristina law-
enforcement structures for the safety of the Orthodox
monasteries in the south of the province, and we hope
also that it will take preventive measures in order
to avert further inter-faith and inter-ethnic clashes.
We have often mentioned the pitiful condition of
the province's Orthodox churches, which have been
vandalized and whose clergy have been attacked. This
problem requires closer attention.

The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo is a long
way off. This has also been confirmed by the report
of the European Union (EU) auditors, who have noted
the unsatisfactory results of EU assistance to Pristina
in the rule-of-law area. The document underscores the
fact that the results are limited and insufficient given
the objectives of the EU, the efforts made and the
financial resources used. According to the auditors, the
situation regarding the rule of law in Kosovo remains
unsatisfactory. In order to improve it, the EU must
ensure that EULEX delivers better and that it be much
more demanding of the Pristina authorities, which are
currently taking a passive stance.
In conclusion, I should like to urge the international
presences in Kosovo, whose unity was mentioned
earlier by Mr. Zarif, to take coherent action aimed at
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

