Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month, and pay tribute to the very
strong, energetic and dynamic leadership of Kuwait
on the issue of the working methods of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank the Kuwaiti presidency
for convening this open debate today.

I also wish to thank the briefers for their very useful
and interesting statements. I think that, having listened
to many statements by the wider membership today,
there are a host of extremely useful issues that will help
the Council in improving its working methods.

I will address the Council today on behalf of the
Group of Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions,
which is made up of Austria, Belgium, Chile, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein,
the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland and my own
country, Sweden. I will focus on one of the issues
raised in the concept note for this debate (S/2019/450, annex), namely, how transparency and efficiency can
be improved in the work of the Council's subsidiary
bodies, including the strengthening of due process.

December will mark the 10-year anniversary
of the creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
for the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, which
was established precisely for the particular purpose
of strengthening due process and fair and clear
procedures in the sanctions regime. We have seen
the work of the Ombudsperson develop and deepen.
It has had a real impact on individuals' right to due
process in the sanctions listing and delisting process.
That achievement of the Ombudsperson has also been
recognized by various regional and national courts.

When the function and Office ofthe Ombudsperson
were established, it was underscored that it should
be able to carry out its mandate in an independent
and impartial manner. The members of the Group of
Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions are today
especially concerned that this independence is being
undermined by the current contractual status of
and institutional arrangements for the Office of the
Ombudsperson in the Secretariat. We therefore urge
the Secretary-General to ensure that the capacity of
the Office of the Ombudsperson is strengthened and
that necessary arrangements are made "to ensure
its continued ability to carry out its mandate in an
independent, effective and timely manner", as stated in
paragraph 65 of resolution 2368 (2017).

This is a matter not only of working methods but also

of ensuring that individuals placed on United Nations
sanctions lists enjoy fair and clear procedures and are
afforded due process. The fairness of such processes is
a determinant for the effectiveness and legitimacy of
the Security Council's sanctions system, which could
otherwise be challenged by national or regional courts.
In that regard, we wish to recall our letter to the Security
Council dated 7 December 2018 (S/2018/1094), which
also includes other proposals for improving due process
with regard to the Office of the Ombudsperson. We all
have an interest in ensuring efficient sanctions that are
legitimate as well as perceived to be legitimate. The
Group of Like-minded States on Targeted Sanctions
therefore urges the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to pursue their efforts to ensure that due process
is afforded and that human rights are respected, both
in the process of imposing sanctions and in subsequent
implementation measures.

Similar due process concerns to those faced in the
lSIL/Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime exist in
relation to other Security Council sanctions regimes.
Courts and tribunals are increasingly faced with
questions emanating from other sanctions regimes
and have underlined the lack of due process protection
that they provide. That is why we ask that the Council
address this issue by creating an Ombudsperson or a
mechanism that provides equivalent protection for
other sanctions regimes.

