The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock
for their comprehensive briefings on the humanitarian
and political situation in Yemen in the light of the most
recent developments in the country's peace process.

For the Dominican Republic, it is of the utmost
importance to recognize the invaluable and fruitful
political consultations held in early December under
the auspices of the United Nations and with the
assistance of several Member States in the search for
a rapprochement between the parties. The Stockholm
agreements are a step forward in ending one ofthe most
terrible conflicts in our recent history, which has left
millions of people, mainly children, in a situation of
hunger and malnutrition with truly regrettable long-
term effects.

I acknowledge Mr. Griffiths for his brilliant
diplomatic and mediation work with the parties. The
Dominican Republic will do everything in its power
to contribute to the realization and strengthening of
the Stockholm agreements and, through the Council,
to support the work of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee in implementing those agreements as well as
the work of the Special Envoy. However, we regret that
during the visit to Sana'a, it was not possible to reach
agreement on future rounds of consultations that could
pave the way for the resumption of formal negotiations
towards a political solution. I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to and recognize the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations, which, in the most
unimaginable of circumstances, have assisted the
Yemeni people and continue to attend to their needs
with a view to alleviating their suffering.

A tribute needs to be extended to United Nations
partners, including international non-governmental
organizations and Yemenis who, day after day,
contribute to the arduous task of providing much-needed
humanitarian assistance. However, for my country, it is
crucial that, in the light ofprogress being made towards
peace in Yemen, all efforts towards seeking a political
solution should be sustained, including through the
meaningful participation of women and young people
in conflict resolution processes, and to keep protection
and humanitarian assistance accessible to the millions
of people who would otherwise not be able to survive.

In this regard, with everyone's permission, I would
like to emphasize the following. Mr. Lowcock noted
that the number of people with acute humanitarian
needs in Yemen is estimated to reach 24 million by
2019, far more than in any other country in the world
today. It is really a challenge from many points of View,
including that of financing, and one that forces us to
keep on the table and not lose sight of the most pressing
needs of the affected population in Yemen, but also one
with a View to creating the necessary foundations for
the re-establishment of the economy, livelihoods and
development in Yemen, by and for Yemenis. Therefore,
with a complementary and inclusive approach, we must
at all costs avoid an intensification of needs, which
would prolong the emergency situation longer than
necessary, and give way to a process of rehabilitation
and sustainable development in the country.

We are concerned that, despite the reduction
in hostilities, there are still serious limitations on
humanitarian access in several regions of the country
due to bureaucratic procedures. We emphasize the
need to expedite provisions that allow the entry and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to affected
populations without further delay. We have received a
very clear message from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other actors on the ground
about the sense of anguish of many Yemeni families,
particularly internally displaced persons, which must
be avoided. People's sense of hope must be restored.
Only then will the country be able to stand up and move
towards a new future.

In a reality as overwhelming as the one before us,
the Dominican Republic urges all actors on the ground
to adhere to the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence in order to achieve
effective and transparent humanitarian assistance that
can access the affected populations and bring so many
people out of despair and hunger.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

