Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive briefing.

Today's debate is the first open debate ofthe Security
Council on the Middle East since the resumption oftalks
between the Israelis and the Palestinians on 14 August.
Those talks carry the heavy burden of hope - hope
for the region as well as hope for the international
community. They represent a remarkable and historic
chance ofa solution, based on the establishment of two
States, living side by side in peace and security.

We have noted that a number of negotiation rounds
have taken place in Jericho and Jerusalem. Reports
coming out of those talks are less than encouraging, yet
we remain cautiously optimistic. It is our hope, as well
as our wish, that things behind the scenes are moving in
the right direction. The nine-month deadline is critical.
The longer it takes, the dimmer the possibility of a
negotiated settlement would become. In his report on
the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine, the
Secretary-General says that:

"For the negotiations to have a chance at success,
they need to be meaningful with a clear political
horizon and yield early dividends" (S/2013/524, para. 16).

Pakistan agrees with that assessment.

We also welcome the fact that the Quartet
principals met on the sidelines of the General
Assembly on 27 September and that they reaffirmed
their determination to lend effective support to the
parties and recommitted themselves to a permanent
status agreement within the agreed timeline of
nine months. The commitment of the international
community to that shared objective is critical. It is a
fragile and complicated process, and all the more, it
merits the support and continued encouragement of the
international community. As we have consistently said,
the credibility of the Council is linked to the peaceful
solution of the long-standing Palestinian issue.

For the process to move forward, specific actions
are required on the ground. How can we expect the
building of trust in an atmosphere where settlement
construction continues? Palestinian prisoners remain in
prolonged detention. Gaza remains blocked and attacks
in and around the Al-Aqsa compound continue to sour
the atmosphere.

That delicate process requires trust, and trust is
earned by action and not by mere words. There have to
be consequences for actions, and therefore, we welcome,
in that regard, the European Union guidelines on
settlements. Pakistan's support to the Palestinian cause
is unrelenting. We have recently contributed $1 million
to the Palestinian Authority for the construction of the
Palestinian Embassy in Islamabad. That is just one of
the sincere gestures of the Government of Pakistan to
show our solidarity with the people of Palestine and
their just cause. We continue to believe that peace in
the Middle East is dependent on the establishment of an
independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine,
based on the pre-1967 borders with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital. Vacating occupied Lebanese lands and
the Syrian Golan is also imperative.

Allow me to turn now to the precarious situation
in Syria. Pakistan welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013) and continued cooperation
of the Syrian Government with the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), aimed at dismantling its chemical
weapons programme. The Secretary-General says, in
his proposal on the elimination of chemical weapons in
Syria (S/2013/591), that it is uncharted territory. Pakistan
hopes that the cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the joint team will continue and that the opposition
groups would also extend similar support.

It may be recalled that the improved atmosphere
in the Council was instrumental in the adoption
of the presidential statement on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (S/PRST/2013/15). We hope that the
Council's pronouncement will have the desired effect
in alleviating the sufferings of our Syrian brothers and
sisters, both inside the country and outside.

Lastly, neither the destruction of chemical weapons
nor the improvement of the humanitarian situation
is a panacea for the ills afflicting Syria. The real
solution lies in dialogue and engagement. We welcome
the renewed momentum towards the convening of
Geneva II and hope that it will be convened as soon
as November. Work towards a plan that fulfils the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and that is
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned remains crucial. We hope
that all sides will work towards such an outcome.

