The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

I would first like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I will focus on
three points.

First, on UNAMI's work, we are pleased to join
Council members in welcoming the adoption of
resolution 2470 (2019) on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. I
would like to thank the Iraqi delegation for the excellent
cooperation, as well as the United States of America,
as the penholder, for its work on the resolution. We
applaud the essential work done by UNAMI, which, I
believe, is perceived positively in various areas of Iraqi
society. We extend our thanks to Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert and the entire UNAMI team for
their continued excellent work. We also commend the
good cooperation between the Government of Iraq
and UNAMI.

The resolution adopted today not only renews
but also improves the mandate of UNAMI. It shows
the unity of the Council in assisting Iraq to achieve
political stability and sustainable development. A
strong UNAMI with the capacity to assist the people
and the Government of Iraq in addressing the complex
challenges is more relevant than ever, and we look
forward to the full implementation of its mandate.

Secondly, on developments in the country,
Indonesia commends Iraq on the formation of the new
Government and looks forward to the appointment of the
remaining ministerial positions. The swift and effective
completion of the formation of the Iraq Government is
an essential prerequisite for the new Government to
gain the trust and support of the people. The stability
of Iraq is important not only for its people but also for
the region as a whole. We need to continue to support
Iraq's reconciliation and development efforts. We
support efforts to strengthen Iraq's State institutions
and the acceleration of the Government programme
for 2018 to 2020 to improve the basic services and
promote reconstruction and economic development
throughout Iraq.

It is incumbent upon us as the international
community to support Iraq in its endeavours. Like
others, we welcome the Government's announcement
of its development of a comprehensive national
anti-corruption strategy as well as Parliament's priority
to fight against corruption, as also mentioned in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/365).
Thirdly, on the issue of security challenges, we
took note of Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert's briefing with
regard to the issue of returning fighters of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their families,
which must be managed in the right way, in particular
with respect to women and children. The issue of
rehabilitation and reintegration is certainly not an easy
task. Nevertheless, efforts should be undertaken so
as not to create a resurgence of radicalism and a new
breed of terrorism. We commend the tireless work of
the Iraqi security forces for their continued search for
the remnants of ISIL, which threaten the security of
the entire population and hinder the ongoing process.
We believe that there is a need for a comprehensive
approach to addressing the security challenges and
ensuring durable peace. In that regard, enhanced
international and regional cooperation is critical.

Lastly, the issue of humanitarian assistance should
also be our priority. Issues of the return of internally
displaced persons, socioeconomic development and
the achievement of the targets of the Sustainable
Development Goals are important.

At this stage, Iraq needs all the support and help
of its brothers and sisters in the United Nations. Rest
assured of Indonesia's commitment in support of Iraq's
stability, development and lasting peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

