Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Ms. Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar, and
express on behalf of Uruguay our great satisfaction at
the adoption by unanimity of resolution 2366 (2017).
We also congratulate and thank the United Kingdom
for the successful negotiation of the text.

For Uruguay, this resolution is a renewed
demonstration of the unequivocal support of the
Security Council for the peace process in Colombia and
recognition of the tenacious and indefatigable will of
the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) to achieve a lasting and stable peace.
They have once again demonstrated their commitment
to peace and, at the same time, the trust they have in
the United Nations in by asking for fresh support, this
time focusing on the political, economic and social
reintegration of the FARC-EP and the implementation
of personal and collective security measures for their
members as well as comprehensive programmes
for security and protection of the communities and
organizations in the territories.

We are very pleased with the prompt response
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and
the Security Council to the request of the parties,
which we consider to be very timely at this stage of
the peace process in Colombia, referring to aspects
that must be dealt with without delay to preserve and
strengthen the great achievement embodied in the
historic laying-down-of-arms ceremony that took place
on 27 June. These are aspects of a peace agreement
that the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP
have been able make central to the potential, solidity,
stability and durability of the peace. To ensure success
in the implementation phase, we must not lose sight of
the comprehensive focus on making progress through
parallel processes in the implementation of the various
points of the Agreement.

It is positive and encouraging that there are already
different actions all aiming towards the same goal. The
resolution adopted today is an example of this, as is the
creation of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund of the United
Nations for Post-Conflict in Colombia. The positive
results obtained in the first year of operations in the
selected areas as priorities are a major contribution to
stabilizing peace in Colombia. We also welcome with
great satisfaction the news of the decision taken by
the Secretary General to declare Colombia eligible for
additional support from the Peacebuilding Fund for a
five-year period.

Once again, we must stress in this Chamber the
example that the will and the commitment of Colombians
in their unswerving pursuit of peace sets for the
world. As my colleague from the United Kingdom has
indicated, in this Chamber we are constantly talking
about war. Therefore, seeing the light of peace shine
in a Colombian process designed, adopted and guided
by Colombians - and of course put into practice by
Colombians - is a source of immense satisfaction for
us all.

