We commend Germany, as President of the Security Council for the month of July, for convening this important and historic debate. We also thank all the briefers for their valuable insights and contributions to the debate. Lithuania aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25). In January 2015, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, Lithuania organized an Arria Formula meeting on the human rights component in United Nations peace operations. We are delighted to see this very topic addressed in a formal Security Council debate. This is a significant and long-needed step forward in bringing discussions on the human rights dimension within United Nations peace operations to the formal setting of the Council. United Nations peace missions operate in increasingly diverse contexts due to the continuously evolving nature of conflicts and diverging intent and interests of State and non-State actors, as well as internal and external pressures on Governments. Yet one thing is abundantly clear - today's conflicts are often rooted in social, political, economic and cultural inequalities and human rights issues are at the heart of many conflicts. The multidimensional aspect is the reason that human rights teams in peacekeeping operations are abundantly important. We need not only to maintain the existing human rights teams in United Nations missions in Mali, the Central African Republic and the Sudan but also to ensure that human rights teams work in each and every peacekeeping operation on the ground. To address the topic of today's debate, Lithuania would like to emphasize three points: first, human rights as a key element in conflict prevention and peacebuilding strategies; secondly, human rights training of peacekeepers; and, thirdly, the protection of women. First, the promotion and protection of human rights are directly linked to the concept of conflict prevention. Many of the worst human rights violations and abuses are at the root of conflict situations, and impunity, as well as armed confrontation, fuel new cycles of violations. When egregious violations of human rights take place, conflict becomes inevitable. Any effort to build a lasting peace must incorporate actions to remedy the effects of violations, protect from new abuses and enable the population to exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms. In such a context, the protection and promotion of human rights should be seen as a key aspect for the success of United Nations peace operations. At the same time, human rights are a powerful advocacy tool for peace missions, as they are instrumental in addressing the root causes of conflict and setting a country on the path towards a sustainable peace through dialogue with national actors. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic is a good example of how local community engagement allows missions to be consistent in ensuring the integration of human rights into national peace and political processes. Secondly, all peacekeepers should be fully apprised of international human rights law and its applicability to their daily tasks. Human rights work cannot remain the sole responsibility of the human rights component within the peace operation, but rather should become an integral part of the duties of the entire mission staff. While we acknowledge that both predeployment and in-mission training programmes have significantly improved over the past couple of years, we need to prioritize further human rights training of peacekeepers at the institutional level. When looking at the area of training, human rights is one topic in a long list of peacekeeping-related issues. A more substantial reflection process on human rights training programmes for peacekeeping is needed, along with the political will to prioritize and adequately resource the area of training. Thirdly, in today's conflicts, women and girls suffer human rights violations in a disproportionate way. Awareness of gender issues in modern conflicts is crucial for peacekeepers to fulfil their roles and perform their deployment tasks properly. Women should not only be seen as victims but rather more often recognized as agents of change and included in decision-making processes. Moreover, improving their social, economic and political conditions should be an integral part of protection strategies, together with their active participation in conflict prevention and resolution. It is also about addressing structural gender-related vulnerabilities. In order to overcome the many remaining challenges with regard to gender equality and gender mainstreaming, it is important to expand cooperation among peace operations, local government, local organizations and civil society. There is the example of the productive cooperation of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of Congo in combating sexual violence and ensuring accountability for crimes. By addressing specific issues, we create a positive environment for broader changes. Finally, we would like to note that the challenges for the staff of United Nations peace operations, both uniformed and civilian, are enormous and, with the arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), a new dimension has been added. We are pleased to see that the COVID-19 pandemic in most missions is being managed rather successfully. Yet, despite the relatively low infection rates, the situation on the ground has certainly not become any easier. We would like to express our appreciation to all the staff of United Nations peace operations, who continue their dedicated work under very difficult circumstances.
