Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Kim Sook, Quinlan
and Loulichki for their briefings. I appreciate their
leadership roles as the Chairs of, respectively, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC).

China appreciates the efforts ofthe 1540 Committee
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We support it in its steady and reliable work in raising
Member States' awareness of resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as in promoting the exchange of experiences
and assistance among them and their achievement of
various resolution goals in a comprehensive, balanced
and effective manner. We hope they will smoothly
complete the annual renewal of their programmes
of work. China is ready to work together with all in
participating in the Committee's work and advancing
the international non-proliferation process.

The Al-Qaida Committee remains an important
mechanism for counter-terrorism at the Security
Council's disposal. In accordance with resolutions 1989
(2011) and 2083 (2012), it recently updated its guidelines,
improved its exemptions procedures, strengthened its
review of listing and delisting requests and updated its
sanctions list, while maintaining good cooperation with
the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team. China
appreciates all these efforts. We support the Committee
as it continues to work in a cautious, objective and
organized fashion, and we hope that Member States
will continue to support and cooperate with its work in
order to protect the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.

China appreciates the efforts of the CTC in
comprehensively implementing resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). We support its work, carried
out with the help of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, in improving the preliminary
implementation assessment and related work, promoting
the exchange of information and experiences, and
providing technical assistance through workshops and
other activities, such as the special events on enhancing
cooperation and technical assistance to States in the
Sahel region to strengthen their capacity in the global
fight against terrorism and on enhancing the capacity
of States to counter terrorism at their borders through
technical assistance the sharing of good practices. We
hope the Committee will continue its dialogue with
Member States, strengthen its cooperation with other
United Nations agencies and help Member States,
especially developing countries, in capacity-building
in the fight against terrorism.

China rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. China rejects any double standard in
dealing with counter-terrorism. We support the United
Nations and the Security Council in the international
cooperative effort against terrorism. We hope that the
international community will continue to cooperate in
the common effort to prevent and combat terrorism.

