Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting focused on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I also want to thank all the members of the Security
Council for the special attention and interest that they
have always shown in considering the situation in my
country whenever they are called on to do so.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2019/229), presented just now by
Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region. Its analysis ofsome
of the issues that it raises demands some observation
and comment on our part. I would therefore like to
refer briefly to some points regarding the security,
political, humanitarian and human rights situations,
and to conclude by discussing the implementation of
the Framework.

Peace and security continue to be essential to
maintaining stability in the Great Lakes region. They
require the eradication of armed groups, unfailing
compliance with the agreements reached and political
will on the part of the leadership to work for harmony
and understanding in the region. In that regard, the
Secretary-General's report emphasizes the activities
of armed groups in the eastern parts of my country. It
highlights the virulence ofthe Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), which is attacking not just civilians but also
members of our armed forces and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The report also
mentions that the ADF has continued to strengthen its
ranks by recruiting in the countries of the Great Lakes
region and beyond. In that regard, I should point out
that the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo noted in its most recent midterm report
(S/2018/1133) the alarming fact that the ADF has an
international recruitment network, and that its recruits
come from several countries in the region. The Group of
Experts also emphasizes another important fact, which
is the ADF's Islamicization of its recruitment efforts,
whereby, according to paragraph 10 of the report, "The
recruiters focused mostly on Muslims."

That situation warrants the attention of the Security
Council and should prompt us to anticipate these armed
groups radicalization before it occurs. According to
our information, in October 2017 the ADF reportedly
declared allegiance to the jihadist Islamic State, from
which it is alleged to have received funding for activities
aimed at turning the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo into the epicentre of the spread of the
Islamic State's influence in Central, East and Southern
Africa. In any case, the group's conduct, whereby it has
systematically obstructed the community response to
the Ebola epidemic, is clearly designed to undermine
every effort to stabilize the region. As we said when
the Council met on 18 March (see S/PV.8486), my
delegation would like to see a strategic review of the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo and MONUSCO in order to enable this negative
force to be speedily neutralized so as to ensure lasting
security in that part of the country.

Paragraph 11 of the Secretary-General's report,
which mentions the report of the Group of Experts, also
refers to the presence of an armed group known as P5
that is reportedly active in South Kivu and associated
with Rwandan opposition groups and received arms
and ammunition from a neighbouring country. My
country, which respects its commitments under the
Framework, condemns that situation, which could
draw us into another armed conflict. We hope that the
Group of Experts can shed light on it and on the arms
and ammunition supply chain so that we can establish
which countries have been violating the arms embargo.

We once again reiterate our call to the international
community for combining regional efforts for the
effective implementation of the Framework. That is the
purpose of the visits to the countries of the region by
President Felix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, who is committed to
good-neighbourly relations. As he said on 15 February
when he addressed our diplomatic corps,

"The Democratic Republic of Congo, located
in the heart of the African continent with nine
neighbouring countries, will give priority to the
consolidation of regional peace. I will focus on a
foreign policy based on good neighbourliness and
constructive dialogue with our nine neighbours
in order to assume our share of responsibility for
regional stability, including within the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region".

The points about the elections made in the
section of the Secretary-General's report on political
developments are not just out of date but were also the
subject of the Council's deliberations on 11 January
(see S/PV.8443). I hope the Council will accept that we
do not wish to return to the issue again.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
Government's efforts should be supported in order
to meet the needs of the populations in distress. My
delegation therefore takes this opportunity to reiterate
its call regarding this to all our partners.

As we said in our statement last week (see S/PV.8486), the issue of human rights violations and
restrictions on democratic space is at the heart of the
work of President Tshisekedi, who made a commitment
to working to promote the rule of law when he came to
power. To that end, he has committed to humanizing the
security services, combating abuses and eliminating
detention centres that do not comply with the law. He
has begun to open up public media access to all to
encourage freedom of expression and assembly and
freedom to demonstrate. He has released political
prisoners and taken robust anti-corruption measures.
He has now set up a national mechanism to combat all
forms of human trafficking in our country.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
committed to the Framework, which it considers a proof
of the international community's determination to find
a definitive solution to the instability that has affected
the country for several years and for which it continues
to pay a heavy price, including several million dead.
That is why it has always striven to implement all
the commitments made under the agreement and will
continue to shoulder its share of responsibility so that
peace and harmony are restored to the region.

In that regard, my Government remains committed
to implementing the decisions of the ninth High-level
Meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, which
call for strengthening the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on
ADF and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism,
on the one hand, and continuing regional cooperation
with a view to the complete and rapid neutralization of
all destabilizing forces, on the other hand. However, as
noted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 67 of the
report, the Democratic Republic of the Congo regrets
the lack of involvement of other States in the smooth
functioning of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on ADF
and therefore urges the guarantors of the Framework to
remind all parties to meet their commitments.

Despite the clear progress made since the adoption
of the Framework agreement, it should be acknowledged
that in recent years we seem to be approaching an
impasse. My delegation would therefore like to ask
the countries of the region and the guarantors of
the Framework to take the opportunity to hold the
tenth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in October to review ourjoint resolve to bring peace to
the region by combating the threat of armed groups that
undermine the development of our States. The Great
Lakes region must indeed aspire to a better life, as
economic development can be achieved only with the
peace and harmony of its populations.

Before concluding, my delegation is of the view
that the region should take the opportunity provided
by the new era in my country to build trust among the
leaders of the region, who must look to the future and
work in such a way as to create relations that will lead
our States towards regional cooperation. That is very
necessary to achieve peace, security and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
my Government's thanks to Mr. Said Djinnit, whose
term as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region of Africa ends at the end of this
month, for his valuable contribution during his term of
office to the pursuit of solutions to restore lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire
Great Lakes region.

In the same vein, my Government congratulates
Mr. Huang Xia on his appointment by the Secretary-
General to succeed Mr. Said Djinnit as Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region as
of April. My Government already wishes him a fruitful
term of office and promises him its full cooperation to
enable him to carry out his work successfully.

Finally, I reiterate the gratitude of the Congolese
people and their Government to the members of the
Security Council for their dedication and commitment
to our country's cause.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
