Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Zarif for presenting the report
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (S/2011/675). I would like to take the
opportunity to congratulate him on his official
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK and to wish
him successful and productive work in this important
post.

The Russian Federation welcomes the
participation in today's meeting of the Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
shares his concerns.
We have listened attentively to the statement of
Mr. Hoxhaj. We note the non-compliance with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). The position of
the Russian Federation in not recognizing Kosovo's
unilateral declaration of independence remains
unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
force and is still considered by all as the binding
international legal base for settling Kosovo and
providing security in the area.

We believe it important for the interested parties
to resume their dialogue aimed at a formula for a
durable settlement of the Kosovo problem. Unilateral
actions of Pristina and the international presence in
northern Kosovo are unacceptable.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned by
the abrupt deterioration in the situation in the northern
part of the district. There have even been certain
flagrant incidents. For example, on 9 November in one
of the neighbourhoods of Kosovska Mitrovica, a mixed
ethnic area, a group of Albanians opened machine gun
fire on three Serbs, one of whom died in hospital
shortly thereafter. It is quite telling that during the
burial service on the shore of the Ibar River, Albanians
partied openly to loud music.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) is also forcefully
pressuring Kosovo Serbs. Only yesterday, the two
groups were engaged in yet another skirmish, as NATO
forces were capturing a Serbian barricade in the
municipality of Zubin Potok. Dozens of casualties
occurred on both sides. The KFOR command has
issued threats of using their weapons with lethal intent.
It is patently obvious to us that that type of situation
could be avoided if KFOR focused not on removing the
Serbian barricades that were erected in reaction to
Pristina's provocative attempts to take control over the
administrative border with Serbia, but on providing
security in the interest of all of the district's inhabitants
as per its mandate.

The statements of some of our Council colleagues
to the effect that the actions of KFOR and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) are somehow ensuring the protection of
freedom of movement as well as a single customs
space for Kosovo as provided under resolution 1244
(1999) are nothing more than a bit of semantic sleight
of hand. Let us not forget that those mandates were
adopted under conditions when, under resolution 1244
(1999), Kosovo enjoyed substantial autonomy as a
union republic of Yugoslavia. The resolution also
called for protection of the interests of the Serbian
population of the district and for providing for its
security. We thus oppose selective implementation of
the mandates of KFOR and EULEX, which openly
plays into the hands of the Kosovo authorities.

The use of force to implement legislation of the
so-called Republic of Kosovo is outside the mandates
of those international entities and violates the principle
of their neutral status. In that context and bearing in
mind the communications on that topic submitted by
the Government of Serbia to the Secretary-General, the
Russian Federation calls for a thorough investigation of
the incident of 27 September, where KFOR used
weapons that resulted in civilian casualties.

We are left to wonder: Why is it that after
12 years of efforts, the international community has
been unable to ensure safe living conditions for one of
the parties to the Kosovo conflict? In that regard, we
believe it would be advisable that in his next report, the
Secretary-General conduct an in-depth analysis of the
ways in which the international presences are
implementing their security mandates to protect the
rights of the entire population of Kosovo.

In equal measure, we call for a full and objective
investigation of the facts related to the illicit trafficking
in human organs uncovered by Mr. Dick Marty, Special
Rapporteur of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary
Assembly. In our view, such an investigation should
proceed under United Nations auspices and report to
the Security Council. Here we note the extremely
unsatisfactory situation in Kosovo relating to witness
protection, which has been confirmed by the Council
of Europe. Those facts have been blatantly ignored,
and as a result key witnesses have been eliminated.

The security situation in the district remains
tense, owing most of all to Pristina's growing tendency
to use force to control Serb-inhabited regions. Attacks
such as those of 2004 must not be allowed. The
situation regarding the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) to Kosovo, most of whom are Serb,
remains unsatisfactory. There are many reasons for
that, including the fact that the IDPs have no assurance
of safety. The ransacking of homes and theft of
property of Kosovo Serbs has been going on with
impunity. International presences must take all
necessary measures to protect Serbian Orthodox holy
sites and believers. We share the concern of the
authorities of Serbia and the Serbian Orthodox Church
with the situation developing in relation to the
handover by NATO forces of protective responsibilities
of significant Serbian cultural and religious heritage
sites to the Kosovo police. These actions could cause
additional security tensions in Kosovo.

The Mission in Kosovo, on the basis of its
Security Council mandate, must play as active a role as
possible in promoting the Kosovo settlement process.
We call on UNMIK to fulfil its duties, including with
regard to the external representation of Kosovo in
regional and international organizations and
mechanisms. We hope the new Head of UNMIK will
provide the corresponding impulse to the Mission's
work.

We believe that Council measures must send an
unambiguous signal to both the Kosovo parties and the
international presences on the need to refrain from
violence and to continue the dialogue. The Russian
delegation will circulate a draft presidential statement
for the press.

