Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to acknowledge the hard work and dedication of the
entire staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under the leadership of Special
Representative Jan Kubis. Japan welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2096 (2013), which renews UNAMA's
mandate and reconfirms the long-term commitment of
the United Nations to durable peace in Afghanistan. I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize the
importance of ensuring adequate resourcing in order
for UNAMA to fulfil its mandate, as described in
resolution 2096 (2013).

With more than 11 years behind us, Afghanistan,
with the unwavering support of the international
community, has gone down a long and uneven path
towards sustainable peace. I am confident that
Afghanistan now finds itself on the right track. In
addition to the long-term commitment of the United
Nations, intensive regional efforts for the security and
stability of Afghanistan, such as the Istanbul Process,
have constantly been put forward at various levels.

On this occasion, I would like to reaffirm that
Japan remains steadfastly committed to the long-
term stability of Afghanistan beyond the completion
of the security transition in 2014. Our new, recently
announced contributions since the beginning of the
year include assistance for security, with support
for the Afghan National Police; governance support
through the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund;
infrastructure building, including contributions to the
Afghanistan infrastructure trust fund; and humanitarian
assistance. In total, the assistance amounts to more than
$570 million and demonstrates Japan's determination
to fulfil the mutual commitments made at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan.

The year 2013 is of critical importance for
Afghanistan in achieving its considerable goals
in 2014. Therefore, with these international and
regional accompaniments, it is now incumbent upon
Afghanistan, with its strong political will, to make
steady and concrete strides forward, especially in the
following three areas, where Japan believes tangible
outcomes are indispensable.

First, as stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/133), the timely development of a credible
electoral framework for the presidential election is
a key Government commitment under the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework. Japan once again
reiterates the importance of attaining deliverables such
as the passage of electoral laws and the appointment
of qualified Independent Election Commission
senior appointees before the senior officials' meeting
scheduled for 3 July. Now we must focus more on
substance rather than mere process.

Secondly, further building the capacity of the
Afghan National Security Forces is the foremost priority
in ensuring that the dividends of the security transition
are irreversible. Japan welcomes the announcement
of the fourth tranche, made in December 2012, under
which 87 per cent of the population will soon live in
areas controlled by Afghan security. The increasing
number of ex-combatants enrolled in the Afghanistan
Peace and Reintegration Programme is also very
encouraging.

Nevertheless, we must not turn away from the fact
that the number of serious security incidents remains
deplorably high and includes an increase in internal
attacks. In order to control the security situation, the
Afghan Security Forces needs to enhance its operational
capacity, in terms of both quantity and quality. In
addition to quantitative reinforcement, a wide range
of qualitative reforms are desperately needed in order
to overcome challenges such as the low literacy rate,
the high turnover and the lack of capable leaders and
trainers. This past month, Japan decided to contribute an
additional $122 million for the Afghan National Police
through the United Nations Development Programme's
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan. We once
again stress the need for that police support to be used
in a transparent and effective manner and be followed
by achieving concrete enhanced capability for the
Afghan National Police.
Lastly, lasting stability in Afghanistan can
be achieved only when all the other efforts are
accompanied by the advancement of an Afghan-
led peace and reconciliation process. The increased
dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan and their
closer cooperation on issues such as the release of
Afghan Taliban detainees are welcome developments.
The new procedure to facilitate requests for travel-ban
exemptions based on resolution 2082 (2012) is also
expected to provide support for other initiatives with
the same goal. I would also like to recall that the whole
peace process is supported by the relationship of mutual
trust among all the stakeholders, including the trust
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.

