Mr. Terzi de Sant'Agata (Italy): Mr. President,
allow me to congratulate you personally on your
appointment as the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council by your country, to
which Italy is linked by very close and friendly
relations.
5
I would like to welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Foreign Minister of South Africa, the
Chairperson of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, and especially the
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel,
former Prime Minister Romano Prodi, who will speak
again in due time before the conclusion of today's
debate.

Italy ranks first among countries of the European
Union in contributions of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, ninth in the global ranking,
and sixth among contributors to the peacekeeping
budget. These statistics explain why we are so
interested in ongoing efforts to enhance and update
peacekeeping doctrines and procedures.

Our interest extends to efforts being made in the
General Assembly and its Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations; in the Security Council,
where France and the United Kingdom are promoting
an interesting debate; in the Secretariat with its "New
Horizon Project" for peacekeeping; and, last but not
least, in considering every possible way, such as the
African Union-United Nations panel, to improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
members of the panel, in particular Chairman Prodi,
for their very valuable contributions to this debate of
the Security Council and to the future peacekeeping
efforts of the United Nations in Africa.

The report, in our view, is well focused, balanced
and rich with practical recommendations and
proposals. Its main political objective is a clear and
defined strategy for improving cooperation between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations. Such a
vision, as outlined in the report and explained by
Chairman Prodi, implies much closer interaction
between United Nations and African Union bodies
from the very start of the decision-making process.
Regional actors, including the African Union, have
better knowledge of internal dynamics in their areas
and enjoy greater legitimacy with local Governments
and public opinion.

About 70 per cent of United Nations
peacekeepers and 73 per cent of the United Nations
peacekeeping budget go to Africa. Therefore, the
regional dimension is key to ensuring effective and

coherent responses to peace and security challenges.
Regional ownership means a common vision and
shared responsibilities. In the spirit of the Africa-
European Union (EU) Lisbon strategy, AU
empowerment in managing regional crises must be
upheld.

As my delegation recently stated in the informal
General Assembly plenary meeting on Security
Council reform, Italy is convinced of the need to
enhance the regional dimension - and therefore the
African voice - in a reformed Security Council. To
help promote the regional dimension, reform should
assure that decisions taken by the Security Council on
regional crises foresee a larger role for Member States
belonging to the region affected. In that context, we
also welcome the proposal for the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council to work together
more closely and to structure a more consistent
relationship between the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission.

The more a continent grows in all its dimensions -
political, economic, social, demographic - the more it
is bound to share global responsibilities based on an
equal partnership. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional, subregional and other
international organizations in maintaining peace and
security is encouraged by Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The report refers rightly to that principle and
underlines United Nations-EU structured relationships,
such as the United Nations/European Union Steering
Committee as an effective example for the African
Union. With regard to cooperation among the United
Nations, the EU and the African Union, I wish to fully
align myself with the statement made earlier on behalf
of the presidency of the European Union.

The report also focuses on two elements that we
deem essential to achieving more reliable and secure
peacekeeping: training and logistics. The effectiveness
and safety of peacekeepers depend on equipment,
adequate training and professional standards that
cannot be improvised. Existing training centres should
be improved and adequately supported. The report is
right in underlining the need for a closer relationship
between the AU and the United Nations Logistics Base
in Brindisi and a possible role for the United Nations
logistics hub in Entebbe.
The predictability and sustainability of
peacekeeping financing are of undeniable importance,
which is why we endorse the report's proposal to
establish a long-term multi-donor capacity-building
trust fund. With regard to the use of assessed
contributions, while we reject any automatic
mechanism, we are open to discussing that option in
the context of clear and swift United Nations
takeovers. Concerted efforts are needed to work out
generally agreeable solutions.

In conclusion, my country fully agrees that the
AU-United Nations panel's report is an important step
forward, provides a solid platform for our work at the
United Nations and sets clear objectives with which my
country is willing to concur.

