Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General of
League of Arab States, Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit; the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov; Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, member
of The Elders; and Mr. Michael Doran, Senior Fellow
at the Hudson Institute, for their briefings. The picture
they have painted of the situation in both Israel and
Palestine, and throughout the region, is very bleak.

In a regional environment marked by numerous
and deadly crises, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
stands out for its longevity and its structural aspects.
Beginning with its longevity, a few months from now
we will commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the partition plan adopted by General Assembly via
resolution 181 (II), which was immediately followed by
the first Israeli-Arab war. This month is also the fiftieth
anniversary of the June 1967 war and the occupation
of the Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem, which
came in its wake. We must not view this moment as
a simple moment of remembrance or as an exercise in
resignation, but rather it should compel us to look to
the future and to breathe new life into our endeavours.

That is particularly true because the second
hallmark of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is its
structure. The lack of a solution to the conflict, which
is serious in and of itself, is also an ongoing threat to
international security. As a result of the very serious
nature of the conflict, its symbolic aspect and the
place it has taken in the collective imagination, the
scope of this unresolved conflict is structural and goes
well beyond the territory of Israel and Palestine. Any
escalation in the conflict risks destabilizing the region
uncontrollably. That is why we cannot resign ourselves
to a fake status quo, which conceals daily erosion on the
ground and of the spirit. The goal of this path is clear:
to put an end to the two-State solution as being a mirage
in the desert, which would be a leap into the unknown
and into the risk of a worse situation.

Ibelieve we all share the view that the current painful
situation has gone on for too long. It has gone on for too
long for the Palestinians, who, for too long, have been
deprived of their legitimate right to pursue statehood as
a result of the occupation and see that prospect slipping
further from their grasp and disappearing with the
expansion of the settlement policy. The announcements
at the beginning of the month of nearly 3,000 new
housing units built in the Israeli settlements in the West
Bank are part of a worrying trend and represent an
increase of 70 per cent in settlement construction this
year, as compared with last year, according to figures
just published by the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics.
With nearly 600,000 settlers in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank, we are reaching the point of no return and
we are faced with the question of the possibility of
the two-State solution slipping away, without another
viable solution. We must remember that the occupation
is illegal under international law and makes achieving
peace impossible.

This situation has gone on too long for the Israelis
as well, because the prospects for a never-ending
pursuit of occupation and colonization contradicts the
democratic foundations of the State of Israel, because
the full regional integration of Israel into the wider
region is possible only once peace has been reached
with the Palestinians and because violence flourishes in
the void presented by the dearth of a political solution.

The attack that took place on Friday in Jerusalem,
which claimed the life of a young female member of
the Israeli police force and which France robustly
condemned, is another tragic example of my point.
The waves of violence that follow one after another,
especially in Jerusalem, serve only to harden
mutual defiance.

Yet, while the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is now the
oldest of the conflicts that are ripping the Middle East
apart, it is also the only one whose solution is known
and widely shared within the international community.
Despite the constant deterioration of the situation on
the ground, the parameters of a future agreement have
not changed: two States living in peace and security
with contiguous, secure and recognized borders drawn
on the basis of the 1967 demarcation lines and mutually
agreed land swaps; with Jerusalem as the capital ofboth
States; and with an agreed, realistic, just and equitable
solution for Palestinian refugees.

There is no viable alternative to the two-State
solution, neither for the Israelis nor for the Palestinians.
The past 50 years have taught that the fates of these two
peoples are intertwined, and that no one can sustainably
fulfil their national aspirations by denying those of the
other side.

Finally, I wish once again to publicly express
France's concerns about the situation in the Gaza Strip.
The ongoing humanitarian crisis in which this territory
is entrenched has been aggravated by the blocking of
the electricity supply, which has lasted for about two
months. The inhabitants of Gaza today live with an
average of two to four hours of electricity per day, and the
energy crisis has serious consequences for the medical,
sanitation and water treatment infrastructure facilities
in particular. We must therefore take action to improve
the situation in Gaza, particularly at the humanitarian
level. All stakeholders must take responsibility to
ensure that a lasting solution can be found in and for
Gaza. This is urgent. If nothing is done, the ongoing
tensions could lead to a new deadly conflict, like those
that the Gaza Strip experienced three times in the past
nine years. We cannot allow that to happen. Israel
must therefore fulfil its responsibilities by alleviating
the restrictions it imposes on the access to goods and
people into and out of Gaza, which should be the
precursor to a lifting of the blockade and which must
be accompanied by robust security guarantees. It is
also crucial that the Palestinians reach a reconciliation
agreement, as we know that there will be no viable
Palestinian State without Palestinian unity on the basis
of the two-State solution.

France is a friend of both Palestinians and Israelis.
That is why it can speak to them truthfully and
repeatedly call on them to return to the negotiating
table, and that is why my country will never give up.
We will continue to act in furtherance of that goal with
our main partners.

In the region, the Arab Peace Initiative remains
the essential framework for making peace with
the Palestinians the first step towards the regional
integration of Israel. We hope that the commitment of
the United States Administration, through its renewed
diplomatic effort, will help to restart the negotiation
proces between Israelis and Palestinians. With our
European Union partners, we stand ready to help the
parties resume negotiations.

Fifty years of occupation means two successive
generations of Palestinians and Israelis who have lived
through the current conflict. The situation is both
physically and psychologically devastating. It is time
to put an end to it.

