Ms. Pajevic' (Montenegro): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We also
thank today's briefers for their valuable presentations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I would like, however, to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.

As stated in the latest report of the Secretary-
General, armed conflict has continued to have a
disproportionate impact on children. It is worrisome
that

"More than 4,000 cases were documented by
the United Nations in 2013, but thousands more
children are estimated to have been recruited and
used." (S/2014/339, para. 9)

We fully share the concerns presented in this report
with regard to grave violations against children.

The Security Council has indeed made substantial
progress in advancing the children and armed conflict
agenda, but more action is needed to protect the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict and
to ensure that perpetrators of grave violations against
children are held to account. It is in that context that we
emphasize the importance of fulfilling the objectives
of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, launched
earlier this year as a new effort to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government forces in conflict
by 2016. To that end, we welcome and recognize the
positive developments and achievements by some
Governments listed in the annexes to the reports of the
Secretary-General. We urge all others to demonstrate
the necessary willingness and determination to end the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces.

Thousands of boys and girls around the world are
still being recruited into Government forces and armed
opposition groups to serve as combatants, cooks, porters,
messengers or in other roles. Girls, and sometimes
boys, are also recruited for sexual purposes. That is
simply unacceptable and it has to come to an end once
and for all. Therefore, we call on all States to become
party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.

We expect that the campaign will make a significant
difference with its two-fold contribution - first, to
the full implementation of action plans to end and
prevent recruitment; and, secondly, to the release and
reintegration of children into civilian life to ensure that
children released from armed forces or groups are able
to become productive members of their societies and
are no longer at risk of recruitment in the future.

We remain gravely concerned about attacks on and
the increasing use of schools for military purposes. That
does not only have a devastating impact on children,
but it is a violation of international humanitarian law.
Schools can be converted into a military targets, and
students, teachers and learning facilities can indeed be
made vulnerable to attacks and other forms of violence
by parties in conflict. In line with resolution 2143
(2014), we call on parties to armed conflict to respect
the civilian character of schools, while encouraging
States to take measures to prevent the use of schools by
armed forces and non-State armed groups.

As this year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, we
have to remind ourselves that the right and access to
education is a fundamental human right. Children must
be provided education, even in situations of armed
conflict. We have to ensure that all measures are taken
to protect students, teachers, schools and universities
from attack and military use. Against that backdrop,
we welcome the development of the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict as a practical measure in
protecting schools against military use. We support
the work towards the finalization of the Lucens
Guidelines and the process leading towards their broad
endorsement.

With respect to United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions and the indispensable role they
play, Montenegro would like to advocate for strong a
child-protection component to be incorporated in the
missions' mandates. That would require peacekeepers,
military and security personnel to receive specialized
child protection predeployment training.

Montenegro is also concerned about the use of
explosive weapons with wide area effects in populated
areas. We would like to call on all parties to conflict
to refrain from the use of such explosive weapons so
as to ensure that civilians are protected, in particular
children, against death, injury and psychological harm.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
a key role in fighting impunity. When crimes of
an international scale are committed and national
judiciaries are unwilling or unable to deal with them,
State parties to the Rome Statute should pay due
consideration to referring those situations to the ICC.
It is also vital that the Security Council, to the extent
possible, use the option to refer situations to the ICC.

In conclusion, let me point out that it is for
everyone - the international community, regional
and subregional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the entire United Nations system -
to contribute to our common and noble objective, that
is, to prevent any future occurrence of children being
involved in armed conflict.

