Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his
presentation, and to pay tribute to him for his valuable
efforts in support of the people of Timor-Leste. I would
also like to express my gratitude to Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres for joining us in this morning's
debate.

An examination of the last decade in Timor-Leste
shows us that there have been strong achievements
with regard to nation-building and the establishment of
peace. The country's security institutions are being
strengthened, as demonstrated by the fact that the
national police force has taken over security functions.
The democratic process is progressing, as the
presidential elections in 2007 have been followed by
the recent local elections. In particular, we
acknowledge the country's endeavours to promote
10
socio-economic development and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) regarding
primary education and health. Little by little,
sustainability is being achieved in Timor-Leste.

Although progress has been made, two major
concerns remain: the slow pace of strengthening the
rule of law, and, as we stated in a previous debate, the
development of an army for which we see no clear
purpose. In regard to the rule of law, there are two
specific events that we find disturbing: the continuing
criticism of the judicial system, which undermines the
legitimacy of democratic institutions, and the incident
in which a fugitive was handed over to the Indonesian
authorities, flouting the established legal procedures.
In the view of my delegation, the decisions that the
political bodies adopted after this incident do not
validate actions that undermine the integrity of the law.
In addition to developing institutions, a culture of
democracy and the rule of law must be fostered.

We also believe it is important to consider the
role of the army in the context of security sector
reform. President Ramos-Horta was kind enough to
explain to us the circumstances justifying the creation
of a military apparatus, and he also outlined his
personal ideas on that respect. In this context, we urge
the Timorese authorities to assign clear tasks to an
army that clearly has little defensive utility. Its
functions must therefore go beyond merely military
activities. It must become an agent for change and play
a structural role in the process of nation-building.
Border patrols; monitoring increased human
trafficking, in which Timor-Leste is becoming a transit
hub; support for local communities; the construction of
social infrastructure and natural disaster response are
some of the tasks whereby that small army could pay
society back for the sacrifices it is making with what
are very meagre resources.

The successful experience of Timor-Leste holds
important lessons for the United Nations regarding the
role that the Organization can and should play in
matters of peace and State-building. First, United
Nations actions in Timor-Leste demonstrate the
importance of making an early start in peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding tasks, and of
strengthening the links between those two activities in
an integrated fashion.

It is also important to stress the importance of
United Nations post-conflict cooperation in building
and strengthening local capacities. That is what the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste has
done with regard to security, justice and governance
institutions in Timor-Leste, helping to guarantee a
sustainable peace and the eventual successful exit of a
United Nations mission through the consolidation of
local institutions.

I cannot fail to point out that the case of Timor-
Leste demonstrates the importance of forging a strong,
dynamic and symbiotic relation between the
international community and the leadership of local
actors. The process of peacebuilding in Timor-Leste
has been characterized by close association between
the United Nations and countries in the region. The
ownership and leadership of the people of Timor-Leste
have made it possible to take strategic advantage of the
assistance of the international community and to
assume in a responsible and determined way the
challenge of building their country. The Security
Council and the Organization should assimilate and
profit from the important lessons learned in Timor-
Leste.

