Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway commends the
United Nations and the Office of the Secretary-General
for their comprehensive involvement in Haiti. Norway
welcomes the appointment of President Bill Clinton as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. We believe
that President Clinton can play a key role in mobilizing
and coordinating the international community's support
to the Haitian Government in consolidating peace.
Norway was the first country to give financial support
to the Office of the Special Envoy, and we look
forward to receiving updates in the weeks and months
to come.

Norway has also supported capacity-building
efforts in Haiti, both within public entities and in civil
society, with particular attention paid to gender issues
and the political participation of women. We have
cooperated closely with United Nations agencies and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and will continue this dialogue. In
addition, we have supported direct initiatives in Haiti
focusing on areas that can foster stability, such as
initiatives promoting dialogue between political
parties, non-governmental organizations and church
communities.

MINUSTAH has played a significant role in
creating conditions conducive to building peace, and
we commend the work of Special Representative of the

Secretary-General Annabi and the women and men of
MINUSTAH. However, much work remains to be done
to establish incentives and a framework for economic
and social development. We welcome President
Clinton's ambition to work with the private sector to
increase foreign investment and thereby create more
jobs and opportunities for the people of Haiti.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/439), a substantial international military and
police presence will be necessary for another year. The
support of the international community must continue.
Member States' engagement in the larger ongoing
United Nations reforms will also be crucial, as reforms
are vital to ensuring effectiveness and flexibility in the
field. Norway supports the Secretary-General in his
planning beyond 2010 to ensure a smooth and gradual
handover of the responsibilities and activities of
MINUSTAH to the Haitian State apparatus. The
success of a handover will depend on the quality of its
planning and must be done in close coordination with
the Government of Haiti, the United Nations system as
a whole and other national and international partners.

