Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also take
this opportunity to congratulate you and the delegation
of Nigeria on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. We further
welcome the presence and participation of the
Secretary-General earlier in today's debate, and we
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John
Holmes, as well as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Pillay, for their briefings to the Council.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) 10
years ago and of the Geneva Conventions 60 years ago,
the Security Council has on many occasions addressed
the important issue before us today. In this context, we
commend the Council for its commitment to the
protection of civilians, especially its adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009).

South Africa attaches high importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. As a country,
we have acceded to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and the two Additional Protocols of 1977. These
instruments are critical to the issue before us today, as
they seek to protect various victims of armed conflict,
particularly civilians not involved in hostilities. My
delegation recognizes that the protection of civilians is,
by its very nature, the primary responsibility of
individual Member States. However, the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has become
more complex as various conflicts of different natures
have broken out.

The issue of the protection of civilians should
therefore be approached in a holistic manner. In this
10-43968

context, measures to protect civilians in armed conflict
can be viable only if the critical needs of civilians,
including their socio-economic needs, are adequately
addressed. Crucially, addressing the specific protection
needs of women and children must remain a priority
matter for the international community, in particular
the United Nations system. My delegation therefore
reiterates our support for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security and resolution 1612 (2005) on children and
armed conflict, as well as other relevant resolutions.

South Africa is of the view that the appointment
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in February this year,
was a positive development that reaffirmed the
readiness of the United Nations to take action in
addressing the plight of women and children when
sexual violence has been a major problem or any grave
violation has been committed.

In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have played an important part in the
protection of civilians. In addition, modern-day
peacekeeping missions are by and large deployed to
address intra-State conflicts, and an increasing number
of United Nations peacekeeping operations have a
protection mandate. In that regard, in deploying
peacekeepers, the United Nations must ensure that all
parties to a conflict commit to and fulfil their
obligations with regard to non-combatants, as provided
in the Geneva Conventions. In my delegation's view,
that requires the Security Council and peacekeeping
missions to operate with great sensitivity to assure the
host country that they are there to work with the parties
and not to replace the State's authority. It therefore
requires a coordinated response by and greater
consultation among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates are well defined and
peacekeeping missions well equipped and adequately
resourced.

For us, the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons represents a major milestone for the continent
when it comes to the matter under consideration. The
deliberate targeting of civilians and the indiscriminate
and excessive use of force, including suicide attacks,
have become widespread in certain places, creating an
atmosphere of fear aimed at further destabilizing and
displacing civilian populations. In other conflict
situations, militarily superior parties, including
multinational forces, often respond with methods and
means of warfare that violate the principles of
distinction and proportionality. In such cases it is again
civilians who bear the brunt.

We therefore unequivocally condemn both
deliberate attacks on civilians and the loss of life as a
result of the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force, which is a gross violation of international
humanitarian law. As a signatory of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its two Additional Protocols
of 1977, South Africa wishes to underline the
importance of adhering to the principles contained
therein and calls for the full implementation of the
commitments made by States parties to those basic
tenets of international law. We support the good work
done by the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other humanitarian agencies in relation to the
promotion and implementation of international
humanitarian law.

The Security Council should also continue to call
on all parties to a conflict, including multinational
forces authorized by the Council, to uphold their
international humanitarian law and human rights
obligations and to report on steps taken to ensure the
protection of civilians during hostilities.

The issue of humanitarian access will require
further attention so as to find ways to ensure that those
in need of life-saving assistance receive it and that
those who provide it do so in a secure environment in
which attacks on humanitarian workers are not
tolerated.

In the case of the occupied Palestinian territories,
my delegation strongly urges that the blockade be
lifted in order to provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the people of Gaza, in accordance with
the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict must
remain a priority of the United Nations system. My
delegation is therefore of the view that finding a
common solution to the protection of civilians will
require the cooperation of each and every Member
State. We also believe that the protection of civilians
would be better addressed in partnership with regional
mechanisms and that strengthening dialogue and
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations would contribute to tackling common
security challenges and ensuring speedy action on the
ground.

In conclusion, my delegation firmly believes that
the protection of civilians would be better ensured by
addressing the root causes of conflict and by
preventing the outbreak of conflicts in the first
instance.

