Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank the
President for giving us the opportunity to address the

situation in the Middle East. I thank Mr. Serry for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mansour and Ambassador Prosor for their
statements.

Japan strongly supports a two-State solution,
under which Israel and a Palestinian State would live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
Japan supports the vision that the borders under a two-
State solution should be defined through negotiations
and based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed
swaps, in a way that would achieve peaceful
coexistence between a viable Palestinian state and
Israel with secure and recognized borders. Through
such a two-State solution, the Palestinians would
exercise their rights to establish an independent State,
Israel would enjoy a greatly enhanced security
environment, and both parties would be able to launch
full-fledged cooperation for mutual prosperity.

A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations. Japan has been
encouraging both sides to resume direct negotiations in
cooperation with the international community. Japan
strongly supports the speech made by President Obama
in May, which laid out a foundation for resuming
negotiations. We call on both sides to engage with the
United States and the international community and to
take steps that would create an environment conducive
to restarting direct negotiations.

Japan will not recognize any unilateral measures
that prejudge the outcome of the final status
negotiations. The two parties must abide by their
obligations under previous agreements, most
importantly the Road Map. We call on Israel again to
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. At the same time, we call
upon the Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to
improve security and fulfil its commitments to ceasing
violence and working against incitement. Japan has
strongly supported the State-building efforts of the
Palestinian Authority, and will continue to provide
assistance in that regard.

Japan remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip. We continue to call for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009). Japan is
keenly monitoring the Palestinian efforts to establish a
unified Government that will genuinely seek a two-
State solution.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our call on
the parties to make the utmost effort to resume direct
negotiations. Japan, along with the international
community, will continue to make efforts to help
realize a just and comprehensive peace in the region.

