Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Council and to wish you every success in guiding
our work. It is no easy task to begin a position of the
importance of Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation while simultaneously occupying the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success
in both positions, and we offer you the cooperation of
our delegation. I also take this opportunity to commend
and thank Ambassador Motoc for his effective and
efficient presidency last month. That efficiency is
demonstrated by the fact that, three days after that
presidency was concluded, Council members already
had the assessment of Romania's presidency of the
Council, which is quite notable. Finally, I should like
to welcome the presence of Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister
of Public Administration and Local Self-Government
of Serbia.

We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2004/613), which enables us to appreciate
the actions undertaken by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, by local
political leaders and by other groups to recover from
the physical and psychological damage caused by the
March violence. While we are mindful of their
seriousness, the events of March - and this is very
important for us - cannot become a permanent
obstacle to the reconciliation and normalization
process in Kosovo. The significant setbacks
experienced in achieving a truly multi-ethnic, stable
and democratic Kosovo require long-term measures.
Therefore, efforts must continue in areas such as the
rights of members of minority communities, human
rights, equality with regard to security, the
implementation of standards, freedom of movement
and sustainable return for all inhabitants of Kosovo,
the reconstruction of property, initiatives to promote
inter-ethnic reconciliation and reform of local
government. Regarding this last point, we note the
adoption in principle on 23 July of the framework
document by the Government of Kosovo.

We reaffirm the validity of the policy of
"standards before status" and of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, presented on 31 March and
recognized by the Council through its presidential
statement of 30 April (S/PRST/2004/ 13). Cooperation
between the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and UNMIK is now even more essential
for the implementation of the Plan.

We call upon the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to continue to implement the six
emergency measures outlined in the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan in response to the March
violence, particularly the remaining task mentioned in
paragraph 4 of the report: investigating the instigation
of the violence by certain authorities and by some
sectors of the media.

We believe that any initiative aimed at inter-
ethnic communication and dialogue is key if we are to
avoid another March and therefore deserves our
support. Therefore, we note with great interest the
instances of reconciliation between Kosovo Albanians
and Kosovo Serbs promoted by various groups,
including the "Contact Group Plus". It is essential to
continue to adopt measures to establish the rule of law
and to ensure its respect, including prosecuting the
perpetrators of acts of violence, confiscating illegal
weapons and suppressing organized crime. It is
promising to note the progress in that regard described
in the report. However, a multi-ethnic judicial system
must still be created, notwithstanding the setbacks of
March.

We believe it is urgent to rebuild damaged or
destroyed property or pay appropriate compensation
and to rebuild holy places and facilities for the return
of those displaced from their homes. Therefore, we see
as an important step the joint declaration signed in
Pristina on 14 July announcing that the reconstruction
of houses will be concluded before the beginning of
winter.

The constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly is an essential element for the success of this
undertaking. The Kosovo Assembly must keep to its
areas of competence, in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework, to
avoid situations such as those that occurred on 8 and
28 July.

We reiterate that, without the significant and
sustainable return of internally displaced persons -
who total 2,400 as a result of March's violence - and
refugees, despite the recent setbacks; without sufficient
freedom of movement; and without the disappearance
of the parallel institutions, the rebuilding of a multi-
ethnic, democratic society capable of integrating all of
Kosovo's inhabitants without exception will be
unfeasible.

In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the efforts
of Mr. Charles Brayshaw, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; to wish every
success to the new Special Representative, Mr. Soren
Jessen-Petersen; and to recall with gratitude the efforts
of Mr. Harri Holkeri.

