The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of September, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. John D.
Negroponte, Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
August 2002. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Negroponte for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Denmark, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), took a seat at
the Council table; Ms. Loj (Denmark), Mr. Kerim
(Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Annabi.


