Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for scheduling this open debate on
this important subject.

Like others, I also would like to commend the
Canadian delegation for bringing forward the question
of the protection of civilians during its recent term on
the Council. It is now important that this item remain
on the Security Council's agenda and that it be
addressed regularly. The two reports presented by the
Secretary-General, in September 1999 and March this
year, have contributed greatly to our understanding of
its many dimensions.

As we commented a year ago in the Council's
debate on this topic, in practical terms a great deal
depends on the ability of the Council to take speedy
and effective action to restore peace and security when
civilians are being targeted. We said then that the
Council's response in the case of East Timor set a new
benchmark in that regard. With more than 18 months'
experience of the East Timor operation now behind us,
that continues to be our view.

I want today just to pick up on three points in the
Secretary-General's report. As to the first point, I
would thoroughly endorse the Secretary-General's
emphasis on a need for a regional, rather than a
country-specific, focus in dealing with situations where
civilians are being targeted, because the spillover
effects, including through refugee flows, can be highly
destabilizing beyond national borders. This is true in
the South Pacific as it is elsewhere.

In the South Pacific we have, with our partners,
responded to conflicts that have taken many civilian
lives by establishing regionally based peace-monitoring
operations, as in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, and
Solomon Islands. The United Nations role in helping to
backstop such arrangements, as for example through its
Political Office on Bougainville, is very much
appreciated.

We consider the Secretary-General's recommendation
that the Council establish more regular cooperation with
regional organizations and arrangements to be highly
pertinent for the reasons he puts forward, and we
believe that it should be taken up.

As to my second point, the Secretary-General has
described the indispensable role of United Nations
personnel and non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
in providing humanitarian relief and assistance to
vulnerable people. He notes that the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee is looking at strengthening
cooperation on issues of staff security between the
United Nations and NGOs at the field level;
Mr. Oshima also referred to this earlier this afternoon.
Indeed, one of the recurring concerns in the Secretary-
General's report is the threat faced by United Nations
personnel and other humanitarian personnel when they
are trying to assist civilians in situations of armed
conflict. As the Secretary-General points out, the death
or injury of such personnel is a tragedy both for the
individuals directly concerned and for the civilians
they are trying to protect, as it may lead to assistance
being reduced or withdrawn.

This is not a new issue, and there was an open
debate and a presidential statement specifically on this
subject in the Council in February last year. At that
time the Council encouraged all States to become party
to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 1994. It is revealing that since
that debate and that call by the Council just over a year
ago, the number of States parties has almost doubled,
with an additional 22 parties since that time, including
some members of the Council. Calls by the Council do
have an impact. Nevertheless, more than two thirds of
United Nations members remain outside the
Convention, again, including some members of the
Council. In our view, a useful practical step that the
Council could take would be to repeat its earlier call
for adherence to the Convention, which plays such an
important role in the protection of civilians.

There are other practical steps that can be taken
as well. One is for the Council to ensure, in resolutions
establishing operations, that they are covered by the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. Not all operations are
covered - and, indeed, there are some recent examples
of operations that have not been covered - but it is
possible for the Council to ensure through its
resolutions that they are covered. Nor are humanitarian
personnel generally covered. But, again, they can be so
long as the United Nations or a specialized agency
enters into an agreement with the organization
concerned. In our View, that should become standard
practice. I would also note that our colleagues from
Japan and Argentina, speaking in the debate before me,
referred to action that should be taken in respect of the
Convention, and we agree.

Finally, in this respect I would note the Secretary-
General's comment that political and legal instruments
available for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict are in urgent need of updating. In our View, the
Convention on the Protection of United Nations and
Associated Personnel is one such instrument. A number
of the delegations that spoke in the Council on this
subject just over a year ago made the same comment,
particularly in relation to the scope of the Convention.
The debate in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly later this year will provide a timely
opportunity to review the Convention.

The third and final point I wish to take up is the
Secretary-General's comment that children are
especially vulnerable to the harm that conflict causes.
He is right to highlight this concern. New Zealand
welcomed the child soldiers Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and also, as a
practical measure, the appointment of Child Protection
Advisers to United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that, as a practical step, the
appointment of Child Protection Advisers should be a
standard feature of all United Nations peace operations.

