Dr. Stamps (Zimbabwe): The world has recently
been through a highly expensive and largely
uncoordinated exercise to eliminate the risk of some
people losing some money, some places losing some data
and some people disrupting their busy schedules. To some
of us, in the real world, this only induces a sense of
wonder that intelligent beings in the metropolitan
countries can be so oblivious, so colour-blind, to what has
happened in the African continent over the past 15 years.

Some $600 billion is estimated to have been spent
on the millennium bug - a largely irrelevant threat,
certainly, to us - while the world at large has laconically
observed the exponential growth of the HIV epidemic in
areas not materially linked to the growth of the
international economy.

Now, with respect, ladies and gentlemen, comrades
and friends, the proverbial chickens are coming home to
roost. Africa may be the world's largest man-made island,
as a result of the Suez Canal, but man's insatiable desire
to explore and exploit distant and unknown, not to say
dangerous, destinations will always overcome any cordon
sanitaire, any island mentality or any sane or logical
precautions that science, medicine or propriety may
prescribe. So it is futile for the global community to turn
its back on the ethnic destruction which the current
epidemic is wreaking in my country and my continent.
We have become used, even inured, to the verbal abuse
to which some of our leaders have been subjected. We
have accepted the repeated canard from international
agencies that, except for one country, there is no political
leadership in Africa on the issue of AIDS. Yet,
surprisingly, many of us, my own country included, have
achieved the impossible. We have induced our own
populations to understand that the exercise of a
completely normal, necessary and entirely pleasurable
human function can have fatal consequences. I note from
the manner in which the Western entertainment industry,
so-called, promotes the hedonistic fruits of promiscuity,
with no intimation of the potentially fatal results, and the
rapid growth of the numbers of young, northern

 

hemisphere women who are becoming HIV-positive, that
metropolitan countries have something to learn from us.

In Zimbabwe the rates of sexually transmitted
infections for individuals peaked in 1990 and have been
going down since then. The rates of new HIV infection
peaked in 1995 and have been going down since then.
Zimbabwe, nevertheless, is currently experiencing one of
the highest prevalence rates of HIV seropositivity in the
world, but of course the rate is derived from extrapolation
of sentinel surveillance data, and the sites were chosen
originally with a View to detecting newly arising infections
early. Thus, antenatal populations, STD clinic attenders and
hospital in-patients form the main cohorts of our national
statistical construct. Whether these rates will change as a
result of our national Voluntary Counselling and Testing
centres, where healthy people seek to determine their HIV
status, is information that is eagerly awaited. Suffice it to
say that the small cohort of voluntary blood donors -
about 8,000 - has consistently shown very much lower
rates of HIV seropositivity, and these rates are
progressively declining as well, showing a dramatic
reduction in seroconversion rates since 1994 and indicating
that positive behaviour change is realistically achievable.
Zimbabwe, uniquely in Africa, has screened all donated
blood for HIV since September 1985, when the first case
was identified in our country.

By the end of 1999, the National AIDS Policy for
Zimbabwe had, after three and a half years of wide
consultation throughout the country, been completed, and
the statute establishing the National AIDS Council, which
involves all stakeholders, was approved by Parliament. The
fiscus introduced an AIDS levy at the rate of 3 per cent on
income tax and corporate tax to provide secure financing
for the activities of the Council. A previous attempt to
create a cross-sectoral national AIDS council foundered
because it depended too heavily on donor support and
because of inadequate inputs from the Ministry of Health,
as well as having no executive function.

This innovation was launched by our President on
World AIDS Day, 1 December 1999, at a day-long
convention in the capital, attended by more than 5,000
people. Particularly challenging were the presentations and
requests from school-age children developed by the
Children's Parliament, which had held its latest session in
September.

The challenge now is to deal with the epidemic
effectively, consistently and fully. No country, let alone one
undergoing extreme financial distraint as a result of flawed
macroeconomic policies, adverse terms of trade, an
economic reform programme which has left just about
every Zimbabwean worse off and a debt service burden
consuming more than 38 per cent of the Government
budget, interest rates alone being four times the allocation
to the total health budget - no country can carry the
weight of the health, economic and social effects of the
devastation wrought by AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa.

This is why we welcome the concern shown by the
Security Council, through its current President, the United
States of America, and the opportunity to present not only
our statistics, but also a few of our achievements and our
proposals, to this highly influential body, confident that
our voice will be heard.

We need to examine and correct those obstructions
to our provision for this disaster. In Zimbabwe we lose
nearly 1,000 people a week to HIV/AIDS; 15 per cent of
those are children under five who have contracted it
through their parents; 27 per cent of expenditure in our
health institutions is in treating, usually unsuccessfully,
HIV-related conditions; we have no access to modern
therapies; breastfeeding is universally practised, and
access to what the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) calls acceptable alternatives is not
feasible for any but a few well-off urban families.

The question we ask is, is this merely lack of
understanding or a new form of racial discrimination,
another ethnic cleansing process? The rich nations rail
extensively against the mistreatment of two journalists in
my country, an event we have admitted to be judged in
court, and yet we are supposed to accept that withholding
available therapies from those who need them is not an
offence against human rights, the right to health being one
of the paramount, universal rights. The disease affects
everyone - poor, rich; urban, rural; employee, employer,
unemployed; educated, ignorant; married, single; young,
old; resident, tourist.

As Mary Fisher, a wealthy socialite infected by her
husband, succinctly pointed out at the United States of
America's Republican National Convention in Houston
some years ago, "HIV asks only one thing of those it
attacks: 'Are you human?"'
I thank the Council for listening.

