We express our sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania for their insights. Let me begin by expressing our deepest condolences to the families and colleagues of the two peacekeepers in Mali, one from Cambodia and the other from El Salvador, who recently died as victims of the coronavirus disease pandemic. The world is facing a major threat, which is impacting us profoundly and testing our resilience at all levels. For this reason, it is now more important than ever that we secure the gains accomplished thus far to bring about peace and security in the Sahel. We understood and supported, as a matter of principle and common sense, the plea for a ceasefire in all conflicts during the pandemic, bearing the hope that the pandemic threat would somehow raise awareness of certain groups and lead to halt in their operations. However, the sad reality is that the Sahel region continues to be destabilized by terrorist groups and intercommunal violence. It is deeply disturbing to witness the dramatic deterioration of security in the Sahel region, in countries such as Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, resulting from terrorist attacks on civilians and security forces, as well as the surge in intercommunal violence, exacerbated by the same terrorist groups, which claimed the lives of more than 4,000 people in 2019 in those three countries alone and created a dire humanitarian situation, with 14.7 million people in need of assistance and more than 1.4 million internally displaced across the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Another matter of concern is the increased coordination and cooperation among terrorist groups in the Sahel, which are currently taking advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to increase their attacks and usurp State authority, as well as their connection to transnational organized crime syndicates to finance their operations. This confirms that our efforts to accomplish peace and security in the Sahel region must continue and be strengthened. It is encouraging to hear about the progress made in the reporting period in operationalizing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which allowed it to carry out a number of operations, and in implementing several necessary regional and international security initiatives launched to support the Force and counter-terrorism efforts in the region, such as Task ForceTakuba, under Operation Barkhane, supported by a number of countries, including Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, the Niger, and the United Kingdom; the Coalition for the Sahel; as well as the efforts of the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States and the G-5 Sahel to increase the number of troops. Challenges, on the other hand, do remain and should be promptly addressed to pave the way to the full operationalization of the Joint Force, demanding greater coordination at the tripartite level - among the European Union, the Joint Force and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) - to tackle shortcomings in the model of support used by MINUSMA. As we all know, the security situation in the Sahel region is a complex one, demanding a comprehensive approach. We therefore commend the initiative of the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel region, through the Coalition of the Sahel, to focus on four pillars: efforts to combat terrorism; capacity-building for defence and security forces; support for the re-establishment of State presence; and development assistance. We encourage the leadership of the Sahel to guarantee the proactive and broad participation of women and youth across these pillars and other efforts towards the consolidation of peace and security in the region. Finally, we highlight the importance of accountability and adherence to human rights and international humanitarian law, especially within the framework of counter-terrorism strategies, to strengthen the credibility of and receptiveness to all efforts.
