Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) over the past 90 days. Under his outstanding
leadership, the work of the Committee has been
proceeding in a balanced and orderly way. China
expresses its appreciation for this and attaches great
importance to and gives consistent support to the
Committee and its work.

On 9 June, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1984 (2011) (see S/PV.6552) on the renewal
of the mandate of the Panel of Experts under the
Committee. China hopes that the Panel will strictly
implement the principles and requirements enshrined in
the resolutions and the guidance of the Committee in
its work, in keeping with the principles of neutrality,
objectivity and independence, and, on the basis of
reliable information, prepare reports and formulate
recommendations in order to play its due role in the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

China believes that dialogue and negotiations on
the basis of progressiveness, equality and mutual
benefit represents the only way to reach a
comprehensive, adequate and lasting settlement to the
Iranian nuclear issue and meet the common interests of
all parties. China hopes that all parties will intensify
their diplomatic efforts and that a new round of
dialogue will be launched as soon as possible between
the six parties and Iran.

As a signatory to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran is entitled to the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It must also honour its
relevant international obligations. China hopes that
Iran will take positive steps to improve the confidence
of the international community in the peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme.

China believes that so long as all parties remain
patient, adopt a flexible and pragmatic attitude,
mobilize positive efforts and take proactive measures
to continue to improve mutual confidence, they will
surely be able to promote substantive progress in the
dialogue and negotiations. China will continue to work
with the other parties in playing a constructive role to
this end.

