Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): First, allow me to express our most sincere
and heartfelt condolences to the delegation of Egypt and
the delegation of Sweden on the condemnable attacks
that their countries have recently suffered.

My delegation thanks you, Madam President, for
organizing this meeting, and, at the same time, we
would like to take this opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, for her presence.

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

Guatemala commends the efforts made by the
brotherly country of Haiti, which have contributed to
its stabilization and the strengthening of its democracy,
in particular the peaceful conclusion of the electoral
process on 7 February. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate President Jovenel Moise on
his election.

Guatemala welcomes the leadership and commitment
shown by the national authorities in financing,
organizing and providing security for the holding of
credible and inclusive of elections despite the adverse
humanitarian conditions resulting from the impact of
Hurricane Matthew. The success of the elections and
the transfer of power is an example of the political
maturity of the Haitian authorities.

We recognize Haiti's efforts to strengthen its
justice and human rights sector. We encourage the
authorities to continue working towards ensuring that
their institutions, particularly the Supreme Court, are
fully functional, which is needed for strengthening
the rule of law and the standing of the institutions of
the country.

We believe that, when the Security Council
considers the Haitian national context, it must do so in
a comprehensive manner, in particular by taking into
account the humanitarian situation, which was severely
aggravated following the impact of Hurricane Matthew
on 4 October, the consequences of which are still
affecting the population, owing to the limited access to
drinking water and the presence of presumed cases of
cholera. In that context, we commend the coordinated
efforts led by the Government of Haiti, with the support
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the country team and humanitarian
partners, to address the various needs arising from the
effects of Hurricane Matthew.

Furthermore, we believe that it is worth underlining
that the role and presence of the United Nations in Haiti
must have as their main goal to ensure a responsible
transition based on MINUSTAH's achievements of
the past several years and to ensure the continued
support of the country's priority needs. To that end, it
will be essential to ensure that the withdrawal of the
uniformed members of the peacekeeping mission does
not foster the perception of a security vacuum and
that the successor mission is focused on the rule of
law, human rights and the strengthening of the police.
We firmly believe that any transition must be carried
out in a responsible, gradual and realistic manner in
accordance with the country's priorities and needs so
as to achieve sustainable peace in Haiti.

In conclusion, Guatemala supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations and appreciates the
leadership of Ms. Sandra Honore and the work of
MINUSTAH's civilian and uniformed personnel. The
degree of commitment shown over the past 12 years to
fulfil the mission's mandate has reflected a coordinated
effort on the part of the international community that
has borne fruit. Guatemala has participated in those
stabilization efforts in Haiti and has contributed to
MINUSTAH since 2004. Our commitment to the
brotherly country of Haiti has been firm and consistent,
and it is our heartfelt wish to see Haiti achieve stability
and development for which we reiterate our support in
the Council.

