Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): For
months now, France, the United Kingdom and the
United States have sought to unite the Security Council
in response to the heinous crimes committed in Syria
involving the repeated, corroborated use of chemical
weapons against civilians over several years. These
criminal acts continue today, as we speak. We must put
an end to them.

The stakes involved are extremely serious, above
and beyond the situation in Syria. More than a century
ago, the world learned with dismay of the horrors of
chemical warfare when chlorine gas was first used
against civilians on 15 April 1915 in Ypres, Belgium.
The international community decided at that time
that it was duty-bound to ensure that such atrocities
never recur.

The current retrogression is therefore especially
terrible. What we once thought impossible is now an
imminent danger; what we had once thought to be in
the past is happening right now before our very eyes.
Prohibited weapons have been used several times in
the Syrian conflict, despite that fact that 192 States are
committed, through their ratification of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, to never using such weapons again and to
destroying their existing stockpiles.

I call on all present to fully grasp the extent of
our responsibility today. We face not only the threat
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
we face the repeated, methodical and barbarous use of
weapons of mass destruction - in this case, chemical
weapons - against civilians. On the scale of threats to
international peace and security, we have hit 10. That
is why France believes that weakness and inaction are
not and cannot be an option. It is why, I recall, that
the members of the Security Council, together and
unanimously, in September 2013 resolutely decided that

"in the event of non-compliance with this
resolution, including unauthorized transfer of
chemical weapons, or any use of chemical weapons
by anyone in the Syrian Arab Republic, to impose
measures under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter" (resolution 2118 (2013), para. 21).

Today we have reached this moment of truth,
when it is no longer a matter of evading or looking
away. Many instances of the use of chemical
weapons have been confirmed and continue to be
reported - very accurately, professionally and
methodically. The responsibility of the Syrian regime
was established in three of such cases without any
ambiguity at all. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
has also demonstrated the responsibility of the Da'esh
terrorist organization in a case of chemical attack. It
is now up to the Security Council, as guardian of our
system of collective security, to act and not just talk.
It has the duty and the responsibility to do so, as it has
committed itselfto do. This is a necessity consistentwith
the establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
on which the Council has reiterated its confidence.

The continuation of the work of the Mechanism,
decided unanimously with the adoption of resolution
2319 (2016) last November, has been indispensable.
But that cannot delay or supplant a Vital action on our
part to sanction those who have flouted the prohibition:
an action drawing the necessary conclusions from
established determinations by a Mechanism that we
unanimously renewed, and an action, finally, to send
a warning and a message of firmness against those
who would consider breaking the taboo in the future.
By putting off acting on the demand for justice to
which we have collectively committed, abdicating our
responsibility, would send an irresponsible signal of
impunity, which we must avoid.

My country, which has long been engaged in the
fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, cannot accept that. The international
situation in which we find ourselves calls for our
immediate and firm reaction. It is up to us to protect
the chemical non-proliferation regime, and with it
all non-proliferation regimes. That is a treasure we
possess, for which we are responsible and of which we
are the guardians.

We come late to this today. That is why France,
together with its British and American partners,
wanted to engage in good faith in a negotiation to bring
together all the members of the Council around to the
appropriate response. The result of our efforts has
produced a balanced proposal aimed at punishing all
the actors involved that is based on targeted measures.

First, the draft resolution (S/2017/l72), which
provides for the adoption of measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, identifies a
violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and condemns the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. Secondly, it reaffirms
the Council's conviction that those responsible for the
use of chemical weapons must be prosecuted. Thirdly, it
reiterates the need for the Syrian regime to comply with
all its international obligations. Fourthly, it reaffirms
all measures taken against Da'esh and the terrorist
groups listed by the Council. Fifthly, it reiterates the
measures specific to the sanctions regime. It establishes
a sanctions committee, supported by a panel of experts.
It establishes the appropriate criteria for listing entities
and individuals responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, in connection with which it includes a list of
entities and individuals. And it establishes an embargo
on sensitive chemicals and on weapons and materials
that could be used to import dangerous chemical
substances, as well as on helicopters.

An inability to act, as I said, would constitute a
blameworthy move backward for the Council. Beyond
our political divisions, we have in the past been able
to mobilize in unison on non-proliferation issues. If
today we are not able to discuss and agree on issues of
such gravity, if we are not able to echo the collective
consciousness of humankind, we will have failed in our
responsibilities. Our credibility is at stake.

In the noisy clamour of our world, there are
moments of truth when we can no longer dodge our
responsibilities. This vote is that moment of truth,
when our fundamental basic values, the law and our
security are at stake. Values: who would not prosecute
those who have killed innocent women and children
in cold blood, in the most atrocious and reprehensible
of conditions? That would be a negation of our entire
civilization. The law: the Council has been unanimous
in saying that we must prosecute those responsible for
those murdered with chemical weapons. What are we
waiting for in implementing laws that we ourselves
have contributed to putting in place? Lastly, our
security: if we close our eyes to the use of chemical
weapons against civilians, what legitimacy will we have
tomorrow to condemn nuclear terrorism or apocalyptic
attacks using bacteriological agents? Who would be
responsible before history?

At stake today are not tactical interests; at stake
are the very fundamental values of our security. The
world is watching and waiting on us. Let us rise to our
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
Let us rise to ensure the power of the law in the service
of the values of the United Nations and the interests of
present and future generations. If for dubious reasons
we do not succeed today, know that France will never
give up.

