Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): Since this is the
first time my delegation has spoken this month at a
formal meeting of the Security Council, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of December. I
should also like to express my delegation's deep
appreciation to Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of Oman for
the efficient way in which he and his delegation guided
the affairs of the Security Council during the month of
November.

The formal signing of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the
Presidents of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia
in Paris yesterday is the most important milestone so far
in the effort to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia. We could almost hear the world
sigh with relief that the most terrible conflict to have
rocked Europe since the Second World War was at last
over.
After four years of war, after hundreds of thousands
of dead and maimed, after horrific destruction, there is
finally a solid basis for peace. Guns must remain silent in
Bosnia, and the order of the day for former adversaries
must be reconciliation and reconstruction.

While today we applaud the political leaders of the
South Slavs for the courageous step that they finally took

 

in Dayton and sealed in Paris, we cannot but think of all
the death, human suffering and destruction that particularly
the civilian population of the region had to endure over the
past four years.

Was it really impossible to achieve a political
settlement that would have prevented this senseless war?
Was it really unavoidable to spill the blood of all those
innocent people and to endure all the horrific destruction
and suffering, before it dawned on some politicians that
true and lasting peace does not come out of a barrel of a
Kalashnikov, but is achieved through dialogue at the
negotiating table?

The resolution that we have just adopted gives a green
light to the deployment of the multinational Implementation
Force (IFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Among the IFOR
contingents that will in the next days pour into Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be almost a thousand young men and
women from my country. The decision of the Government
and Parliament of the Czech Republic to participate in
IFOR is an unequivocal expression of my country's deep
interest in the establishment of durable peace and stability
in the region of the South Slavs. It is also the continuation
of the Czech involvement in the United Nations
peace-keeping efforts.

IFOR, authorized by the Security Council and under
the command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), will be in Bosnia to keep peace at the request of
the parties themselves. IFOR forces will be tough and
uncompromising in carrying out their mandate. Their one-
year mission has clear objectives, and IFOR has the
necessary means to fulfil them.

The deployment of IFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina
constitutes a serious commitment on the part of the
international community to help the peace process.
However, let there be no mistake: the main burden of
responsibility for the success or failure of the peace process
rests squarely on the shoulders of the Bosniacs, the Croats
and the Serbs. They have one year to translate, with the
help of the international community, the still-fragile peace
into an irreversible process.

Despite our great satisfaction over the success of the
peace talks in Dayton and the signing of the Peace
Agreement in Paris, we are very much aware of the crucial
linkage between maintaining and strengthening peace in the
region and the urgent need for its reconstruction. We
therefore welcome the establishment, at the London
Conference on implementing civilian aspects of the Peace

 

Agreement, of the office of the High Representative, who
will coordinate the reconstruction effort in the regions
devastated by war.

The Czech Republic also welcomes the
establishment of the Peace Implementation Council and
its Steering Board. By taking this decision, the London
Conference has established a proper framework for the
implementation of particularly the civilian aspects of the
Dayton Agreement and is moving the process of
reconstruction into its practical phase.

The role of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not end today. On the contrary, it
should be revitalized. The United Nations should, together
with or in parallel with other institutions and
organizations, focus on activities which will contribute
most to the advancement of the peace process in Bosnia.
In this endeavour it can count on the full support of the
Czech Republic.

