Mr. Okuda (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate. I would also like to thank
the Chairs of the Council's three counter-terrorism-
related Committees for their respective briefings on
developments during the past six months. Terrorism
continues to be a serious threat to the international
community. Countering terrorism requires a
comprehensive and multifaceted approach, as well as
enduring engagement. The three Committees play a
significant role in that context and should continue
their efforts to develop further effective measures.

The threat of terrorism posed by Al-Qaida and the
Taliban continues unabated. The sanctions imposed
under resolution 1267 (1999) - namely, travel bans,
the freezing of assets and arms embargoes - continue
to play a crucial role. In order to fulfil its
responsibilities, the 1267 Committee is now devoting a
substantial amount of work to reviewing the
consolidated list, but adequate information from other
Member States, in particular from designating States, is
indispensable in order to have a meaningful review. As
the Chair of the 1267 Committee stated in his report,
some entries lack adequate and relevant information to
ensure necessary sanctions and, in order to retain them
on the list, additional information is required. In that
regard, we join the Chair of the 1267 Committee in
strongly requesting the relevant States to consider the
request for updated information seriously.

The circumstances in Afghanistan and Pakistan
remain acute. With regard to Afghanistan, Japan is
committed to supporting the effort by the Afghan
Government to improve the security situation,
including through its vigorous assistance to the Afghan
police sector and the disbandment of illegal armed
groups, as well as other forms of assistance. As
concerns Pakistan, the Pakistan donors conference and
the Friends of Democratic Pakistan Group ministerial
meeting were held on 17 April in Tokyo. Participating
States affirmed their intention to assist and support
Pakistan's efforts to counter terrorism. At the meeting,

Japan pledged to enhance its assistance to Pakistan.
Japan believes that a regional approach and close
relations with neighbouring countries are indispensable
in combating extremists who conduct activities across
borders.

Given the increasingly international nature of
terrorism, each Member State needs to strengthen its
counter-terrorism capacity. In that regard, enhancing
assistance for capacity-building is a matter of urgency.
During its term as Chair of the G-8 last year, Japan
took the initiative to strengthen cooperation between
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). We
commend this year's Chair, Italy, for furthering that
effort.

We welcome the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and CTED in promoting assistance
for countering terrorism in close cooperation with the
other two Committees. We hope to see further such
efforts. CTED should also continue its active
contribution to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), bearing in mind
the clear distinction between the work of CTED and
that of CTITF. Whereas CTED identifies assistance
needs and promotes the provision of assistance in
cooperation with donor States, CTITF ensures overall
coordination and coherence of counter-terrorism
activities within the United Nations system.

The CTC's Preliminary Implementation Assessment
(PIA) is a crucial tool, as it provides the only objective
assessment conducted by the United Nations of the
implementation of counter-terrorism efforts in each
State. We welcome the fact that the first review of the
PIA has been undertaken, as that stock-taking exercise
enhances the tailored dialogue between Member States
and the Committee. We also welcome the submission
by CTED of the technical guide, which aims to ensure
the consistent assessment of the PIA.

Nuclear terrorism continues to pose what is
potentially the gravest threat to the international
community. Japan includes the prevention of nuclear
terrorism as one of the 11 benchmarks of its global
nuclear disarmament policy. In that connection, we
welcome United States President Obama's proposal to
undertake new international efforts to strengthen the
control of nuclear material and to hold a global summit
on nuclear security.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays an important role in preventing
terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). Japan attaches great importance to
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) in the context of
worldwide engagement on the non-proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery. In order to
promote implementation, it is useful for the 1540
Committee to have dialogue with other international,
regional and subregional actors. Japan will continue
and enhance such dialogue through other forums,
including the G-8.

Lastly, I would like in this context to mention the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism. The Convention, which has been
ratified by 52 States, will be an effective tool in the
prevention of nuclear terrorism. We therefore
encourage those who have not yet done so to join the
Convention without delay.

