Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to join the previous speakers in
extending my delegation's appreciation to Foreign
Minister Rodriguez Giavarini for presiding over today's
open debate. We are also highly appreciative of
Argentina's initiative of taking up once again this
important and urgent question before the Council, drawing
upon the Council's previous discussions and actions on
the issue. Our thanks also go to Ms. Frechette, Deputy
Secretary-General, and Ms. Bertini for their very
important introductory statements.

 

We note with a sense of satisfaction that, since my
delegation first introduced this urgent issue to the Security
Council during our presidency in May 1997, the Council
has taken a series of important follow-up measures. It
adopted resolution 1265 (1999) in September 1999 and a
number of presidential statements on this subject. I would
like to reiterate my Government's conviction that the
Council should continue to take the lead in dealing with
this urgent issue. My delegation therefore welcomes this
open debate and the subsequent adoption of a presidential
statement as another step in the right direction.

Having said that, let me make brief comments on
some issues to which my delegation attaches importance.
First, we are of the View that the Security Council should
continue to forge ahead with international efforts to break
the culture of impunity by bringing to justice those who
attack United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel in situations of conflict. The
Council has already set a good precedent in this regard by
establishing the two ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendation in his report (S/1999/957) that,
in cases of non-compliance, the Security Council could
consider taking enforcement measures to facilitate the arrest
and surrender of those accused by the two Tribunals. In this
connection, we also hope that the statute of the
International Criminal Court will enter into force as soon as
possible.

Secondly, we fully agree that national Governments
and the parties to conflict should bear primary responsibility
for guaranteeing the safety and security of United Nations
and associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. We echo the suggestions made by Ms.
Frechette and Ms. Bertini this morning that serious efforts
should be made to strengthen thorough investigations of and
strict law enforcement against the violators of international
humanitarian norms at both the national and international
levels. Specific measures should be taken to hold
transgressing parties and their leaders liable, both physically
and financially, to their victims, under international law.

Thirdly, we welcome General Assembly resolution
54/ 192, adopted last December, on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations
personnel, which sets out the guiding principles for
enhancing their protection. In this resolution the Assembly
requested the Secretary-General to submit a report by May
2000 containing detailed analysis and recommendations
addressing the scope of legal protection under the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We look forward to this report so that an
appropriate mechanism may be explored for extending the
coverage of legal protection in conflict situations.

Last but not least, my delegation shares the View
expressed by previous speakers that when the Security
Council takes a decision on peacekeeping operations in
support of humanitarian operations, the Council should
provide them with a clear mandate to protect United
Nations and associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel, together with sufficient resources to implement
the mandate. Clear rules of engagement are also required.
The United Nations has learned painful yet instructive
lessons from its past experiences in dealing with the
situations in Somalia, Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia,
which are applicable to current and future peacekeeping
operations. In this regard, we support resolution 1289
(2000) on Sierra Leone, adopted two days ago, in which
the Council underlined the importance of the safety and
security of United Nations and associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel.

As the involvement of the United Nations has
steadily grown in recent years in peacekeeping and
humanitarian operations in conflict zones, the international
community has an enormous obligation to rise to the
daunting challenge of providing adequate safety and
security to United Nations and associated personnel, and
to humanitarian personnel involved in these operations.

We welcome today's open debate as an opportunity
to once again draw the urgent attention of the
international community to this desperately serious and
pressing issue. What we need now is not words, but
actions. We sincerely hope that more concrete and action-
oriented recommendations will emerge and be tenaciously
pursued in close collaboration with other United Nations
organs and agencies, with the full support of the entire
United Nations membership. Taking this opportunity, I
would like to reiterate my Government's strong
commitment to the cause of protecting United Nations
and associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict situations, and I assure you, Mr. President, that
the Republic of Korea will continue to be actively
involved in these common efforts.

