Mr. Mahmoud: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present to the Security Council the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/409) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). This is the first
report since the Council adopted resolution 1923
(2010) on 25 May, authorizing a revised mandate for
MINURCAT. The report before the Council contains an
assessment of the security and humanitarian situations,
of the progress made towards the fulfilment by the
Government of Chad of the tasks and benchmarks set
out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 1923 (2010),
and of the implementation of the mandate of
MINURCAT. The report also contains an assessment of
international and regional options for the Central
African Republic based on the Secretary-General's
evaluation of the consequences of MINURCAT's
departure from the north-eastern part of that country.

Following the adoption of resolution 1923
(2010), MINURCAT has worked to adjust its tasks and
posture in eastern Chad to the new mandate.
Accordingly, on 27 May its military component ceased
all area security patrols and escorts, and confined its
activities to those outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11 of
the resolution. By 15 July, MINURCAT's military
component had been reduced to 2,174, with 1,878 in
Chad and 296 in north-eastern Central African
Republic, and is now based in four main locations -
10-48016
three in eastern Chad and one in north-eastern Central
African Republic.

As far as the security situation is concerned, I
should like to summarize it as follows. Some criminal
activities and banditry remained the main threat to
security in eastern Chad during the one and a half
months covered by the report. As in earlier periods,
there have been no reports of deliberate targeting of
civilians or of fresh significant internal displacements.

As of 27 May, when MINURCAT's military
suspended area patrolling and escorts, the Government
took over full responsibility for the security and
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers in
eastern Chad. Despite the complexities of the security
situation and logistical and other limitations, the
Government has spared no effort to rise to the
challenge.

The Detachement integre de securite (DIS) has
increased its escorts of humanitarian workers and
patrols in and around refugee camps and key cities by
21 to 25 per cent compared to earlier periods. On 1 July,
the Government also launched a new system for the
coordination of security patrols and escorts for
humanitarian workers. This system, which is being
established in 13 key locations in eastern Chad, will
supersede the earlier coordination mechanism run by
MINURCAT. The joint Chad-Sudan border force -
whose headquarters are scheduled to move this month
from E1 Geneina to Abe'che - also continued to patrol
along the border with a view to interdicting cross-border
arms movement and banditry. This has resulted in an
increase of cross-border trade and civilian population
movement.

Following the spate of security incidents against
humanitarians in June, President Deby replaced the
Government of the Ouaddai region in Abeche. In July,
the number of incidents decreased, also thanks to the
start of the rainy season.

As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned,
there have been encouraging reports of some returns of
internally displaced persons (IDPs). The recent
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur,
however, has prompted new, albeit so far limited,
arrivals of Sudanese refugees. Some 70 international
humanitarian organizations continue to provide aid to
the 255,000 Sudanese refugees and 168,000 internally
displaced persons in eastern Chad, and to 64,000
refugees from the Central African Republic in south-
10-48016
eastern Chad. An estimated 150,000 members of the
host population also received humanitarian assistance.

Since April 2010, humanitarian actors have
reported a steady stream of returns in the Dar Sila and
Ouaddai regions, estimated at 20,000 people. Time will
be required, however, to determine how many of these
returns represent permanent or seasonal movements.

Pursuant to resolution 1923 (2010), on 1 June the
Government of Chad and the United Nations launched
the Joint High-Level Working Group, chaired by the
head of the Coordination nationale d'appui au
deploiement de la force internationale a I'est du Tchad
and composed of representatives of MINURCAT, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Chadian security forces. The Joint
High-Level Working Group has been meeting monthly
to assess the situation on the ground with respect to the
protection of civilians and the implementation of
measures adopted by the Government towards
implementing the tasks set out in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1923 (2010).

In the meantime, MINURCAT continued to
implement its mandate in the areas of the rule of law,
including the provision of assistance and advice to the
DIS and the justice and prison sectors in eastern Chad;
human rights monitoring; and promotion and
protection, with particular attention to sexual and
gender-based violence. At the same time, it has
produced plans to consolidate the gains achieved in
these areas and to lay the foundation for their
sustainability by the Government of Chad and its
partners. In this regard, MINURCAT is discussing with
the United Nations country team ways to help absorb
some of the Mission's activities in the current planning
processes, and particularly the early recovery plan for
eastern Chad, on which the United Nations
Development Programme is in the lead.

The sustainability of the DIS is an issue that will
require sustained attention by the Government of Chad,
especially given the short time remaining before
MINURCAT's withdrawal. The Government and the
United Nations have established a joint technical
working group that has been working since June on a
plan for the sustainability of the DIS.

MINURCAT, for its part, has already started
activities towards the consolidation and sustainability of
the DIS. Most of the construction projects in support of
the DIS are expected to be completed by 31 December,
3
except the drilling of wells in the police stations, which
can start only following the end of the rainy season in
October.

As far as the Central African Republic is
concerned, the Secretary-General has outlined in the
report before the Council two options on how best to
mitigate the impact of MINURCAT's departure from
the north-eastern part of that country. The threat to
civilians, IDPs, refugees and humanitarian workers in
the north-eastern area remains real. The lack of
sustained progress in combating security threats in
north-eastern Central African Republic is mainly the
result of the weak presence of its armed forces and the
lack of logistical and other means from which it
suffers.

In this context, the Secretary-General has
presented two options to the Security Council. The
first, as members may recall, provides for a United
Nations peacekeeping force in north-eastern Central
African Republic that would deter insecurity in the
area and provide in extremis security and extraction for
humanitarian actors until the Government has
developed adequate capacity to assume this deterrent
role. The Secretariat estimates that the deployment of
approximately 1,000 personnel, military and civilian,
would be needed. Preliminary estimates of the cost of
the operation range anywhere between $98 and $122
million per year.

The second option would focus on strengthening
long- to medium-term efforts in building the Central
African Republic State capacities for security and the
rule of law, coupled with immediate measures to
strengthen the capability of the armed forces of the
Central African Republic in the north-east. This option
could be complemented by the deployment of joint
border patrol forces between the Government of the
Central African Republic on the one hand and those of
Chad and the Sudan on the other, pursuant to
agreements the Central African Republic signed with
its neighbours some time ago.

Assistance for the strengthening of the Central
African Republic's State and security capacity could be
provided on a bilateral or multilateral basis, including
through the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), with the support of the African Union
(AU) and other regional implementing partners whose
presence through the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) is,
in reality, in the Central African Republic. In
preliminary contacts with ECCAS and MICOPAX
officials, as well as the AU, most of these interlocutors
have expressed readiness to examine this option.

Yesterday, Mr. President, you had a chance to
meet with Foreign Minister Antoine Gambi, who
conveyed to you the position of the Government of the
Central African Republic. This position was expressed
to me in June by Prime Minister Touadera and, in July,
confirmed to me by President Francois Bozize, who
reiterated that the preferred option for the north-eastern
Central African Republic would be the one that builds
the capacity of the Central African Republic security
forces.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, and
based on his assessment of the situation and the
position of the Government of the Central African
Republic as stated above, the Secretary-General is of
the view that the second option is the more appropriate
course of action. He stands ready, of course, to lend his
support. In this regard, allow me to add that the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration on the
Central African Republic could play a catalytic role.

Further to resolution 1923 (2010), MINURCAT
has undertaken the planning necessary for the full
withdrawal of its civilian and military components by
31 December 2010, and for the Mission's liquidation
starting on 1 January 2011, unless the Council decides
otherwise. In this connection, I wish to state that the
initial drawdown of the military component was
carried out in an orderly and secure manner. In that
regard, I wish to express my appreciation for the
cooperation MINURCAT has received from the
Government of Chad. I would also like to express my
appreciation to all troop- and police-contributing
countries for their unfailing support to MINURCAT
during this last phase of its mandate.

(spoke in French)

To conclude, I would like to underscore the three
following points.

During the six weeks following the adoption of
resolution 1923 (2010), the Government of Chad has
spared no effort to gradually assume its responsibility
for the protection of civilians. When necessary,
vigorous action has been taken.

Secondly, the Detachement integre' de securite
(DIS) has made considerable progress alongside the
10-48016
other security forces in providing protection for the
humanitarian space. However, a great deal remains to
be done by the Government and MINURCAT during
the Mission's final few months. Many challenges
remain to be overcome. Ensuring the sustainability of
the DIS will be a long and painstaking process that will
require the full attention of the Government and its
partners.

Thirdly and finally, an urgent solution will have
to be found over the coming two months to fill the
security vacuum following the departure of
MINURCAT from the north-eastern Central African
Republic.

