Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.

After four years, millions of civilians - men,
women and children - continue to bear the brunt of
the conflict in eastern Ukraine, which has become yet
another protracted crisis. Over 2,700 civilians have
been killed and up to 9,000 civilians have been injured
since the outbreak of hostilities. The conflict-affected
area is one of the most mine-contaminated areas in
the world. Landmines maimed or killed 238 civilians
in 2017.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs documents 1 million crossings per month of the
457-kilometre contact line that divides eastern Ukraine.
Civilians risk shelling, sniper fire and landmines as
they make the arduous journey through the five official
checkpoints, where processing time can range from
hours to days.

I travelled across the contact line last year and
spoke to people waiting in long lines at one of the
checkpoints. Many of them were elderly. Ukraine has
the highest proportion of elderly people affected by
conflict in the world. They must cross the contact line
every 60 days to register in the Government-controlled
area as internally displaced persons (IDPs). It is the
only way they can access their meagre pensions of
$30 to $60 per month. I commend the Government of
Ukraine for adopting a national IDP plan to address the
situation of 1.5 million registered IDPs. The success of
the plan requires a whole-of-Government approach and
sufficient allocation of resources.

Last week before the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and 80 States Members of the United
Nations called for enhanced protection for civilians
through adherence to the rules of war (see S/PV.8267).
Those rules must be respected by all the parties to the
conflict in Ukraine. Despite repeated appeals, water-
treatment workers and facilities have been targeted on
34 occasions in 2018. The Donetsk filtration station,
which supplies water to over 345,000 people, has come
under fire eight times in the past 40 days, with five
workers having been injured last month.

Over 600,000 people are regularly exposed to
hostilities along the contact line. Families live in damp
basements, and more than 100,000 children attend
schools with windows lined with sand bags. More than
40,000 homes have been destroyed or damaged. Only 10
days ago, two schools in the Donetsk region were shelled
when hundreds of children were attending classes.

Wars have limits. The parties to the conflict must
take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
civilian harm.

Humanitarians aim to reach 2.3 million people
with vital assistance and protection services in 2018.
However, we face immense access and funding
challenges. We have received only 13 per cent of the
$187 million that we appealed for in the humanitarian
response plan, which has forced such agencies as the
World Food Programme to withdraw from Ukraine,
although 1.2 million people are food insecure.

The health situation is also severe. Millions of
people have limited access to health care. Measles
and hepatitis outbreaks are frequent. HIV/AIDS
prevalence among pregnant women is unacceptably
high. Multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis often goes
undetected or untreated. It is essential for patients to be
able to access appropriate treatment.

After significant effort, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the United Nations recently secured more
humanitarian access in the non-Government-controlled
area. We hope that will facilitate the scaling up the
delivery of critically needed impartial, independent and
neutral humanitarian aid to millions ofpeople in need. I
appeal for urgent funding to support those efforts.

This conflict has stretched millions of Ukrainians

to the breaking point. Many displaced people have

exhausted their savings and means of survival. In

addition to the daily hostilities, they face such risks as

trafficking, transactional sex, drug use and alcoholism.

After four years, eastern Ukraine is now a protracted

protection crisis, requiring an approach that addresses

undeniable humanitarian needs while simultaneously

reinforcing resilience. Humanitarian and development
actors are therefore seeking to apply a new way of
working. The practical approach taken in Ukraine is
already generating dividends.

Before I conclude, I once again call on all the parties
to the conflict in Ukraine to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
They must take constant care to spare civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure. Finally, I urge the world
to stand in solidarity with the millions of Ukrainians
who urgently need our support. I also urge political
leaders to make every effort to end the conflict. As I
was constantly told by the Ukrainian men and women
I met during my October 2017 Visit, peace remains the
only true solution to their dire humanitarian situation.

