Ms. Ibrahim (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and for the concept note
(S/2016/503, annex) provided to guide our discussion.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing. We acknowledge the important role of France,
among others, on this issue, including our region, with
the Multinational Joint Task Force. We appreciate the
perspectives brought to the debate by His Excellency
the President of the Central African Republic and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Peter Maurer.

United Nations peace operations are a vital part
of the global security architecture. They have been
a source of hope for victims of conflict. Vulnerable
people living in conflict zones across the world count
on the United Nations to protect them. With the growing
number of people affected by conflict, that has become
a challenge for the United Nations. To its credit, the
Organization has taken bold steps to meet the challenge.

Nigeria is pleased to note the progress made,
particularly at the normative level, since the Council
took the historic step in 1999 to recognize the
protection of civilians as central to the mandate of
peacekeeping missions. Ten of the 16 current United
Nations peacekeeping missions, involving more than
97 per cent of all United Nations peacekeepers, have
the protection of civilians in their mandates. Resolution
1894 (2009), which calls for allocation of resources for
the protection of civilians, is emblematic of the effort
to translate normative commitments into concrete
measures that enhance the protection of civilians in
theatres of conflict.

The international community expects the United
Nations to perform flawlessly when offering protection
to civilians in conflict areas. However, the challenges
faced by peacekeeping missions are often overlooked or
not adequately appreciated. Indeed, challenges remain
in the implementation of protection mandates in conflict
areas. We support the continued engagement of the
Security Council on the issue, and we see merit in the
pragmatic and effective efforts to achieve constructive
results to that end.

The protection ofcivilians in armed conflict is a task
that involves multiple issues and requires the collective
efforts of various stakeholders. At the strategic level,
close collaboration among the Security Council,
the United Nations Department for Peacekeeping
Operations, troop- and police-contributing countries
and individual United Nations peacekeeping missions
is vital for the success of a protection-of-civilians
mandate. Similarly, at the tactical level, close
coordination among the various components of a peace
mission is crucial to achieving success in the protection
of civilians in conflict areas. It should be underscored
that a clear and common understanding of protection
mandates is fundamental to the effectiveness of
strategic coordination among mission components.

While emphasizing the imperative for peacekeepers
to act when civilians are under threat, we urge troop-
and police-contributing countries to ensure that their
personnel have the requisite predeployment training in
protection issues. It is also important that peacekeepers
not be restricted by additional caveats beyond those
explicitly accepted by the Secretariat before deployment.

Nigeria strongly supports community engagement
in promoting the protection of civilians. Community-
alert networks and community-liaison assistants are
vital to understanding perceptions of threat at the
community level, including how communities seek to
reduce risks and how peace operations can address
them. We would like to see the international community
recognize those imperatives.

Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and recognizes the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within their
national jurisdictions. That conviction underlies our
Government's resolve to take all measures necessary to
protect civilians in the battle against the terrorist group
Boko Haram and its likes. Indeed, the Government of

Nigeria has no higher priority than to rescue all of the
persons held hostage by that group.

Since the establishment of the Multinational Joint
Task Force, considerable success has been recorded
in the battle against Boko Haram. Over a thousand
kidnapped women and children have been rescued, and
all territories once controlled by the group have been
recovered. Despite the enormous efforts made by the
Nigerian Government and the member States of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission as well as by the Republic
of Benin, we believe that more still needs to be done.
We recognize the imperative for internally displaced
persons and other vulnerable groups to be provided
with adequate protection, as anything short of that could
expose them to further abuse. We therefore call on the
international community to continue to support the
efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force to protect
civilians in the course of their intricate assignment.

In conclusion, Nigeria salutes the courage of
peacekeepers, who work tirelessly, usually under very
challenging circumstances, to keep civilians safe. We
pay tribute to the men and women who have lost their
lives while serving in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, and we offer our deep condolences to their
families, their friends and their Governments.

