Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean Pierre Lacroix for his thorough briefing.
I also wish to join my colleagues in welcoming the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
here among us today.

Recent months have been marked by positive and
historic developments in the Sudan. The Sudanese
people, particularly women and young people, have
achieved unprecedented changes by demanding a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous future. Belgium
wishes the new Sudanese authorities every success in
the crucial tasks that they will have to undertake, as
set out in the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August.
We welcome the priorities outlined/identified by Prime
Minister Abdalla Adam Hamdok during his statement
here in New York during the high-level week of the
General Assembly (see A/74/PV.10). We particularly
welcome the commitments to respect for the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of the Sudanese
people. In that context, we welcome the agreement
signed by the authorities on establishing an office of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in the Sudan. We encourage the
authorities to fully implement that agreement as soon
as possible.

Belgium applauds the crucial mediation role played
by the African Union and the region, particularly during
the recent meetings in Juba, and the support provided by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and the entire international community.
We encourage all those actors to continue to support
the Sudan.

We have an unprecedented opportunity to build a
lasting peace in Darfur. As mentioned by the Under-
Secretary-General, Darfur remains a fragile region,
where the root causes of the conflict, in particular
access to land and the future of the displaced, have not
yet been resolved. We fully support the first priority of
the Sudanese authorities to bring an end to the existing
conflicts and to restore peace within the first six months
of the transition. In that context, the Juba Declaration
of 11 September represents a significant milestone. We
call on all parties, in particular the armed movements,
to engage in constructive negotiations. This moment
represents a unique opportunity to put an end to the
many conflicts that have been tearing the country apart
for too long.

With regard to Darfur, the conflict has had many
humanitarian consequences. Civilians continue to
suffer in clashes in Jebel Marra. The protection of
civilians, including free and unhindered humanitarian
access, must be ensured. I would also like to stress the
importance of the fight against impunity in responding
to violations against children and women.

Finally, the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will
be reviewed by the Council again before the end of
the month. For Belgium, the UNAMID exit process
cannot be separated from developments in the rest of
the country. In that regard, we noted with interest the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the joint
United Nations-African Union report (S/2019/816) on
the common political strategy for Darfur. A six-month
renewal of UNAMID's mandate is required, without
reducing its military and civilian personnel. With
regard to the specific conditions for the transition and
for a follow-up mechanism, Belgium calls for patience.
Our country welcomes the establishment of the African
Union-United Nations-Sudan joint task force, which
will consider it and whose recommendations may
enable the Council to take a more informed decision in
the coming months.

The Sudan is experiencing a historic moment as a
result of the courage and aspiration for freedom, peace
and justice of its people. Significant challenges to
sustainable peace remain. The Council must continue
to support the country as it continues its transition.

