Mr. Arcia Vivas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
begin our intervention by thanking the presidency of
New Zealand for convening this debate, and Minister
McCully for presiding over it. We also thank the Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his briefing.
We welcome him and we support his commendable
efforts as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
should highlight the work done by UNAMA, which
has been essential to promoting peace, national
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic and
social development. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, our friend
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is very concerned about the delicate political
and security situation in Afghanistan, which poses
great challenges for the country. As the Secretary-
General points out in his report (S/2016/768), the
levels of violence arising from the Taliban and other
non-State actors have had great impact on the civilian
population, which has been forced into displacement
to other areas of the country in order to avoid clashes
between armed groups.

The security situation has been adversely affected
by the ongoing military operations of the Taliban,
which have been carrying out a military campaign
that has tested the Afghan national security system.
In that regard, we note with concern how the statistics
relating to armed clashes increased by 14.7 per cent
between May and July. Likewise, the armed conflict in
Afghanistan continues to affect the civilian population,
who are the main victims of armed clashes between
the parties. According to report, 1,600 people were
killed and 3,575 were injured during the reporting
period, the highest figure recorded since 2009.
The UNAMA report indicates that women and children
are the most affected by the spiral of violence. Since
the beginning of 2016, we have seen an increase in
executions of women by non-State actors. To this we
must add the use of children as soldiers and the tragic
toll of 213 boys and girls killed in fighting on the
ground. In that context, Venezuela reiterates its call
for the Taliban insurgents to resolutely join the peace
talks. We support the statement made by the Secretary-
General, which has been reported on several occasions,
that direct negotiations between the Taliban and the
Afghan Government are key to this dynamic, but must
not undermine the role of the international community
in support of these initiatives.

We believe that strengthening dialogue and mutual
trust among all parties is essential to consolidating
peace. It is therefore necessary to redouble efforts in
that direction, with the support of the international
community. In this regard, we welcome the efforts of
the High Peace Council, which has made progress in its
programmes of action towards a national reconciliation
strategy.

Afghanistan has also been destabilized by the
presence of the so-called Islamic State, whose terrorist
cells are a threat to peace and security in the region.
In this regard, presidential statement S/PRST/2016/l4,
which the Council has just adopted, provides elements
to that end, while condemning the terrorist attacks of
that organization, such as the latest in Kabul last July,
in which hundreds of civilians were killed by terrorist
acts.

At the political level, we call for the Afghan
leadership to work on behalf of the people and thereby
bridge the differences that hinder the achievement of
the objectives set by the National Unity Government.
In that regard, we welcome the achievements made in
electoral reform, and recognize the intention of the
Afghan Government to hire advisers to the President in
various fields, such as education, security and internal
affairs.

In the field of the political empowerment of women
within the framework of resolution 1325 (2000),
we stress the efforts of the Afghan Government in
adopting the strategy and action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016-2020.
We also recognize the interaction between UNAMA
and the authorities of that country to strengthen
protection services for women and eradicate violence
against women. The establishment of centres to
address this issue reflects the commitment of the
Afghan Government in this area, and we encourage
it to continue working in that direction. We welcome
the progress made in increasing the participation of
Afghan women in positions of leadership at various
Government levels.

We emphasize that strengthening dialogue and
cooperation between Afghanistan and Pakistan is
necessary to contribute to stability in the region.
We regret the fact that once again the report reflects
political disagreements between the two countries. In
that regard, we hope that they will be overcome for
the benefit of their peoples. Common challenges in the
political, economic and security fields require greater
understanding on the part of the respective authorities
in order to overcome the mistrust and problems that
affect them. We welcome the strengthening of regional
cooperation between Afghanistan, India and Iran,
which continues with trilateral transport projects and
transit that will facilitate trade among those States and
the countries of Central Asia. The ongoing high-level
visits to Afghanistan are a clear manifestation of this
trend towards dialogue and the solving of problems of
common interest to the region.

The Brussels Conference for the development of
Afghanistan, to be held in October, will be of great
importance to promoting the stability, security and
economic and social development of the nation. We
therefore encourage the international community to
continue supporting the people and Government of
Afghanistan by providing resources and building
capacity to promote their development. It is to be noted
that improving the security situation will favourably
affect the country's political, economic and social
dynamics.

Drug trafficking continues to pose serious threats
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Taliban
uses illegal narcotics trafficking to fund its terrorist
activities. As indicated in the report, poppy cultivation
and production in the country have increased, with the
low rate of crop eradication being a most disturbing
element, due to heavy fighting, particularly in the
province of Helmand. In that regard, we welcome the
joint efforts of Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, as well as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to forge a common
front against this problem in the framework of regional
cooperation. We reiterate that the effective fight against
drugs requires international cooperation, including
that of neighbouring countries, to prevent, combat and
eliminate this scourge.

Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue its efforts for a comprehensive and
inclusive political process leading to the establishment
of a firm and lasting peace, to enhance its control over
all its territory and resources, and to strengthen the
State and its institutions on behalf of its people, who
have suffered war and violence for so many years.

