Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

I would like to express my gratitude to you, Madam
President, for holding this open debate and preparing
the concept note (see S/20l4/787, annex), and I also
thank the Secretariat for its briefing. NAM. welcomes
any opportunity to share its views when the Council is
working to prepare a resolution on this important issue.

The Non-Aligned Movement unequivocally
condemns terrorism as criminal and rejects it in all its
forms and manifestations, as well as all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism wherever, by whomever
and against whomsoever committed, including those
in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
which are unjustifiable whatever the considerations
or factors that may be invoked to justify them. In that
context, NAM. members reaffirm their support for the
provisions contained in General Assembly resolution
46/51, of 9 December 1991, and other relevant United
Nations resolutions.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that terrorist
acts constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, in particular the right to life, leading to the lack
of the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms of peoples. Such acts endanger the territorial
integrity and stability of States as well as national,
regional and international security, destabilize
legitimately constituted Governments or the prevailing
constitutional order and political unity of States, affect
the stability of nations and the very basis of societies,
create adverse consequences for economic and social
development, and cause the destruction of the physical
and economic infrastructure of States.

Terrorism should not be equated with the legitimate
struggle of peoples under colonial or alien domination
and foreign occupation, for self-determination and
national liberation. The brutalization of peoples
remaining under foreign occupation should continue to
be denounced as the gravest form of terrorism, and the
use of State power for the suppression of and violence
against peoples struggling against foreign occupation in
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination
should continue to be condemned.

Furthermore, terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group, and these attributions should not be
used to justify terrorism or counter-terrorism measures
that include, inter alia, profiling terror suspects or
intrusions into individual privacy.
The Movement expresses grave concern over the
acute and growing threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, namely, individuals who travel to a State
other than their State of residence or nationality for the
purpose of the perpetration, planning or preparation
of, or participation in, terrorist acts, or providing or
receiving terrorist training, including in connection
with armed conflict.

It emphasizes the need for States to address this
issue, including by implementation of their international
obligations, and underlines the importance of United
Nations capacity-building and facilitation of capacity-
building in accordance with existing mandates to assist
States, including those in the most affected regions,
upon their request.

Conscious of the need to take speedy and effective
measures to eliminate international terrorism, the
Movement urges all States, consistent with the United
Nations Charter, to fulfil their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law
in combating terrorism, including by prosecuting
or, where appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators
of terrorist acts; by preventing the organization,
instigation or financing of terrorist acts against other
States from within or outside their territories or by
organizations based on their territories; by refraining
from organizing, instigating, assisting, financing or
participating in terrorist acts on the territories of other
States; by refraining from encouraging activities within
their territories directed towards the commission of
such acts; by refraining from allowing the use of their
territories for planning or training for, or the financing
of, such acts; and by refraining from supplying arms or
other weapons that could be used for terrorist acts in
other States.

The Non-Aligned Movement rejects any actions or
measures and the use or threat of use of force, imposed
or threatened to be imposed by any State against any
NAM. country under the pretext of combating terrorism
or to pursue its political aims, including by directly or
indirectly categorizing them as terrorism-sponsoring-
States. It totally rejects the unilateral preparation oflists
accusing States ofallegedly supporting terrorism, which
are inconsistent with international law and constitute a
form of psychological and political terrorism.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon all States
to condemn any form of, and refrain from extending
political, diplomatic, moral or material support to,
terrorism. It urges all States, consistent with the United
Nations Charter and in fulfilling their obligations
under international law, to ensure that neither refugee
status nor any other legal status is abused by the
perpetrators, organizers or facilitators of terrorist acts,
and that claims of political motivation by them are not
recognized as grounds for refusing requests for their
extradition.

The Movement also calls upon all States to respect
all human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, and to reaffirm their commitment
in this respect to prevent human rights violations in
keeping with the rule of law and their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, and in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. We also call upon the
Security Council sanctions committees to further
streamline their listing and delisting procedures to
address the concerns of due process and transparency.

NAM. rejects any actions and measures, and the
use or threat of use of force, in particular by armed
forces, that violate the United Nations Charter and
international law, especially the relevant international
conventions, imposed or threatened to be imposed by
any State against any non-aligned country under the
pretext of combating terrorism or to pursue its political
aims, including by directly or indirectly categorizing
them as terrorism-sponsoring-States.

The Movement reaffirms the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Member States'
primary responsibility to implement it, welcomes the
Strategy's reviews and calls for its transparent and
comprehensive implementation.

The Non-Aligned Movement strongly condemns
the criminal incidents of hostage-taking that result
in demands by terrorist groups for ransom and/or
other political concessions and calls upon all States
to cooperate actively in order to address this issue,
including its legal aspects.

The Non-Aligned Movement also encourages all
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying
or acceding to the 13 international instruments
related to combating terrorism. We also call upon all
States to observe and implement the provisions of
all international instruments as well as regional and
bilateral instruments related to terrorism to which they
are party.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
an international summit conference under the auspices
of the United Nations to formulate a joint organized
response of the international community to terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, including identifying
its root causes.

We further reiterate the importance of the
conclusion of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, noting the negotiations in Ad
Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210, of 17 December 1996, for elaboration
of the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism and the continuing efforts to that end. We
call upon all States to cooperate in resolving that
outstanding issue.

I would now like to add a few words in my national
capacity.

As we gather here today, there is a consensus in the
Council and across the United Nations on the threat that
the Takfiri terrorist groups, especially the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), pose to the security of
the Middle East and North Africa and other parts of the
world. However, we believe that any position against
the threat should be coupled with action. Slogans by
themselves will not serve the purpose. All countries,
especially those surrounding the areas controlled by
ISIL, should mean what they say and act resolutely
to stop the atrocious acts that that group commits and
mobilize in a way to destroy it.

It is very unfortunate that a few Governments in the
region have yet to take the threat seriously. They have
yet to manage to control their borders and prevent the
movement of ISIL recruits or stop the flow of financial
aid from their territories to that criminal group. To do
the job and help destroy the Takfiri terrorists, it is also
necessary to do away with the thinking and propaganda
machine underlying the activities of the group.

On that front, too, we do not see sufficient efforts
on the part of those who bear the main responsibility for
what ISIL and other similar groups have done. To the
contrary, we have witnessed - as was the case earlier
in this debate - positions talen and efforts made to
single out a number of groups that have been part ofthe
current fight against the Takfiri terrorist groups. That
kind of approach can only stoke the fire of sectarianism
and deflect the attention from the main threat that is
menacing the region and beyond.

During the past few years, my Government has been
doing everything in its power to fight extremist groups
in the region. We have, first of all, secured our borders
to prevent any movement to or from the areas controlled
by those groups. In many cases, Iranian officials have
stopped and apprehended individuals who have tried
to use Iranian territory to cross over or send material
assistance to terrorists. We will continue our resolute
fight in that regard and hope that the Security Council
will do everything in its power to help stop this threat.

