Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like those who have spoken before me, I thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing on his visit
to Chad and the Sudan, which gave us a clearer picture
of humanitarian operations on the ground and an
analysis of the factors directly affecting the protection
of the civilian population and the work of humanitarian
agencies.

I also wish to thank the Permanent Representative
of Chad for his presence and his statement.

With regard to the situation in Chad, we share
Mr. Holmes' concern over the lack of security caused
by the criminal activities of bandits against the civilian
population and humanitarian workers. We are all the
more concerned because the bandits operate with
almost complete impunity. We commend the work of

the European Union Force in Chad to improve security
and hope that the transition to the second United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT II) and the deployment of more
United Nations personnel will lead to an even deeper
improvement with regard to the protection of the
civilian population. Costa Rica will work with other
delegations in determining the mandate of MINURCAT
II so as to further improve security around the camps
for refugees and displaced persons.

My delegation also shares the Under-Secretary-
General's assessment of the vicious circle of impunity
in the harassment of and violence against humanitarian
workers and civilians. We were pleased to note that
Mr. Holmes raised that matter with the authorities of
Chad, and take this opportunity to call on that
Government to take firm steps to strengthen its
investigation and justice mechanisms. We also recall
that MINURCAT is presently mandated to assist the
Government of Chad in promoting the rule of law, and
we invite that Government to take advantage of the
support of the international community to fight
effectively against impunity. My delegation firmly
condemns the recruitment of children by armed groups.

With regard to the Sudan, we share the Under-
Secretary-General's concern over the deterioration of
the security situation in rural and urban areas, and
particularly in displaced persons camps. We agree that
a real and verifiable ceasefire between the Government
of the Sudan and the rebel groups is essential if
humanitarian assistance is to be more effective.

The initiative of the Government of the Sudan to
declare a unilateral ceasefire on 12 November was, in
our view, a positive step, but that it has yet to translate
into any real improvement in the situation on the
ground for people receiving humanitarian assistance
and the personnel delivering it.

We also share Mr. Holmes' concern over the
increase in attacks on and harassment of humanitarian
workers. We recall that the work of those individuals
has a direct impact on more than 4.5 million people in
the Sudan. It is incumbent on the Government of the
Sudan to protect those who deliver assistance. We also
agree on the importance of all parties to the conflict
recognizing and observing the humanitarian principles
and norms of international humanitarian law.
Improvement in the Sudan, especially in Darfur,
depends on the actions of the parties and these must
have, at the point of departure, a clear commitment to
those principles and rules.

I wish to refer to the situation of persons living in
displaced persons camps. I would like to ask
Mr. Holmes what his assessment is of the situation of
those persons and the plans in effect for their future.

My delegation takes note of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Chad and the Sudan and
we recognize the efforts of the contact group and the
Government of Libya in this regard. We hope that
improvements in relations between both countries will
have positive and concrete effects on the security
situation in the border areas and, consequently, on the
humanitarian situation.

We reiterate once again that the obligation to
protect civilians is primarily an obligation of States.
Therefore Chad and the Sudan must do whatever is
necessary to honour that obligation. The rebel groups
must also implement their obligations in that regard.

My delegation would like to express, once again,
our support for the recommendations of the Secretary-
General contained in his most recent report on the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (S/2008/662). In
this regard, the Security Council is considering
convening an important debate on measures relative to
the protection of civilians under imminent threat.

Finally, we hope that the next debate on the
protection of civilians will offer us an opportunity to
discuss this important issue.

