Mr. Van 00sterom (Netherlands): Mr. President,
I would first like to express my appreciation for your
initiative in organizing this important open debate on
terrorism and cross-border crime, with a special focus
on the African continent.

I align myself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

In view of time constraints, I will deliver an
abridged version of my statement, the full version of
which will be available via Twitter.

This week the world was shocked by brutal terrorist
events in Australia, Pakistan and Yemen. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands condemns these atrocious attacks
in the strongest terms. These events remind us of how
acts of terrorism can randomly target innocent civilians
and how they constitute a threat to peace and security
everywhere. These terrorist acts show that terrorism

is one of the biggest challenges of our time. Terrorism
needs to be addressed globally, and all countries should
make efforts to that end. In order for these efforts to be
constructive, we need to remain firmly committed to the
universal principles of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply committed to combating all
forms of terrorism. Together with Morocco, we chair
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum's new Working
Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters. This week, the
inaugural meeting of the Working Group was convened
in Marrakesh, Morocco. We pay tribute to the efforts
of the Government of Morocco in this field. In view of
our close cooperation, Mr. President, we thank you for
having the Permanent Representative of Morocco and
me speak in succession today.

In our view, the United Nations plays a key role in
the international efforts to combat terrorism. This role is
threefold: first, to facilitate cooperation among States;
secondly, to mainstream preventive and protective
measures across the United Nations agenda, including
development; and thirdly, to go after the means of
financing terrorist groups, their leaders and affiliated
persons. The United Nations sanctions regime is, of
course, a crucial tool for this purpose.

The increasing links between terrorist groups
and cross-border crime are of grave concern to
the international community. We are concerned
that criminal activities are an important financing
mechanism for terrorist groups, particularly in certain
regions of Africa. The proliferation of arms as a result
of the destabilization of Libya has strengthened and
emboldened these terrorist groups, and they threaten
regional peace and security. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands takes this threat very seriously, and we
therefore have a large contingent in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. As I said earlier this week, we treasure our
cooperation with Chad in the field in Mali.

In the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, a special
Horn of Africa Working Group addresses both regional
stability and specific issues in the Sahel. It is important
that more States make use of this Working Group
to focus to a greater extent on the specific regional
dimensions of terrorism in that part of Africa. As I
mentioned previously, countering transborder crime is
a key element in that work.

We need to collect more empirical data on the
links between transnational organized crime and
terrorism. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) is well equipped to do this, and its
transnational organized crime assessment for West
Africa is a prime example. We also suggest making
more intensive use of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime for combating
cross-border crime on the African continent.

The impact of these crimes is felt by countries
in the region. And it is also felt in Europe, which is
a frequent destination for trafficking in persons and
drugs. The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes it is
crucial to forge new partnerships between European and
African countries to combat the destabilizing effects of
transnational criminal activities. Through the UNODC,
the Government of the Netherlands supports affected
Governments in data collection and capacity-building
for law enforcement agencies. On 21 January 2015,
our Mission in New York will host an event to discuss
the broader adverse effects of transnational organized
crime on the sustainable development of countries. We
strongly welcome the participation of African States.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a partner for
peace, justice and development. We therefore cooperate
intensively with multilateral and bilateral counterparts
on both transnational organized crime and counter-
terrorism efforts. We seek to build strategic partnerships
for a joint response, promoting peace, justice and
development, and we strongly welcome suggestions by
countries in the affected regions for ways to cooperate
further.

