Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening this open debate on the critical
subject of links between terrorism and organized
crime, since both of them are today destabilizing
regional and global security. Ijoin other delegations in
thanking Mr. Yury Fedotov, Under-Secretary-General,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Michele Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and Ms. Makarenko for
their insightful briefings.

Today international terrorism has gained a more
sinister character, moving from isolated acts to
large-scale terrorist aggression across Europe, Asia
and Africa. The activities of terrorist groups are
undermining security far beyond the conflict zones
of North Africa and the Middle East and resulting in
forced migration to Europe on an unprecedented scale.
My delegation is alarmed that terrorists are benefiting
from transnational organized crime. That compels us
to take action to prevent terrorists from raising funds
through a variety of means.

Kazakhstan is a party to all the major international
conventions and instruments against terrorism and is
also guided by the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We propose that the Strategy
and other current United Nations instruments should
be made legally binding through relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Last year, the third phase of the Joint Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia
was launched in the region together with the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, the Office of Counter-Terrorism (OCT)
and CTED. Kazakhstan is proud to be the first donor to
the third phase of the regional project, allocating 10 per
cent of its overall budget.

International terrorism cannot be defeated
without a coordinated response. In September 2018,
Kazakhstan therefore launched the code of conduct
towards achieving a world free of terrorism, a concise
document with 10 provisions that reflects existing
conventions and legal instruments and calling for
our better cooperation, joint actions and coordinated
efforts to fight terrorism. More than 80 like-minded
Member States have already signed it and coalesced to
honour commitments to implement the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and other instruments.

Based on our recent experience in the Council, we
can say that we have found no proof of a direct link
between terrorism and organized crime in our region
of Central Asia. At the same time, we have some cases
where we observe a close connection between the
United Nations-listed terrorist organizations and drug
traffickers operating on the territory of Afghanistan.

In the light of the continuing opium cultivation
on the territory of Afghanistan, the role of regional
and international organizations such as INTERPOL,
UNODC and its Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for combating the illicit
trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances
and their precursors are becoming even more relevant.
We call on States Members of the United Nations to
enhance cooperation with the regional organizations.

Prompt and decisive action calls for political will
and collaboration at the regional and national levels to
counter terrorism and tackle organized crime. A lack
of educational and employment opportunities creates
fertile ground for radicalism and leads to the spread of
terrorist ideology among vulnerable groups, primarily
the youth. We need to address factors that trigger
negative global trends, instability, armed conflicts in
many regions of the world and refugee flows, together
with the unresolved problems of poverty and disparities
in development, all of which further derail progress and
impede the full effectiveness of our interventions.

Our law enforcement agencies cooperate closely
with the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth
of Independent States, the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Offices of UNODC, the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe and the European Union
in strengthening regional cooperation, including the
exchange of information, practical experience and joint
measures in countering terrorism and organized crime.

In the current circumstances, we need to
relentlessly search for ways to improve, strengthen
and unite our efforts. We should make better use of
the enormous potential of OCT, CTED, UNODC and
relevant regional structures to share experiences and
best practices, train personnel and develop effective
tools for practical cooperation. Capacity-building is
key to success.

To conclude, Kazakhstan is ready to work hand
in hand with others to improve and intensify mutually
beneficial cooperation to mobilize all possible efforts
to counter international terrorism and organized crime
regionally and globally.

