Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express particular thanks to former
President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios, who are here with
us today at this meeting. I would also like to thank the
Ambassador of the Sudan and Mr. Ezekiel Lol
Gatkuoth for their presentations and for updating us on
the situation in the Sudan.

We welcome the signing of an agreement on
temporary arrangements for the administration of
Abyei. We hope that it will take effect immediately and
that it will serve to reverse the very serious
deterioration of the security situation. In recent weeks
and even days, unacceptable acts of violence have
occurred, compromising the peaceful transition to the
birth of South Sudan. We strongly condemn the violent
loss of life, the displacement that has taken place and
all the violations of the human rights of the population.
What has taken place in Southern Kordofan and in the
Abyei Area is unacceptable.

The current crisis clearly shows that there are still
serious differences that the parties must overcome.
This is essential if we are to return to the spirit of
compromise and political will displayed on past
occasions. We hope that the agreement that has just
been signed will be a very positive sign in that
direction.
The Peace Agreement itself and its subsequent
implementation, the holding of general elections and
the referendum held at the beginning of 2011, through
which Southern Sudan's independence was opted for,
are proof that, on any issue, regardless of difficulty or
seriousness, a negotiated and satisfactory solution can
be found by the parties.

In this context, we would highlight the enormous
efforts made by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel charged with implementing the
recommendations for the Sudan in order to bring the
parties together and resume negotiations. The
leadership of former President Thabo Mbeki and other
members of the Panel and the role played by the
Government of Ethiopia should be underscored. We
trust that the agreements arrived at thus far will serve
as an element for trust between the parties and a step
towards arriving at definitive and sustainable
agreements.

In this respect, it is crucial that the parties refrain
from acts of violence or provocation and incendiary
speech, and renew their commitment to negotiations on
all outstanding issues.

Of equal importance is the need to respect the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan and other
agencies of the system, allowing them to carry out their
various mandates in an environment free of security
threats.

The commitments set out under the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and other
security agreements must be fully respected, with
priority given to the withdrawal of all armed forces
from Abyei and the establishment of mechanisms to
ensure security and allow for the return of displaced
persons.

Of equal importance is the need to end the
violence in Southern Kordofan State so as to allow for
the provision of humanitarian assistance to the
population and to establish the conditions needed to
hold the public consultations planned for the region,
which must be an inclusive process reflecting the
concerns and aspirations of the population with
effective implementation mechanisms.

We are only a few weeks away from the end of
the transitional period and the establishment of
Southern Sudan as an independent State. However, we
cannot lose sight of the fact that several crucial matters
under the CPA remain unresolved, such as the final
status of the Abyei area, the satisfactory conclusion of
the popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile States, and border demarcation. Likewise, a
wide range of post-CPA issues also remain to be
resolved, and, to a great extent, the future of good
neighbourliness and bilateral cooperation between the
two parties will depend on these.

Against that backdrop, the international
community must remain united in providing all
possible support and assistance to the parties in their
quest to arrive at solutions and commitments aimed at
resolving all of these issues and establishing
harmonious and mutually beneficial relations between
two independent States living in peace and working
together to face common challenges. To this end, the
United Nations and the African Union have a very
important role to play in ensuring the security and
prosperity of all of the population.

