Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I too would like
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing
and welcome Deputy Prime Ministers Daeic' and Thaci
to this debate.

New Zealand strongly encourages dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristine, and the European Union's
support for this process. We commend the leaders of
Serbia and Kosovo for their willingness to engage and
hope that this will continue in a constructive atmosphere
aimed at delivering concrete results. Leadership and
political determination will continue to be necessary to
deliver on all agreements reached thus far to normalize
relations.

Long-term reconciliation requires due attention to
the past to prevent it from blocking progress in the future.
We acknowledge the steps taken by Kosovo towards the
establishment of a specialized court to try cases arising
from the European Union Special Investigative Task
Force. We urge the Assembly of Kosovo to take the
remaining steps required to complete this process. We
also urge constructive ongoing attention to resolving
the particular political and socioeconomic issues
affecting the people of northern Kosovo. In a similar
vein, we encourage continued attention on the matter
of missing persons and greater efforts in addressing
property issues and other matters that affect the return
of displaced persons.

The problem of nationals travelling abroad to join

foreign conflicts is of increasing international concern,
with Kosovo being no exception. The adoption ofa law
by the Assembly of Kosovo aimed at prohibiting the
recruitment of individuals into foreign conflicts is an
important step in combating this problem. However, the
issue will continue to require more than legislation. As
shown by the way Kosovo has stemmed the outward
flow of irregular migrants, influencing the movement
of people requires a comprehensive strategy. Ongoing
cooperation with partners in the region, the engagement
of community leaders and economic reforms to improve
conditions for all residents of Kosovo will be important
in countering the issue of foreign fighters.

New Zealand is a strong believer in ensuring that
the Council hears the views ofpeoples who are affected
by its decisions. Equally, we must organize the work of
the Council so that its time and energy are optimized to
advance the cause of international peace and security.
Given the breadth of the Council's agenda, achieving
the correct balance is not easy.

With respect to the Council's consideration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, we are not convinced that it is calibrated
appropriately. We think that the Council should be
more flexible in how it organizes itself to monitor the
situation in Kosovo, with more scope to ensure that the
Council can adjust its activity to reflect developments
on the ground while adequately addressing the other
issues on our agenda.

