Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this open meeting on Guinea-Bissau. It is a
contribution to strengthening the efforts of that country
and its Government for reform, reconstruction and
rehabilitation and for building peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

We also wish to thank Mr. David Stephen for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General. We
appreciate the efforts of his Office and of his
colleagues. We also thank Ambassador Kumalo and the
Ambassador of Gambia for their important statements
on the recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.

We believe that the coming period - during
which preparations will be made for holding free and
transparent elections and the internal situation,
particularly the political and economic situation, will
be dealt from a different perspective - will be a
decisive phase for Guinea-Bissau, a country which
needs the full support and encouragement of the
international community and the donor community in
order to save itself from its deteriorating economic
situation, which is negatively reflected in various walks
of life, particularly social and political ones.

We have taken note, and have listened to
Mr. Stephen's statement, that officials' salaries,
totalling $11 million, have not been paid. That has led
to desperation. It is a clear example of the effect of the
economic and financial situation on the internal
situation in Guinea-Bissau. We also wish to refer, in
that regard, to the death of children due to hunger,
which has also been referred to by Ambassador
Kumalo. In that context, we respect the efforts of the
United Nations and of the Secretary-General, and the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Guinea-Bissau, as well as of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNOGBIS). We thank them all for their great
efforts in the difficult circumstances that that country is
experiencing. We call upon the Government of Guinea-
Bissau to further cooperate with the United Nations in
order to support peace and stability there.

The Security Council has understood the
importance of this phase that Guinea-Bissau is going
through, and that is why it was included in the plan for
the mission that will visit West Africa next week. That
underscores the importance the Council attaches to that
country, to restoring the peace desired. The visit will
also be a real opportunity to assess the situation, to
accurately inform the Security Council about it and to
become familiar with sources of concern in Guinea-
Bissau. The mission will give us the opportunity to
help that country seek comprehensive and permanent
solutions to the situation there.

In that regard, we wish to point out that the
regional dimension of the resolution of all crises in
African countries also applies to the crisis being faced
by Guinea-Bissau. We appreciate the great efforts
being made by neighbouring African countries,
particularly West African countries and Portuguese-
speaking countries. Their efforts greatly affect the
search for a peaceful solution between the Government
and the various sides and political parties in Guinea-
Bissau.

We join the representative of Guinea-Bissau in
addressing an appeal to donor countries and the
international community at large to provide the
necessary financial and humanitarian assistance to
enhance stability in the country. We also call on donor
countries, financial institutions such as the Bretton
Woods institutions and the international community at
large to cooperate with the Economic and Social
Council to consider offering concessionary terms as a
way of addressing the problems of Guinea-Bissau. We
must work hard to find more efficient debt relief
solutions given the very fragile economic situation,
which negatively affects all aspects of life in the
country and causes instability. We must take account of
the political and economic history of Guinea-Bissau, as
the representative of that country mentioned.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the
importance of the regional dimension, which is crucial
to resolving the problems that Guinea-Bissau faces.

