Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madame, for this new opportunity to present to the
Security Council an update on the peace process in
South Sudan and to address the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

This morning, I informed the representatives of the
countries contributing troops or police personnel of the
new concept of operations proposed for the Mission.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Loj, will present some additional elements on
the operational status of the Mission during our
consultations on the operational situation. I will
therefore focus on the current political trends.

Our assessment is clear. The peace process in South
Sudan is currently in a critical phase that requires
the active political engagement of the international
community, including the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development-plus group, as well as Security
Council members, to encourage the implementation
of the transition. Otherwise, the progress made
to date would be in vain. We must therefore work
collectively to increase the adherence of the parties to
the implementation of their agreement and support the
institutions established by the agreement so as to end
this senseless conflict.

Since late October, as I have said, some progress
has been made on the political front. Following the
seminar on operational implementation of the clauses
of the ceasefire and transitional security arrangements,
held in Addis Ababa from 21 October to 3 November,
the parties finally reached a new agreement on the
distribution of forces provided to ensure safety in the
capital. On 20 October, the Ugandan army began to
withdraw its troops from South Sudan, as stipulated
in the agreement, and that process concluded a month
later. Last week, the Government began to withdraw its
security personnel from Juba, in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.

The Council has probably notedthat on 18 November,
President Salva Kiir gave a speech to the nation in which
he reaffirmed that support for the peace agreement and

the establishment a Transitional Government of National
Unity were among the Government's priorities. On
27 November, the first meeting of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission was held, chaired by former
Botswana President Festus Mogae. Unfortunately, the
armed opposition and representatives of former Sudan
People's Liberation Movement prisoners did not attend
the meeting.

As we feared and must acknowledge, the
implementation of the peace agreement is progressing
very slowly and with great difficulty. Since August,
numerous violations of the ceasefire agreement have
taken place in several regions ofthe country. Continued
fighting between both parties, especially in Unity
state, has resulted in substantial civilian casualties,
caused the displacement of additional people and
increased humanitarian assistance needs. The clashes
also resulted in additional cattle theft and looting of
humanitarian goods as well as numerous violations of
human rights.

A complete and immediate cessation of hostilities
would be the first real contribution to the peace process,
which the two parties owe to their people. However, we
are still witnessing incessant clashes on the ground.
Unfortunately, we continue to see fighting on a daily
basis aimed at retaking or consolidating military
positions before the start of the transition. That trend is
also evident at the political level.

(spoke in English)

The decision taken by President Kiir on 2 October
to establish 28 states in South Sudan continues to
generate controversy in the country. Most recently,
on 19 November, a special session of the National
Legislative Assembly approved amendments to
the Transitional Constitution of South Sudan that
removed all references to South Sudan being made up
of a specific number of states and gave the President
the power to appoint governors and members of the
National Legislative Assembly during the transitional
period. Strong concerns have been raised by the
oppposition and within other political parties in respect
of the legality of such measures. That initiative could
make even more challenging a reconciliation between
the parties at this important moment in the formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity.

At this point in the peace process, any
unilateral political initiative taken by either party is
counterproductive. Our messaging to both parties
should be clear and unequivocal: we need the agreement,
the whole agreement and nothing but the Agreement,
and we need it urgently.

In that context, the Secretary-General has proposed
to the Security Council a number of adjustments to the
mandate of UNMISS, as well as to the configuration
of the Mission. The proposal is for UNMISS to
focus on providing support to the key institutions
of transition, including the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, which will oversee the
implementation of the agreement in all its facets; the
joint integrated police, which will be responsible for
security in Juba, Malakal, Bentiu and Bor; and the
joint operations centre, which will coordinate the
movements of the forces allowed to remain in Juba.
The Secretary-General has also recommended that the
Mission be authorized to provide technical support to
the Transitional Government in making constitutional
and legislative adjustments, planning for national
elections, establishing transitional justice mechanisms
and developing strategies for security-sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

As UNMISS takes forward that targeted support,
it would continue to implement its current mandated
tasks, working closely with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to transition the
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism formerly
in place to oversee the cessation of hostilities, to the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM) envisioned in the
peace agreement. Operational planning to that effect is
already well under way, as directed by resolution 2241
(2015). The Mission would also continue to focus on
the protection of civilians. Its efforts would be directed
towards providing increased protection from internal
violence within the protection-of-civilian sites, as well
as for civilians facing violence in areas of origin or
displacement outside such sites, by projecting its troops
and conducting extensive patrols in areas of tension.

It is our assessment that an increase of 500 troops
and 600 police personnel would allow us to provide
the support required of the CTSAMM. and enhance
such protection-of-civilians activities. It is important
to note, however, that increasing protection outside of
the protection-of-civilian sites fundamentally requires
the cooperation of the Government, as well as that of
UNMISS troop-contributing countries, which have
at times proved reluctant to take the proactive and
forward-leaning posture that the task requires.

For our intention to translate into results, the
routine violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
particularly through restrictions imposed on the
Mission's freedom of movement, must end. As the
Mission moves towards the provision of more robust
support to the national authorities in the implementation
of the peace agreement, it will be essential for the
Government of National Unity to prove itself a willing
partner. It must make the strategic decision to support
and facilitate, rather than simply tolerate, the work of
our Mission.
Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate the
Mission's continued need for air assets, including
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Real-time
information is critical for the Mission to improve its
awareness of what is happening, to react rapidly and
to save lives. In a country as vast, and in many parts
inaccessible, as South Sudan, UAVs are not only useful,
they are in fact vitally important for monitoring the
changing situation and needs on the ground. They can
also play an essential role in supporting the permanent
ceasefire, which both parties have stated is a key
priority.

With respect to security in Juba, our vision is
also clear. We must invest in the provisions set by the
agreement to address tensions and incidents in the
capital. We must invest in the rapid operationalization
of the joint integrated police, the joint operations
centre, the joint military command and the CTSAMM
to guarantee security. That is not just the request of the
Government, it is the only politically and operationally
sound option. UNMISS must help the parties work
together to rebuild confidence and maintain security
together in Juba. There is no alternative.

Finally, in line with the recommendations of the
High-level Implementation Panel on Peace Operations,
the Secretary-General has recommended a phased
approach to structuring UNMISS'S engagement in
South Sudan. To that end, we feel that a period of
one year would provide us with the time required to
implement the proposed mandated changes and assess
their impact on the situation in South Sudan.

Bringing peace and stability to South Sudan will
require a concerted effort from all partners involved
in resolving the conflict. The Security Council, the
African Union, the IGAD-plus process and countries
of the region have a critical role to play in maintaining
pressure on the parties to implement their agreement,
building its political momentum and demonstrating
the benefits of peace. No number of troops or police
can replace the political will required of the leaders of
South Sudan to bring their conflict to an end.

