Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): 1 should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your extremely effective
presidency during this month of October. I should like also
to thank you and other members of the Security Council for
making it possible for my delegation to take part in today's
open discussion.

The developments in and around Kosovo continue to
command the constant attention of the whole world,
bringing new challenges to, and hopes for, a peaceful
settlement of this internal conflict.

Our delegation strongly believes that the new Security
Council draft resolution - which is to be adopted, quite
symbolically, on United Nations Day - will become yet
another sign of the deep concern of the international
community, which is willing to do everything possible to
facilitate the efforts of the parties to the conflict to find a
peaceful solution to the problem of Kosovo by civilized
political means, to avert a humanitarian crisis and to defuse
the existing threat to peace and security in the region.

In our View, this draft resolution can be seen as
sending yet another serious signal to the parties to the
conflict as to the real possibility of unavoidable
repercussions for them unless the perpetration of acts of
violence against the civilian population and terrorist
activities are stopped.

We note with satisfaction the declared readiness of the
leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to comply
with Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199
(1998), and we welcome the concrete measures
undertaken by the Yugoslav authorities to this end.

Ukraine also welcomes the signing on 16 October
1998 of the agreement between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) permitting the OSCE to
establish a verification mission in Kosovo, as well as the
agreement between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
concerning the Air Verification Mission over Kosovo,
which complements the OSCE Verification Mission. We
commend the energetic efforts in this regard by the
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, as well as the tireless
efforts of the United States Special Envoy,
Mr. Holbrooke.

I take this opportunity to reiterate my country's
interest in expediting the settlement of a dangerous crisis
situation in the region by political means, with the
involvement of respective multilateral mechanisms, and
on the basis of a peaceful dialogue, the principal elements
of which should be recognition of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
respect for the human rights of all people residing in
Kosovo and a possible solution to the problem of Kosovo
on the basis of expanding its autonomy.

As the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine noted
in its statement on 15 October 1998, while "understanding
the motivations of NAT O's decision of 13 October 1998
on the possibility of the use of military force in
Yugoslavia", we are still very hopeful that the latest steps
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia leadership as to the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1199
(1998) will make it possible to avert the use of force,
because it could lead to unpredictable consequences.

Being an active participant in the settlement of the
conflict in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since its
very outbreak, Ukraine reaffirms its readiness to delegate
its representatives to the OSCE Verification Mission in
Kosovo and to join the international mediation efforts. We
hope that our sincere intention to nominate an eligible
candidate to head this Mission, declared well before this
endeavour had been put in place, will be duly appreciated
by the members of the Security Council.

These days, while striving to achieve a peaceful
solution in Kosovo, the international community is
demonstrating an unprecedented pattern of cooperation, in
particular between the United Nations and relevant

 

regional organizations. We believe that this pattern could
serve as a practical model for the efficient interaction of all
interested parties in the prevention of potential conflicts in
the future and their resolution should they occur.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country's
willingness and determination to contribute its utmost to the

resolution of the Kosovo problem.

