Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to express my appreciation for the presence of
Ms. Carla Del Ponte and for the presentation of her report
to the Council. The report gives us a very clear and
dramatic picture of the difficulties and challenges that the
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda face. We
hope that these briefings will be repeated on a regular basis
and that their format continues to be broad so as to benefit
the whole membership of the Organization as well as to
benefit the cause of justice and international law.

Both Tribunals have completed the stage of institution
building and are now fully operational and carrying out
their judicial work. The Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
has exceeded original expectations. The statistics on
indictments, trials and detentions contradict the pessimism
of those who predicted that the Tribunal would have a
purely symbolic role in the administration of justice.

We are well aware of the particular difficulties that the
International Tribunal for Rwanda had to overcome in the
early stages. Despite those difficulties, that Tribunal also is
entering an operational stage and has issued significant
judgements, including the first convictions for the crime of
genocide since the Convention was adopted in 1948.

As Judge Pillay informed us on Monday in the
General Assembly, the Office of the Prosecutor is involved
in some 90 investigations and hopes to produce some 20
indictments in 2000.

The jurisprudence and procedures of both Tribunals
were taken into account in the course of the negotiations
on the Rome Statute and continue to be an important
frame of reference for the discussions under way in the
Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal
Court. Thus, they are already influencing the development
of international law.

Despite the fact that there are grounds for
satisfaction, it is clear that both Tribunals face significant
difficulties and problems, some of them related to
organizational and administrative aspects which could be
remedied by the Tribunals themselves. In particular, it is
important to ensure proper coordination between the
Tribunals in order to overcome the difficulties arising
from the fact that they share the same Prosecutor and
Appeals Chamber.

But the more serious problems, those that affect the
very possibility of administering justice, are related to the
lack of cooperation on the part of States. It is well known
that the main feature of the ad hoc Tribunals is that they
lack their own coercive measures. For this reason, they
fundamentally and inevitably rely on the cooperation of
States. Such cooperation is essential in order to produce
evidence and to ensure the arrest and transfer of persons
as well as the execution of sentences. Furthermore, it
should be remembered that the ad hoc Tribunals are by
nature exceptional and they differ from the future
International Criminal Court in that they are not
complementary to national jurisdictions but have primacy
over national systems. The obligation to cooperate with
the Tribunals, explicitly spelled out in their statutes, is
absolute. Lack of compliance is not simply a violation of
the statutes but imperils the very objectives for which
these Tribunals were established.

The Security Council cannot remain impassive in the
face of this report and the call for action. What is at stake
is the credibility of the Tribunals and the authority of the
Council. We fully share the concerns that Ms. Del Ponte
has just outlined.

In conclusion, it seems to us that we need to
underscore the fact that States cannot, for any reason
whatsoever, unilaterally suspend their cooperation with
the ad hoc Tribunals.

 

