Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me echo the delegation
of the United Kingdom by stressing that it is also our
understanding that the Russian delegation's delivery of
a de facto full and substantial statement after its request
had been rejected did run against the practices and
procedures of the Security Council.

We have gathered in this Chamber today to
discuss an additional demonstration of disregard for
international law and an attempt to undermine efforts
aimed at achieving peace in Eastern Europe. Russia has
just added another dimension to the conflict in Ukraine.

During the previous Security Council briefing on
Ukraine (see S/PV.8386) we expressed our concern
about the development of military capabilities taking
place in the Crimea and the Sea of Azov. For several
months Russia has delayed hundreds of commercial
vessels attempting to reach Ukrainian ports in the Sea
of Azov Via the Kerch Strait for extended periods and
at great economic cost for Ukraine. Now Russia attacks
Ukrainian vessels, stating the need for protection of
"Russian territory". Further militarization and an
increase of tensions brings more instability to a region
that has already suffered enough.

After the aggression against Georgia, the illegal
occupation of Crimea, the fuelling of the conflict
in Donbas, the building of the Kerch Bridge without
the consent of the authorities in Kyiv, and the farcical
elections in the separatist regions on 11 November,
Russia has now violated Ukraine's navigation rights.
We strongly condemn Russia's aggressive actions and
call on its authorities to respect international law. We
also call on both sides to exercise restraint in the current
situation, which may further jeopardize the stability of
European security.

This State-to-State conflict initiated and fuelled
by Russia has one aim: to destabilize Ukraine. We
therefore urge the United Nations system as a whole to
give proper attention to this active armed conflict. We
cannot turn a blind eye to this situation just because
one of the sides in the conflict is a permanent member
of the Security Council.

Russia's military actions in Crimea and the Sea
of Azov should serve as a lesson learned as to what
this State is capable of in order to safeguard its critical
infrastructure in Europe. Persistent violations of
international law, including bilateral agreements, lead
directly to the imposition of forced solutions aimed at
controlling Russia's interests concerning the existing
communication and energy infrastructure as well
as such infrastructure under construction and that
being planned.

Let me reiterate that Poland strongly supports the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
We do not recognize Russia's annexation of Crimea. We
underline the need for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements, which is the only path to a lasting
solution to the conflict in and around Ukraine.

