Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I started to
listen to my Russian friend so as to respond to him, but
instead I am truly in awe of his ability to say what he
said with a straight face.

Today's meeting of the Security Council has
been convened under truly strange circumstances.
The Russian Federation has asked us to discuss what
it calls unilateral threats related to Syria. What is
strange is that Russia is ignoring the real threat to
international peace and security that has brought us all
here. It is ignoring its own unilateral responsibility for
all of it. What we should discuss today is the use of
deadly chemical weapons to murder innocent Syrian
civilians. That is one of the most blatant and grotesque
violations of international law in the world today. It is
a violation of all standards of morality. It violates the
long-standing international consensus that chemical
weapons represent a unique evil. Chlorine, mustard
gas and other chemical weapons killed 90,000 people
and injured more than 1 million during the First World
War. In the history Canada in the Great World War, the
Canadian soldier A.T. Hunter described it this way.

"The gas cloud gathered itself like a wave and
ponderously lapped over into the trenches. Then
passive curiosity turned to active torment - a
burning sensation in the head, red-hot needles in
the lungs, the throat seized by a strangler. Many
fell and died on the spot. The others, gasping,
stumbling with faces contorted, hands widely
gesticulating and uttering hoarse cries of pain, fled
madly through the villages and farms and through
the city itself, carrying panic to the remnants of
the civilian population and filling the roads with
fugitives of both sexes and all ages".

Chemical weapons did not produce the most
casualties in the First World War, but they were the most
feared. In the Second World War chemical weapons
were employed on an industrial scale against civilians,
resulting in the worst genocide in human history, which
the United States recalled just yesterday on Holocaust
Remembrance Day. That is what brings us here today.
That is what chemical weapons are all about. That is
why we must not stay silent in the face of the horrible
use of chemical weapons in our own time.

The first response to all of this death and injury
was the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which banned the use
of chemical weapons and more. Later, in 1993, the
Chemical Weapons Convention was signed. It obligates
all of its parties to never under any circumstances

"develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or
retain chemical weapons, or transfer, directly or
indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone".

It also prohibits all parties from helping anyone to
engage in such activities. The United States is a party
to the Convention. Russia is a party to the Convention.
Every country that is currently a member of the Security
Council is a party to the Convention. Even the Al-Assad
regime has pledged to abide by the Convention, so in
theory all of us agree on the core principle at stake
today. No country can by allowed to use chemical
weapons with impunity. Now that we have established
what we all agree on, let us ask ourselves what we
should be condemning today. We should be discussing
the actions that truly brought us to this moment in time.
We should not be condemning the country or group
of countries that might have the courage to stand up
in defence of our common principle against the use of
chemical weapons. Instead, we should be condemning
the country that has unilaterally prevented the Security
Council from upholding it.

Which member of the Council most exhibits
unilateralism with regard to chemical weapons? It
is Russia alone that has stopped at nothing to defend
the Syrian regime's multiple instances of the use of
chemical weapons. It is Russia alone that killed the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, which enabled the world to
ensure accountability for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. It is Russia alone that has used its veto six
times to prevent the condemnation of Al-Assad's use of
chemical weapons. It is Russia alone that has used its
veto 12 times to protect the Al-Assad regime. To make
matters worse, it was Russia alone that agreed to be
the guarantor of the removal of all chemical weapons
in Syria. If Russia had lived up to its commitment,
there would be no chemical weapons in Syria and we
would not be here today. That is the Russian record of
unilateralism. It is a record that has led to the trashing of
all international standards against the use of chemical
weapons. This meeting should not be about so-called
unilateral threats, but rather about the multiple actions
that Russia has taken to bring us to this point.

Our President has not yet made a decision about
possible actions in Syria, but should the United States
and its allies decide to act in Syria, it will be in defence
of a principle on which we all agree. It will be in
defence of a bedrock international norm that benefits
all nations. Let us be clear. Al-Assad's most recent use
of poison gas against the people of Douma was not his
first, second, third or even forty-ninth use of chemical
weapons. The United States estimates that Al-Assad
has used chemical weapons in the Syrian war at least
50 times. Public estimates are as high as 200.

In the weeks after Al-Assad's sarin-gas attack last
April, which killed nearly 100 people, including many
children, the regime used chlorine gas at least once and
possibly as many as three times in the same area. Last
November, just as the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism expired, the regime again attacked its
people with sarin in the Damascus suburbs.

In January, Al-Assad used at least four
chlorine-filled rockets in Douma, and then he struck
again last weekend. Thanks to Russia, there was no
United Nations body to determine blame. But we know
who did this; our allies know who did this. Russia can
complain all it wants about fake news, but no one is
buying its lies and its coverups. Russia was supposed
to guarantee that Al-Assad would not use chemical
weapons, and Russia did the opposite.

The world must not passively accept the use of
chemical weapons after almost a century of their
prohibition. Everything the United Nations stands for
is being blatantly defied in Syria, with the help of a
permanent member of the Council. All nations and
all peoples will be harmed if we allow Al-Assad to
normalize the use of chemical weapons. It is those who
act to violate the prohibition of chemical weapons who
deserve our condemnation. Those who act to defend it
deserve our support. The United States and its allies
will continue to stand up for truth, accountability,
justice and an end to the use of chemical weapons.

