Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 25). The promotion and protection of human rights is integral to peace and security, and is embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. Violations and abuses of all human rights - civil, political, economic, social and cultural - can be drivers of conflict. On the other hand, the respect for, and protection of, human rights can help prevent and end conflicts by contributing to addressing the root causes of instability. With that in mind and as a long-standing troop-contributor, it is our firm belief that human rights are integral to our peacekeeping efforts. The upholding of human rights principles and the implementation of tasks in line with human rights principles and international human rights law applies to all United Nations peacekeeping operations, irrespective of whether there is a specific human rights component. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) increases the challenges of conflict and the vulnerability of people. We therefore congratulate Germany on its leadership and on prioritizing this agenda item throughout its Council membership. We also welcome today's briefings, as well as the continued engagement of High Commissioner Bachelet with the Security Council. The new challenges for peacekeepers in reaching and protecting vulnerable populations in conflict, created by this pandemic, means that we must ensure that peacekeepers are fully supported and fully resourced in the implementation of their mandates, but most especially in relation to the protection of civilians and human rights. Human rights components play an indispensable role in peacekeeping operations, and we recognize the crucial contribution of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting missions to fulfil their mandates. We must guard against disproportionate public health measures that impede the work of our missions or undermine human rights protections. Put simply, the implementation of emergency measures must not compromise human rights, which must remain at the heart of our responses to the pandemic, both globally and locally. We know too that COVID-19 is making it more difficult for peacekeepers to interact with communities and individuals. It is important that we are innovative in supporting interaction and engagement with local populations and civil society. The voices of those key stakeholders are crucial to helping missions resolve conflict and make them as effective as possible in protecting human rights. Other capabilities, including strategic communications, outreach and engagement, civil-military cooperation and key leader engagement, should also be harnessed to address protection-of-civilian concerns and ensure the promotion and protection of human rights in a holistic and integrated manner. Ensuring that peacekeeping missions fully incorporate human rights principles and mainstream human rights throughout their tasks demands standardized and contextualized predeployment training. Comprehensive training will enhance their performance and effectiveness at a time when we must seek increased accountability. The Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative places particular emphasis on accountability. That is particularly important in relation to the issues of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeepers. Ireland has signed the voluntary compact on combating sexual exploitation and abuse, which contains a series of commitments by the United Nations and the relevant Member States to prevent or prosecute cases of sexual exploitation and/or abuse by personnel deployed within United Nations peacekeeping missions. Our commitment to those standards has led to a whole-of-Government approach in implementing the provisions of the voluntary compact. There can be no impunity for those who violate or exploit the people they have been charged to protect. Increasing the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in peacekeeping at all levels will also positively impact human rights protection within peacekeeping missions. The presence and skill sets of women peacekeepers and women protection officers within missions significantly impact a mission's ability to carry out its mandates with regard to the protection of civilians and conflict- related sexual violence. The role that women can play in the delivery of peace is key. We must recognize that role by ensuring their inclusion and that they are free to participate equally and meaningfully in the delivery of peace. Ireland agrees fully with the Secretary-General's assertion that human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and security, and that their inclusion in the deliberations and decisions of the Security Council is of great importance. As an incoming member of the Security Council, we will seek to build on the important work done so far and further integrate human rights into our peacekeeping efforts.
