Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): There
is no doubt that the "month of Africa" was to some extent
a calculated risk. It has drawn attention to a continent of
huge problems where the Security Council has been
trying hard but has not achieved the results that we or
Africans wanted. But I, personally, believe that it was an
exceptional initiative and was thoroughly worth doing, if
only to bring into public relief the need for a greater
effort on Africa. That, itself, was worth doing. It has, of
course, created expectations. I do not think that President
Chiluba and the Foreign Ministers of South Africa and of
Namibia would be with us this morning unless they
wanted to check whether the Security Council was
following up on the rhetoric. I think that that is what we
have got to do.

 

We have seen some concrete results. The Burundi
debate provided an important platform for former President
Mandela's facilitation. The Angola meeting helped keep
pressure on arms supplies. My Minister of State, Peter
Hain, today made another statement, in South Africa, to
draw attention to the United Kingdom's determination to
follow up on particular abuses of sanctions and to try to
bring people to justice. The debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo achieved the strong recommitment
of the parties to Lusaka and made more likely the early
sending of a peacekeeping force to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The ground-breaking debate on AIDS also
brought that issue to the centre of the Council's agenda. I
believe that it would be right to bring it to the attention of
the General Assembly and also for the Council to follow up
the AIDS debate in checking, in liaison with other United
Nations organs, how to move United Nations action on
AIDS forward.

The Security Council's special concern with Africa did
not begin this month, and it will not end this month. We
have already spent a great deal of time in the past two
years trying to help Africans get Africa right. Some of our
efforts were perhaps better targeted than others. Mrs.
Ogata's message on refugees and internally displaced
persons was a very important one. But I do not think that
the Council knows how we are going to follow it up. There
are relentless challenges that have stretched the resources of
the Council and the Secretariat to the breaking point. How
are we going to deal with the issue of resources?

Overall, however, I think that the Council's record on
Africa is improving. We now have a substantial
peacekeeping operation up and running in Sierra Leone,
which the Deputy Secretary-General has called the most
immediate test for the Council in Africa. The United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic is drawing
to a successful conclusion. Ambassador Fowler's efforts on
Angola really have put the squeeze on UNITA's sanctions
busters. Another example is the work of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) on Ethiopia and Eritrea. Although
we have not taken that work forward in the Council, there
has been good liaison between the United Nations and the
OAU on a very discreet and confidential mediation effort
which I hope is now beginning to bear results.

We have concentrated in particular, however, on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I think that that is now
going to be the most conspicuous test of whether this
month has been worth it. The United Kingdom hopes that
work will begin immediately on a draft resolution and that
it can be completed this week. The Lusaka parties have
made it quite clear that the longer they have to wait for
the deployment of these observers to monitor the ceasefire
and redeployment of forces, the less likely it is that their
commitments will hold and that national reconciliation
will be a reality.

United States efforts in the past month have
therefore demonstrated how important high-profile, big-
impact diplomacy is for making progress on Africa's
problems. But let us not lose sight of the importance of
other approaches - less headline-grabbing, and perhaps
lower key, but, in the long term, just as critical to success
for the United Nations Africa agenda and for the triumph
of results over rhetoric.

In December, Minister Peter Hain chaired a meeting
on Africa in this Chamber from which he drew a number
of conclusions. He noted that there was a broad consensus
in favour of regular and more structured consultation and
coordination between the Council and the OAU and
regional bodies; of the greater use of tools such as joint
envoys and missions, an issue which Ambassador Baali
brought up this morning; and of more regular meetings
between the Security Council, the OAU and subregional
bodies. Mr. Hain also drew attention to the peacekeeping
needs of Africa, and to the need to increase capacity, an
issue on which we need to do more and to do so early.

All of these points need to be acted upon. I would
like, in particular, to see a more regular dialogue with the
OAU; that has not yet been established. I think that we
would have raised that issue with Secretary-General Salim
had he been here. We need to work on that now, to make
sure that it happens on a regular basis. With that partly in
mind, I want to make a modest proposal for taking
forward some of these ideas from the "month of Africa".
I suggest that the Africa experts of Council members
establish themselves as an informal but permanent
working group to look at African problems - away from
the day-to-day demands of Secretariat briefings, mandate
renewals and other Council business. The purpose of such
a group would not be to draft statements or resolutions
but to examine whether the Council is using all the
appropriate tools at its disposal to follow up on this
month; to ask why certain issues are perhaps not being
brought before the Council; to consider whether a group
of friends or a contact group might have useful input on
a particular Council item; to check whether the provisions
of Council resolutions on Africa are being properly
implemented; and to consider whether briefings by the
OAU or regional African Group representatives could
help inform the Council's work.

 

Such a working group might have regular meetings
with the representative of the Chairman or the Secretary-
General of the OAU. Our colleagues will have other and
different ideas, and we look forward to discussing them in
this forum and more informally. We look to the Argentine
presidency to take forward some of these ideas as soon as
it can put them on the schedule. But one way or another,
let us agree today to use the energy, imagination and focus
generated by the "month of Africa" to fuel a continuing and
productive effort.

