Lord Ashdown: I am very conscious, Sir, of your
proper requirement to be brief, so I will try, if I may -
whilst, I hope, covering most if not all of the points -
to be as swift as I can.

First of all, may I say how much I personally
appreciated - as will, I know, my staff - the very
widespread expressions of support that we have
received here. They are heartwarming and provide us, I
think, with a huge sense of confidence about the
support that comes from the Council, and for that I am
deeply grateful. May I say that, very welcome though
they are, we need alongside them - and members may
think these are even more important - the practical
help that was referred to properly by the representative
of Colombia, in the support programmes, for the judges
and the prosecutors, and in the witness protection
programmes. If we are now to seriously tackle, as I am
determined we will, the networks of serious, large-
scale organized crime in Bosnia-Herzegovina, then
some people will be, indeed already are, putting their
lives at risk to clean up the space in Bosnia-
Herzegovina. Practical help, practical assistance with
judges, with prosecutors that can help us train, with
witness protection programmes by those who have
experience in dealing with organized crime, will be
hugely important to our success. It is a battle we cannot
afford to lose. And in this context, I think the point
made by the representative of Denmark on behalf of
the European Union (EU) is extremely important.

The London Conference of 24-25 November on
organized crime throughout the Balkans is a very
important milestone for us. The representative of
Denmark asked me a direct question: "What can best
come out of it?" And the answer is: "That practical
help that we need." And may I stress, perhaps speaking
on behalf of my colleagues who have already spoken
from the region, that organized crime is not just a
Bosnian problem, it is a Balkans problem. Nor is it a
problem that is unique to the Balkans. Organized
crime, corruption and the black market stalk after war
like a black shadow. Those of us who remember what
happened after the Second World War in Europe will
remember that this is an inevitable consequence of war
and dislocation.

But it must be beaten. There is not a single civil
space, not a single political space, not even a single
economic space in the Balkans. But there is a single
criminal space. It operates completely disregarding
borders and ethnic differences. It has to be tackled
regionally. And it can only be tackled regionally with
the specific, practical measures of the sort that have
been outlined and which, we hope, will be put together
at the London Conference.

On the question of refugees raised by Ireland,
Mexico and the representative of the EU, the key thing
that is stopping refugees returning in most areas of
Bosnia-Herzegovina - leaving aside perhaps a tiny
handful, three or four I could name, where the problem
remains security - is lack of economic activity, lack
of social provision and lack of jobs above all. But,
nevertheless, there are many areas to which people
would wish to move back but they are now prevented
from doing so, because there simply is not the money
to put a roof on their house.

I wish that Council members could have come
with my wife and me, a matter of weeks ago, when we
went to stay with people moving back, unbelievably, to
the hill villages above Srebrenica. These were
devastated farm lands that had not been opened up for
six years and were being cleared by women, because
all the men had been killed. Those women have had the
courage to return to their communities, to clear their
farm land by hand, to sit patiently beside their ruined
and burnt house in the very community where their
father their grandfather and their sons had been
slaughtered. You would have seen then that the heart-
breaking thing is that whatever their commitment,
whatever their courage, the thing that keeps them from
coming back is that there is not the money to put a roof
on their house, that we cannot provide them with a
cow, that we cannot provide them with a herd of sheep
to get their economy restarted. Now that is what this
means to keep that funding up, and I beg the Council to
make sure that continues to happen.

There are some who think it is the time to cut
back our funding. It is not. We are on the edge of a
miracle here, but it has to be kept going. The
representative of France mentioned the fact, as indeed
have many others, that they did not regard the vote as a
vote for nationalism. That is correct. But it remains a
hard and unavoidable fact that the people who are now
more powerful are those who come from the
"nationalist" parties. I am not sure nationalism and
non-nationalism is necessarily the only criterion by
which you can judge Bosnian politics any longer. I
think we are moving to a rather subtle and more
complex structure.

But let me just make this point, that I think that
we ought to judge the next Government by its actions,
not by who is in there or what label they have. All of
their manifestos are committed to reform. This is where
they have to prove it.

But here is a point that I think it is important that
the Council might like to fasten on - and I put it in the
blunt, undiplomatic terms of a representative of a
country that makes a major contribution in terms of
resources to Bosnia-Herzegovina - why should we
continue to provide our taxpayers' money to help their
country if they hand so much of it over to criminals, so
there is inefficiency in their systems? And our
taxpayers are saying that if we are dealing with a new
Government of whatever colour and calibre, then a
little more direct approach that links the resources that
we provide with the reforms that have to be made to
tackle corruption and criminality, to set up a value
added tax and to reform the customs system might be
an appropriate way forward.

The representative of the United States asked me
two direct questions, would I be prepared to use the so-
called bond powers to counter Dayton-obstructionists
and those who break the sanctions on Iraq set up by the
United Nations Security Council? The straightforward
answer to him is yes, though in the latter of those two it
is rather more a matter, it seems to me, for SFOR at the
moment, together with the United Nations authorities,
to establish whether or not there has been a breach in
such sanctions. I stand ready to use my powers to back
up any action that they require to deal with a case of a
breach of international law as may be revealed.

Jacques Klein will cover the question of whether
or not UNMIBH is ready.

On the question of low turn-out, can I just say
that this is disappointing to us all, the low turn-out. I
have gone all around the country day by day,
exhaustively, in order to try to improve turn-out. At 55
per cent, I merely reflect that it is still rather higher
than normally found in some of the countries around
this table. But let me enter as a thought for the
international community. If we descend on nations in
the chaos after war and we believe that the first thing
we should establish is democracy, and we measure
democracy by the number of elections there are, rather
than saying that the first thing we should do is establish
the rule of law, then do not be surprised if when
elections are held every two years or more frequently,
the nationals are rather bored with it when they do not
see results. If we have inflicted, as we have, on Bosnia-
Herzegovina, six elections in six years, giving a
Government only two years to conduct the reforms in a
massive programme that required radical reform,
without giving it time to deliver the dividends of that,
then we should not be too surprised if, at the end of the
day, people are getting fed up with elections, because
they do not see their Governments delivering progress.

My argument remains, and it is not a new one -
I said it six years ago when the war ended in Bosnia -
in countries in which we try to establish peace after
war our priority should always be the rule of law first
and democracy second. Only if you establish the rule
of law can you have decent democratic practices.

But the United Kingdom delegate is right. I think
we should be taking that as a message to speed up the
process of reform. That is how I have read it. That is
how others have read it, and that is what we shall now
do.

The representative of the United Kingdom asked
me two questions: was it possible to put together a
"non-nationalist" coalition in the Republika Srpska?
The answer is yes. It does depend on, I think Mr.
Mladen Ivanic, the ex-Prime Minister of Republika of
Srpska. But, numerically, it can be done. Does it matter
who forms the new Governments? Of course it does. I
look at the manifestos of all the parties, including the
most nationalist, and I can find strong commitments to
reform in each of them. But that reform will proceed
more quickly if those who are known by their actions
as reformers are in Government, rather than if those
who are not known as reformers are in.

Now it may be that the "nationalist" Governments
are committed to reform. But I think it is legitimate for
us to say we are rather sceptical in view of what has
been seen in the past. We are not dismissing that claim.
But we will judge it according to what actions they
subsequently take. What I am clear about is that the
process of reform cannot now be impeded, though it
could be slowed down.
The representative of China mentioned the single
economic space and he is absolutely right. Here is a
simple fact. If you are a wine grower in Citluk, in
Herzegovina, you will find it easier to sell your wine to
Berlin than to Banja Luka. We need, as the
representative of China said, to carry out the economic
reforms to create a single economic space with uniform
economic rules, so that we can generate an internal
market, before we begin to tackle the question of
whether we can pull in external investment.

The representative of Russia mentioned the Dayton
Agreement. I can only say to him what I have said
previously: that none of the proposals I am making and
none of the proposals I intend to make part company
with the provisions of Dayton or the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me, however, say to him
that I do not think that he would disagree - and I have
discussed this many times with his Ambassador in
Sarajevo, to whom, incidentally, I pay tribute as a very
close colleague and wise adviser - that we have
allowed Dayton to be used by the obstructionists to
obstruct too much in the past, and what we have to use
are the provisions of Dayton which allow the kind of
reforms we are talking about.

Secondly, he talks about the importance of
consensus. He is again right. It must always be right to
build up consensus. Can I, however, tell the Council
what my problem is? I think the representative of
Mauritius identified it when he talked about the debt
crisis. The reason for the debt crisis is that
international aid is on a glide path downwards - and
so it should be six years after the war. But, so far, the
scleroticism of the economy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not made it attractive for international
investment. The only way to fill that gap of the
domestic debt crisis is by international investment.

That debt crisis will start biting very hard by
about the spring of 2003. It is unlikely that we will
have a Government formed until January or February.
It may happen earlier, but I do not believe it
necessarily will. It is very probable that we will have to
take the steps necessary to reform the economy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to attract
international investment before the new Government is
formed. Now we will seek to do that as far as possible
on the basis of consensus, because that is the kind of
reform that will stick. But I have to say that Bosnia and
Herzegovina does not have time to waste, if lives and
businesses are not to be threatened and if social
services and teachers are to continue to be paid.
The representative of Bulgaria mentioned
customs. I think I said earlier how important that was.
We lose huge sums of money - one and a half times
the State budget - through failing customs revenue.
That, too, is a regional problem.

A few other questions were put to me. The
representative of Syria asked about the military. I will
ask Jacques to deal with the police. There has to be
military reform. It has to stay, as the Russian
representative clearly said, within the requirements of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. But there is
room, in my view, to move towards further military
reform in order to enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join Partnership for Peace. I think that it is not an
unreasonable target for us to set to say that that could
be done within 18 months, provided that there is a
willingness to carry out those reforms, again I stress,
strictly within the Dayton construct.

I mentioned the debt crisis, which was raised by
Mauritius, but, let me just say that there is a need to
fund effectively the State court. Part of its role will be
to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with a domestic
capacity to try war crimes. That can be done next year
or the year afterwards. What separates those two
achievements will be whether or not, and to what
extent, the domestic war crimes capacity of the State
court is supported by the international community. The
less support there is, the longer it will take for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to try war crimes in its own backyard.

The European Union asked about the formation
of the new Government. Here is the problem: the
election has given us a precisely balanced number of
seats held by what you might call the nationalist parties
and all the rest. That means that, although it is possible
for a Government to be formed by the end of this year,
I am rather doubtful that it will be. We are probably
looking towards January, February or even March
before a Government is formed.

Croatia asked, whether there was anything that
the Security Council could do on Karadzic and Mladic.
Well, the answer is, the sooner we capture and bring to
trial both Karadzic and Mladic, the sooner Bosnia will
be able to put its past behind it. That is the great act of
closure that will enable us to begin to build our future.
I am impatient for that to be done. I understand how
difficult a military task that is, given the wild nature of
the Bosnian countryside. I take comfort in a single fact,
and that is that, although the arrest of those two men
and their being brought to trial is necessary, and
although when it happens the process of reform will
speed up, their power is no longer such as to be able to
create a complete block on the process of reform. They
can slow it down, but they cannot stop it.

I want, finally, if I may, to pay tribute to the point
made by the representative of Yugoslavia. One of the
things that has made my job immeasurably less
difficult, apart from the tremendous foundation laid by
Jacques Klein and all my predecessors, is the fact that
we have now seen - from Croatia for a longer time,
but from Yugoslavia more recently - a kind of
regional cooperation that makes it possible for us to
solve problems more easily and more quickly. That
regional cooperation, which was clearly symbolized by
the meeting between the three Presidents, to which the
representative of Yugoslavia referred, is one of the
most hopeful signs for the future.

I apologize for having taken so long before I hand
over to my colleague Jacques Klein. May I sum up
simply by saying this. There are those who still regard
Bosnia as being a black hole in the Balkans. It is not.
The things that have been done as a result of the
remarkable support of the United Nations, the
international community and Bosnian institutions -
and, if I may say, the extraordinary courage of the
Bosnian people themselves - have ensured that this
country has advanced further from one of the most
terrible wars of the second half of the last century in
six years than my own country of Northern Ireland has
managed in 30.

Some of the things that have been done there are
simply miraculous and ought to be understood. If you
had sat in the shattered city of Sarajevo, and someone
had said that this country, in a mere six years after the
war, would have the most stable currency in the
Balkans, that there would be complete freedom of
movement right across the country, that there would be
more than a quarter of a million people moved back to
the homes from which they were driven in blood and
terror only six years earlier, and that completely
peaceful, violence-free elections would have been
conducted, then you would have said that that was
impossible. But that is what States have achieved. It is
a dangerous thing for me to say this, but I think that the
worst is now behind us in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The easier task is now ahead. It is not going to be easy,
but it is going to be easier. That can be done, but it can
be done only if the international community continues
to apply the same will and resources to make things
happen that is has applied over the past six years.

