Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Like others, we thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
his tireless efforts. The delegation of Ukraine supported
resolution 2268 (2016), just adopted by the Security
Council, and wholeheartedly hopes that it will serve the
purpose ofbreaking the dangerous pattern of escalation
in Syria and help to bring this conflict to an end.

At the same time, we would like to register our
disagreement with the language of paragraph 4 of the
resolution in the part that recognizing the efforts of the
Russian Federation to reach understanding on the terms
of the cessation of hostilities. In reality, it is precisely
the Russian Federation's support for the Government
forces in Syria that have taken the violence to a new level
in recent months. Russia is now trying to impose itself
as a mediator in the Syrian settlement process. Russian
tactics in Syria are similar to those in eastern Ukraine.
Like in Ukraine, Russia is stirring up violence in Syria,
including by supplying military personnel, providing
arms and ammunition, conducting combat operations
and spreading false propaganda. As we speak, I have
just learned from reports that, with less than one hour
left until Syria's ceasefire begins, a Russian air strike
just hit the Al-Kinana hospital in Darat Ezza in Aleppo
province. The current situation in and around Aleppo
has too much in common with the tactics used by the
Russian armed forces during the siege of the Ukrainian
city of Debaltseve in February 2015 after the signing of
the Minsk package of measures.

Regrettably, our proposals to balance the text
of paragraph 4 of the draft resolution were not duly
reflected. However, preoccupied by the gravity and
urgency of the situation in Syria, the Ukrainian
delegation decided to cast its vote in favour of the
resolution. Our motivation is driven by our recognition
of the dire need to reverse this horrific conflict that has
devastated Syria and put the entire Middle East on the
brink of a larger regional escalation. That arrangement
is obviously long overdue, but what matters is that it
reflects a wide understanding that the Syrian people
cannot wait any longer and deserve peace and most
urgent help. Now that we have a glimmer of new hope
in Syria, we need tangible practical steps on the ground.

That having been said, we cannot but underscore
the importance of the coming days and weeks, which
will be defining ones. The parties to the conflict, both
inside and outside of Syria, will have to prove with
deeds, not words, that they are committed to meeting
their obligations. This time there will be no room for
political manoeuvres or excuses. There will be only one
way - that of setting arms aside and engaging in a
serious political process.

