Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Bolivian presidency for organizing
today's debate on what we consider an essential topic,
as well as the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which has given us a very informative framework for
our discussions.

When we talk about natural resources, we are
talking about extractive resources, including fossil
fuels and minerals. But it also means soil quality,
biodiversity and drinking water, all vital resources
that are affected by climate change. Sustainable
management of natural resources can and must be a
factor in economic development. However, all too often
the struggle to control them still helps to trigger, amplify
or perpetuate deadly conflicts. In such situations, the
challenge is to combine short-term action, which is
critical for responding to urgent crises, with long-term
efforts to address their root causes, which often include
tackling the issue of natural resources. My message
today is simple. We must work together to more
effectively address this factor in conflict prevention,
crisis management and support for political transition
processes and sustainable development.
My first point is about prevention. The conditions
that lead to conflict over natural resources are well
known. When the revenues they generate are poorly
distributed, when predators enter the picture, when
the management of the companies involved is opaque
or the stakeholders are not included enough in the
decision-making process or the distribution of resources,
the risk of conflict increases. That is true for internal
conflicts or those sparked by actors from neighbouring
countries. To better identify such precarious situations,
we must encourage the sharing of analyses and
diagnoses and develop early-warning mechanisms.
We therefore call on the Secretariat to integrate the
natural-resources dimension into its reports and to find
the expertise required for that through the support of
the specialized agencies of the United Nations.

Civil society and private actors can also make
valuable contributions alongside Governments to
improving governance in the exploitation of resources.
Voluntary measures to improve revenue transparency
are a step in the right direction for that, and here I
particularly have in mind the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. Encouraging the contribution
of civil society also means ensuring that advocates
for environmental law and sustainable resource
management everywhere are free to express themselves
and protected against possible attacks. Lastly, we
must support the tools of preventive diplomacy in
the management of natural resources, such as the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes.

My second point is about crisis management. When
a conflict breaks out, the revenues generated by the
illegal exploitation of resources can help it to spread
or persist. The Libyan crisis is a good example of
that. The predations of the country's natural resources
have encouraged many actors to maintain the status
quo rather than back the political transition process
proposed by Special Representative Ghassan Salame'
and supported by the Council. That is also very clear in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic, in the predatory activities of armed
groups. In all those crises, the war economy is also a
lopsided economy that adversely affects the people in
two ways - they are deprived of the resources they need
for development and they are the primary victims of the
continuing conflict. Difficulties in accessing energy
and natural resources during conflicts are also a factor
in increases in sexual and gender-based violence. For
example, women sometimes have to expose themselves
to intolerable violence in order to bring home water and
essential supplies. South Sudan is a particularly serious
example in this respect.

In addition, women's inequitable access to
resources hampers not only their empowerment but
also the development of the countries concerned. It is
therefore our duty to address this issue, as it is a factor
in the perpetuation of crises. This we do when we adopt
sanctions, in particular when we establish designation
criteria linked to the exploitation of natural resources,
such as the mechanisms established in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Central African
Republic. We can and must do more in this area, in
particular by ensuring that we recruit specialized
experts and by encouraging them to update the local
and international intermediary networks that make
such traffic possible.

Beyond Council action, the recommendation tools
set up by the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development to encourage multinational companies
to adopt a responsible attitude are also very useful. Of
course, this responsibility is generally based on central
follow-up and transparency capacities. I would also like
to laud the valuable contribution made by mechanisms
for the certification and follow-up of commodities,
such as the one for diamonds created by the Kimberley
process, whose chairmanship is held this year by the
European Union. We would like to see the gold sector
also be subject to a certification framework, in the same
spirit of cooperation between public and private actors.

My third and final point relates to post-conflict
situations, which also require determined action on
our part. Here security-sector reform poses a crucial
challenge. In order to prevent and combat the illicit
exploitation of natural resources in the long term,
we must enhance both the operational effectiveness
of the security forces and their transparency and
accountability, focusing on this issue in the mandates
adopted or renewed by the Council. In addition, when
private service providers are charged by the extractive
sector with providing site security, regulations must be
in place that will ensure their professionalism and their
coordination with the public authorities.

Peacekeeping operations can help host countries to
strengthen the rule of law and, in so doing, contribute
to creating a climate that is conducive to a rational and
legal exploitation of natural resources that also takes
into account the interest of the population. They will
help the host country to exercise its sovereignty in this
area as well. In that respect, we must also ensure that
the conduct of United Nations staff is beyond reproach.
In post-conflict situations, land and land ownership
issues are also very important, as we can see in Darfur.
They are key factors in enabling the return of displaced
persons and preventing the resurgence of conflict.
Conflict prevention also involves recognizing and
securing existing and determined property and usage
rights, regardless of their origin or nature. We must pay
particular attention to ensuring that the land rights of
women are upheld, including in post-conflict situations.

Finally, I wish to underline the important role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission with respect to
countries in post-conflict situations that are dependent
on natural resources. It provides an indispensable
framework for bringing together all the components of
the United Nations system and international financial
institutions and for promoting best practices.

In the face ofsuch a complex challenge, mobilization
is vital across the board so that natural resources can
become a driver of sustainable development rather than
fuel for current and future crises. Mr. President, you
can rest assured of France's resolute commitment in
this respect.

