Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Almasabi for their briefings. Estonia fully supports the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths aimed at reaching an agreement ona nationwide ceasefire, humanitarian and economic measures and the resumption of the political process. It is unacceptable to seek further territorial gains at the expense of the people of Yemen, who are suffering as a result of the increasingly grave humanitarian crisis, as we just heard from the briefings by Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasabi. We urge all parties to heed the call of Yemeni civil society to cease hostilities and agree on measures to alleviate the suffering of Yemenis without further delay. This is necessary for the start of the next phase of the comprehensive political process, which is the only way to find sustainable peace. Despite the important progress made towards this agreement, it is deeply worrisome that fierce fighting continues, resulting in an ever-growing number of civilian casualties and the exacerbation of the humanitarian crisis. We strongly condemn the recent air strikes that caused multiple civilian casualties, including children, who are bearing an increasingly heavy burden from the hostilities. We remind all parties of their obligation to adhere to international humanitarian law andto protect civilians, especially vulnerable groups, such as women and children. We also condemn the continuous the deployment of drones and the firing of ballistic missiles at civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia. We are also deeply concerned about the alarming humanitarian situation in Yemen, which the coronavirus disease pandemic and the dire economic situation have exacerbated. We remind all parties, especially those in northern Yemen, about the need to facilitate safe and unhindered access for humanitarian personnel. We also urge them to facilitate the air travel of humanitarian staff, lift commercial import restrictions and find a solution that will secure the regular importation of fuel. With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we urge the Houthi authorities to take immediate concrete steps, without preconditions, to provide the United Nations mission access to the ship. There is not much time left for preventing a possible leakage or explosion, which would have catastrophic consequences for the environment as well as to the economy.
