Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): May I
first of all thank the Secretary-General for his first
report on Timor-Leste. On behalf of my delegation, I
should like also to welcome to the Council Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor, and to express our
appreciation for the useful information he has just
given us. We commend him for the excellent work that
he and his team have done on the ground in such a
short period.

At the public meeting of the Security Council on
20 May 2002, my delegation stated that, with Timor-
Leste's independence, a new era was opening up for the
country. We noted the tremendous amount of work that
lay ahead of the new authorities and stressed the need
for the international community to remain engaged in
supporting the efforts being made.

Six months have elapsed now, and my delegation
is pleased to see that a great deal of progress has been
achieved thanks to the work done by the people there,
the leaders of Timor-Leste and the international
community.

However, many challenges remain that must be
dealt with to enable that young State to shoulder all of
its responsibilities.

The report under consideration tells us how the
situation is evolving on the ground and discusses the
responsibilities of the various players with respect to
strengthening what has been achieved and developing
Timor-Leste. My delegation welcomes the efforts made
to ensure the proper functioning of national institutions
and to promote a participatory democracy that reflects
the concerns of the Timorese. It welcomes Timor-
Leste's joining the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank and the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries.

The elaboration of a regulatory and technical
framework for the development of the natural resources
of the country, in particular oil and gas, is a
prerequisite for resolving the socio-economic problems
of the country. We note also the contribution made by
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor to
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1410
(2002).

Programme I, on stability, democracy and justice,
suffers from some technical shortcomings that require
our attention. Programme II, on internal security and
law enforcement, has resulted in a drop in crime,
thanks to the unified chain of command of the United
Nations police and the Timor-Leste Police Service. In
this connection, we support the continuation of the
training programme, so as to ensure the successful
transfer of power from the United Nations police to the
Timor-Leste Police Service.

Programme III concerns external security and
border control. In this respect, my delegation welcomes
the joint efforts made by the Governments of Timor-
Leste and of Indonesia, inter alia to put an end to crime
and to maintain an atmosphere of stability. In that
connection, we believe that settling the question of
refugees is more necessary now than ever before.

We also welcome the launching of the National
Development Plan for Timor-Leste, and we urge the
various partners to give it greater support in order to
facilitate a smooth transition.

Lastly, given the fragility of the institutions, my
delegation is convinced of the urgent need to build
capacity, to develop human resources and to pursue
appropriate policies in order to strengthen the
foundation for sustainable development in Timor-
Leste.

