Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): Let me express my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening today's important debate.

We join with previous speakers to support the
statement of the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

At the outset, I condemn in the strongest terms
and categorically reject the reckless remarks made
by hostile forces, including the United States, Japan,
the United Kingdom, France, Spain and the Republic
of Korea. Taking the opportunity offered by today's
open debate, they once again called into question the
measures taken by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to bolster its self-defence capabilities, and
referenced the use of chemical weapons that have never
existed, while branding the Republic as a threat to
world peace and regional security and a country that
violates Security Council resolutions.

This is nothing but an outrageous breach of the
sovereignty of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Everyone recalls that, in February this year, the
hostile forces tried to use the death of a citizen of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to step up their
human rights racket against the Republic and spread
rumours about its use of chemical weapons or weapons
of mass destruction, in a bid to create an atmosphere of
international criticism against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Once again, I hereby strongly denounce the reckless
remarks against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea by hostile forces, for the dangerous political
purpose of tarnishing the dignified image of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and weakening
its social system by spreading such ruinous rumours on
the international stage.

On the occasion of today's open debate on the
theme of global efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors, once
again, I would like to clarify and emphasize the policy
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The respected Supreme Leader Comrade Kim Jong
Un, in his remarkable statement made at the historic
seventh Congress of the Worker's Party of Korea, clearly
affirmed before the world that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, as a responsible nuclear-weapon
State, would not use nuclear weapons first, unless the
forces of aggression that are hostile to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea violate its sovereignty with
their nuclear weapons; and would faithfully observe
its commitments to nuclear non-proliferation, which
it agreed to before the international community, and
strive for global denuclearization.

We are seriously concerned by the fact that the
United States and its vassal forces again picked a fight
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea over
its self-defence strengthening measures under the
pretext of non-proliferation. I would like to clarify the
principled position of my Government.

It is clear that the main root cause of the grave
situation on the Korean peninsula, which is inching to
the brink of war and is shrouded in nuclear war clouds,
is the hostile outdated policy and manoeuvres of the
United States aimed at provoking a war against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Needless to
say, as everybody witnessed, thejoint military exercises
Key Resolve and Foal Eagle 2017, which were carried
out by the United States on the Korean peninsula over 60
days in March and April this year and which introduced
the largest-ever mass aggressive forces and sufficient
strategic assets to wage another full-scale war, are
very dangerous and reckless aggressive war drills that
constitute grave threats to the peace and security on
the Korean peninsula and beyond in the region and are
acts of State-sponsored terrorism against a sovereign
State. Those kinds of extreme, provocative military
manoeuvres by the United States continue even after
the end of the joint military exercises.

The United States staged the madcap pre-emptive
nuclear strike drills against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea after deploying two nuclear carrier
strike groups in the East Sea of Korea and introducing
B-lB strategic bombers from the Guam Island. They
even brought a nuclear submarine into the Port of Busan
in South Korea and held a missile interception test
simulating the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
intercontinental ballistic missile attack on 30 May. On
20 June, the United States introduced two B-IB nuclear
strategic bombers into the airspace of South Korea to
conduct simulation bombing exercises, and it is openly
arguing that it would send strategic bombers to the
Korean peninsula more than once a month. Now it has
introduced the monster-like Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense missile defence system in South Korea
in order to aggravate the tensions and turn the Korean
peninsula into a radioactive zone. On 1 June, the United
States publicly imposed unilateral sanctions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and, on 3 June,
it spearheaded the fabrication of another sanctions
resolution through a vote of the Security Council.

The United States is stepping up its military buildup,
including modernizing its nuclear weapons, just in
order to obtain exclusive and permanent possession of
the most sophisticated weapon system in the world, but
other countries are not allowed to test or launch any
nuclear- or ballistic-related object. It is really the height
of shameless arrogance, self-righteousness and double
standards. That the United States forced others to agree
to the sanctions resolution, which had been fabricated
in a back room at its own pleasure, and described the
resolution as the will of the international community
is a flagrant example of high-handedness and of its
trampling upon international justice and an arbitrary
act in pursuit of its own interests.

It is a fatal miscalculation if the countries that
had a hand in the frame-up of the sanctions resolution
think that they can delay or keep in check the open
development of the nuclear forces of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea even for a moment. They
will clearly see that their means and indiscreet acts run
counter to their objectives.

The buildup of nuclear forces by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is a natural exercise of its
sovereignty to thwart the nuclear threat imposed by the
United States against our country in an unprecedented
way. It is also an effort to ensure genuine international
justice and peace and security on the Korean peninsula
and in the region.

To this day, the United States continues to talk
about dialogue, but it does not make any sense to talk
about dialogue when unjust preconditions are attached
and extreme pressure is applied. Having undergone
rigorous trials, the Korean people have arrived at
the conclusion that the only way to defend their vital
rights and sovereignty is to react to the nukes in kind.
No matter what others say and whatever sanctions,
pressure and military attacks may follow, we will not
flinch from the path of building up our nuclear forces,
which are used to defend the sovereignty of our country
and our right to national existence.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's self-
reliant nuclear force serves to guarantee and strengthen
the peace of the Korean peninsula and the world.

I reaffirm my Government commitment to
strengthening its national nuclear deterrent in every
possible way to eliminate the source of nuclear threat
and blackmail of the United States, which grows more
desperate day by day, and to safeguard the peace and
security of the Korean peninsula and the world.

