Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The grim trend of
developments in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in
recent weeks makes the convening of this open debate
both timely and commendable. The new cycle of
violence that is taking place in the region as a result of
suicidal attacks and retaliatory military incursions,
afflicting the civilian populations on both sides,
jeopardizes the prospects for implementation of the
road map.

The Brazilian Government noted with deep
concern the Israeli security cabinet's recent decision to
"remove" the President of the National Palestinian
Authority, Yasser Arafat, from the Palestinian
territories. We view with even greater alarm explicit
statements on the assassination of President Arafat.
Brazil recognizes him as a legitimate authority
democratically elected by the Palestinian people. In
that connection, the Government of Brazil calls on
Israel to renounce the decision adopted by its security
cabinet and once more urges the Israelis and the
Palestinians to act with the utmost restraint. Their
return to the negotiating table is the only path
conducive to a comprehensive, just and lasting solution
of the conflict in the Middle East.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the
appointment of Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed
Qurei. His many diplomatic skills - as reflected in his
contribution to the Oslo process - will be important
for the resumption of contacts with his Israeli partners
in the quest for a new momentum in the peace process.

Finally, Brazil reaffirms its full support for the
work of the Quartet and its goal to promote, with the
international community's cooperation, an end to
terrorism and violence, an end to occupation and a
permanent settlement of the conflict based on
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002)
and other relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We call upon the parties to comply immediately and
thoroughly with those resolutions, especially to bring
about a meaningful ceasefire and Israeli withdrawal
from Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. We
reaffirm our willingness to contribute to the
implementation of initiatives capable of leading to an
improvement of the situation in the region, including
by participating in an international mobilization under
the aegis of the United Nations.

