Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for
the briefings provided by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We reiterate our full
support for the work they are doing.
We must once again express our regret that
this conflict has been going on for eight years, and
that we continue to witness the constant siege and
Violence suffered by the Syrian people, especially the
most vulnerable populations, women and children.
According to OCHA, more than 13 million people
require humanitarian assistance, more than 1.5 million
people still live in hard-to-reach areas and more than
8,000 live in besieged areas. Also, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, there are more than 6.6 million internally
displaced persons in Syria. We regret that in May alone
more than 130,000 civilians were displaced from the
city ofAfrin as a result ofthe ongoing violence resulting
from military operations.

We also express our concern in the light of the
escalating Violence we are seeing in the south-west of
Syria. We call for a cessation of violence, which would
allow for the restoration of the previous relative calm that
was seen in the region. By the same token, we condemn
any attack on hospitals or educational facilities, and
we call on the parties to uphold their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We underscore the tireless work being
carried out by various humanitarian agencies and their
staff, who risk their own lives to continue to strive to
deliver much-needed humanitarian access.

My delegation calls for the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018). In that regard, we must highlight
the various initiatives that have led to local evacuation
agreements that have facilitated not only the entry of
humanitarian assistance but also the evacuation of
persons in need, including members of armed groups
and their families. We hope that those agreements
will continue. Furthermore, in the framework of the
various Security Council resolutions, we encourage
the continued deployment of convoys, including cross-
border convoys.

We believe it is important to point out that more
than 2,000 requests were approved in the month of May
for food distribution by the World Food Programme,
as well as for first aid and vaccinations for more than
1 million children and mothers. According to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/539), that means that
approximately 2 million people received food assistance
and more than 1 million benefited from water, food,
sanitation and hygiene services. We therefore call on
the Syrian Government to continue to cooperate in that
area and to coordinate more closely and actively with
United Nations agencies and their representatives.

We also draw the Council's attention to the ongoing
return of civilians to the city of Raqqa - the report
of the Secretary-General indicates that more than
130,000 civilians returned to that city in May alone.
We reiterate that, in addition to having to face a lack
of basic services, those who are returning must also
grapple with the dangers of explosive remnants of
war. Clearing Raqqa and other affected areas in Syria
of such remnants is therefore essential and must be
urgently carried out in order to avoid more deaths and
allow people to resume their daily lives. Similarly, we
reiterate our concern about the need to safeguard the
lives of the thousands of innocent civilians, including
children, who continue to move back to the city of Idlib.
It is essential to prevent a further escalation of violence
in that area.

Against that backdrop, it is important to reinforce
the Astana agreements, which established key
de-escalation zones, which are among the international
initiatives that have helped to reduce Violence in Syria.
We believe that our common approach to this conflict
must focus on adopting measures to reduce Violence
on the ground, build confidence among the parties
involved, alleviate the humanitarian situation and
promote efforts to find a peaceful political solution to
the conflict. For that reason, the political process must
be relaunched on the basis of the various initiatives
and meetings that have taken place at different levels
bringing together the different parties involved in
the conflict.

In that regard, we note the information provided
by Mr. De Mistura that he is seeing headway in
the establishment of the constitutional committee.
Therefore, we once again highlight the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held
in Sochi, which focused on strengthening the political
process lead by the United Nations in the framework
of the road map set out by resolution 2254 (2015).
Those efforts are to be developed through the drafting
of a new constitution and the establishment of the
constitutional committee, which in our view should
be representative and neutral. We hope that the work
of the committee will be active and dynamic and will
include the participation of all necessary stakeholders
in the conflict.

We express our full support for the work being
carried out by the Special Envoy to bring together the
parties involved within the framework of a dialogue
that will enable them to achieve sustained peace in the
medium- and long-term. Similarly, we commend the
good offices of the Secretary-General aimed at working
closely with the members of the Security Council in
finding a peaceful settlement to the conflict.

Lastly, we reject any attempt to foster factiousness,
ethnic divisions or sectarianism in Syria. The Syrian
people must freely decide their future and their political
leadership within the framework of their sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and without
any pressure or foreign interference. We reiterate that
the only option for resolving the conflict is through an
inclusive, consultative and concerted political process
led by and for the Syrian people.

