Mr. Wittig (Germany): As this is the first time that
I take the floor in the Security Council this month, let
me express our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
for your delegation's assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of June. We trust, Sir, that
you will guide us with your wisdom through all the
challenges presented by what looks like a very busy
month. You can count on Germany's support.

At the same time, I would like to warmly commend
and thank our colleague from Azerbaijan, Ambassador
Mehdiyev, for his very effective stewardship of the
Council in the month of May.

Since this is the last time that Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Ocampo is addressing the Council, I would
like to start by thanking him, not only for his report and
statement today, but for his many years of hard work,
dedication and commitment to international justice.
His contribution has been instrumental in the efforts
undertaken by the International Criminal Court (ICC)
to bring to justice perpetrators of atrocities committed
in various parts of the world. We are of course very
grateful to him for the work he has done in following
up on resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), which
referred the situations of Darfur and Libya, respectively,
to the ICC. As he leaves his present functions, we wish
him all the best for the future.

We noted the arrest warrant issued against
Mr. Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, the current Sudanese
Minister for Defence, on 1 March, and we understand the
deep sense of frustration expressed in the Prosecutor's
report before us. Ahmed Haroun, indicted for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, is Governor of Southern
Kordofan state; Ali Kushayb, indicted for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, is at large in the Sudan;
and President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, indicted for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, has
been re-elected and defies the authority of the Council.
Unfortunately, some of the indictees continue to incite
Government forces to commit atrocities in defiance of
Security Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2035 (2012), of 17 February 2012. In short, unlike the
case of Libya, open conflict, and therefore impunity,
continues to characterize the situation in the Sudan.

In the light of that deplorable situation, I would
like to reiterate that it is the prime responsibility of
the Government of the Sudan to comply with the
Council's resolutions, cooperate with the Court and
surrender indicted persons to the authority of the Court.
As the Prosecutor's report makes clear, no such will to
cooperate currently exists at the relevant levels of the
Government of the Sudan.

However, that does not mean that justice will not
be done at some point in time. Eventually, the Sudanese
will have to decide what is ultimately best for them and
their country. The recent sentencing of Charles Taylor
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone to 50 years in
prison is a clear sign that the age of accountability is
neither a dream nor a mere concept, but is becoming a
reality. We must not waver in our determination to foster
that reality. Perpetrators of genocide, crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes must not and cannot
be allowed to avoidjustice.

Notwithstanding the Sudan's primary responsibility
to cooperate, we have taken full note of the Court's
findings regarding the non-cooperation of countries
when they have been visited by President Al-Bashir.
The non-execution of Court requests severely affects its
ability to fulfil its mandate. Germany therefore reiterates
its call upon all State parties to the Rome Statute to fully
honour their obligations under the Statute, in particular
the obligation to cooperate with the Court and execute
any warrant of arrest issued by it. We also support
ongoing action by the ICC Assembly of States Parties to
encourage full cooperation with the Court.

