Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I would like once again
to congratulate you, Mr. Minister, on the Dominican
Republic's presidency of the Security Council. I am
very glad to see you again. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment. Let me also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.

Allow me to convey Indonesia's deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Colombia following the terrorist attack in Bogota
last week. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.

The recent bombing shows the complexity of
challenges faced by Colombia. Indonesia is confident
that that will not deter Colombia's strong commitment
to making further strides towards peace and stability.
Indonesia is privileged to have been part of Colombia's
endeavour. In 2015, at the request of Colombia's
Government, I led a high-level delegation to Bogota
to share Indonesia's experiences in ending its 29-year
conflict with the Free Aceh Movement.

Indonesia was therefore very happy when, in
2016, the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) signed the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which provides important guidelines and
sets out the path towards peace and reconciliation.
Its full implementation by all parties will provide
lasting peace, stability and prosperity. From our own
experiences, we know that healing wounds and staying
true to an agreement have never been easy and require
the commitment, patience and understanding of all
parties and the support of the international community.

Allow me to highlight some key issues with regard
to the briefing.

First, effective reintegration is key: it is a highly
complex and sensitive challenge and requires sustained
nurturing. Moreover, while political reintegration
is critical, socioeconomic reintegration is equally
important. Ensuring the livelihood of the population is
vital: everyone must be able to enjoy the peace dividend.
We therefore welcome the strong efforts of President
Duque Marquez to accelerate the socioeconomic
reintegration of former members of FARC-EP.

Indonesia stands ready to contribute, in particular
to provide support for demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, including the conversion of coca
fields into more productive commodities, such as palm
oil, rubber or cacao. Last December, Indonesia and
Colombia initiated a programme entitled "Oil palms for
peace". We look forward to continuing to work closely
with Colombia this year and expanding the programme
into a second phase entitled "Crops for peace".
Secondly, security challenges must be addressed.
We note from the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1159) that illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations still persist, which has allowed violence
to occur in areas that were previously under FARC-EP
control. We are also concerned about the assassination
of former FARC-EP members, social leaders and human
rights defenders by those illegal armed groups. We have
learned from our own experience that law enforcement
must be accompanied by respect for human rights.
Otherwise, order and security, as well as mutual trust
and confidence, will be hard to attain. We therefore
welcome the adoption by the Colombian Government
of the Action Plan for the Protection of Social and
Community Leaders, Human Rights Defenders and
Journalists, which we trust will be implemented in
an effective and consistent manner. In that context,
Indonesia stands ready to extend our support to the
Government and the good people of Colombia.

Thirdly, commitments made must be honoured by
all sides. The ultimate success of the peace process
will depend upon all parties involved respecting
their commitments.

Colombia has embarked upon a historic journey
towards peace. It must stay on course. All parties must
continue to play their parts. At stake is the welfare of
the people of Colombia, who long for peace. The unity
of the Security Council is of vital importance so that it
may work closely with the Colombian Government and
a stable and lasting peace will not be beyond reach.

