Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As
Mr. Arnault stated - and I would like to reiterate - the
visit to our country by the members of the Security
Council was of the utmost importance. For the very
first time, we witnessed both supporters and detractors
of the peace process engaging in dialogue, gleaning
additional information and trying to deepen their
understanding about the common goal that unites us.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for being part
of the Council's mission to Colombia last week. I think
that the visit was very valuable. I also thank Mr. Arnault
and his entire team for their remarks and for facilitating
the surrender, on 27 June, of all individual weapons held
by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to the United Nations,
an organization that we acknowledge and respect for
its impartiality and its role as the guarantor of global
peace and security.
More than nine months have elapsed since the start
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia and, through
the reports of the Secretary-General, members of the
Council have witnessed the ceasefire and cessation of
hostilities, the registration of weapons, the surrender
of all individual weapons, the 9,604 members of the
FARC-EP, including militiamen and guerillas, who
are in the process of being reintegrated, a series of
legislative and institutional reforms required for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement and the start
of plans for the reintegration process, which the Post-
Conflict Minister so eloquently explained last week.

For all those reasons, I dare say that, despite
the remaining tasks, both the FARC-EP and the
Colombian Government have in fact fully upheld their
commitments. These are not minor tasks. In the coming
months, by the time we finish the first Mission's
mandate in September, we must work to complete the
phase of locating, extracting and destroying unstable
armaments in the caches, as the Special Representative
mentioned during his briefing.

This peace process is largely the result of the
leadership of President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon
and of Colombia's commitment to moving forward
with strength and determination on the path towards
lasting peace.

I am honoured to be here before Council members
representing a country that has bid farewell to arms as
part of a monumental effort in which Colombians have

insisted, over and over again throughout the years, with
successes but also many failures, until we reached this
moment that opens the door to a future that is possible
for all of us.

Similarly, and based on what we have learned
together, Colombia and the United Nations - through
the one-of-a-kind tripartite mechanism format, which
Mr. Jean Arnault mentioned - have learned lessons
that can certainly serve Council members on other
matters, bearing in mind the unique aspects of each
case, and even, in a not-too-distant future, can serve
to reciprocate the unwavering support given to us by
the international community, the United Nations and
the Security Council throughout this process. At the
end of the day, the Peace Agreement seeks to build a
more inclusive Colombia in which there is room for
everybody, so we can all contribute to the building
of our nation, whose success lies primarily with
all Colombians.

I know that I do not need to tell you, Mr. President,
or any Council member how precarious building
sustainable peace is once the agreements between
parties to a conflict have been signed. It has always
been said that the first years of reincorporation are the
hardest and are when the political will, the action and
the commitment of the parties and the support of the
international community are put to the test. That is why
I would like to reiterate once again the gratitude of my
Government and of the citizens of Colombian.

Now that we are preparing to establish a second
political mission whose mandate responds to the
contents ofthe Peace Agreement itself, we are confident
that the history of Colombia, which until now has been

a success story, can continue and be strengthened. With
the Council's support, I am sure that this will be so.

