Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I will now speak
in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo and the Charge' d'affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union,
Mr. Christiane, for their briefings. We also welcome the
reports of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) and of
the Joint Commission (see S/2018/1070).

I will focus on three points: first, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA); secondly, our
concerns about Iran's ballistic-missile programme and
its role in the region; and, thirdly, the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).

First, with respect to the JCPOA, in our view,
the Plan is a product of years of negotiation, a major
diplomatic accomplishment and a key non-proliferation
achievement. It was unanimously endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015). Preserving
the agreement is a clear priority for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. The agreement is crucial for the security
of the region, of Europe and of the entire world.

The JCPOA has been delivering on its objective,
which is to prevent Iran from developing nuclear
weapons, an obligation it also has under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Further, the
JCPOA is based on solid verification. Inspectors from
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) spend
more than 3,000 calendar days per year on the ground in
Iran and monitor more than 25 locations in the country
on a 24/7 basis, which is an important endeavour for
my country and one to which we have contributed more
than €l.5 million.

The inspections have led to already 13 consecutive
IAEA reports confirming that Iran is living up to its
commitments under the JCPOA. It is in that light that
we reiterate our deep regret at the decision of the United
States to withdraw from the agreement. We believe that
the JCPOA effectively blocks the route to an Iranian
nuclear weapon. It is better than any alternative, which
is why we call on the JCPOA participants to remain
committed to the agreement.

This brings me to my second point: our concerns
about Iran's ballistic-missile programme and its role in
the region. The Kingdom of the Netherlands shares the
serious concerns expressed by many today about Iran's
ballistic-missile programme, the recent ballistic-missile
tests and Iran's destabilizing role in the region. We are
concerned about Iran's meddling in the internal affairs
of such countries as Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, and
about its support for such armed groups as Hizbullah
and the Houthi. We condemn any Iranian involvement
in the transfer of missiles and arms to actors in the
region, including missiles to the Houthi in Yemen. We
call on Iran to refrain from any such activities, to fully
implement resolution 2231 (2015) and to engage in
serious dialogue on these concerns.

With respect to my third point, the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), as long as Iran continues
to remain committed to the JCPOA, the international
community should do so as well. We therefore call on the
entire international community to continue to support
and implement resolution 2231 (2015), including the
JCPOA. The international community should ensure
that Iran continues to benefit from the agreement, as
foreseen, including trade through the procurement
channel, as needed. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to play its part in ensuring the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) - nationally,
as a member of the European Union, and, this year, as
Facilitator for the resolution in the Security Council.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
sees it as a clear priority that the JCPOA participants,
including Iran, and the international community
remain committed to resolution 2231 (2015), including
the JCPOA, especially now that the agreement seems
to be at a crossroads. At the same time, Iran should
address the international concerns about its ballistic-
missile programme and its destabilizing role in the
region. The JCPOA showed that the international
community could come together and resolve even the
most complex of issues. It showed that it is possible to
overcome differences through dialogue and diplomacy.
It is a clear example of effective multilateralism, and
ensuring the continued implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) is in the interests of the Iranian people, of
the region and of us all.

