Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, let me thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing and his tireless efforts in the service of
realizing a prosperous and stable Afghanistan. We
welcome Ms. Aisha Khurram. Belgium attaches great
importance to the voice of young leaders like her.
Finally, I warmly thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan for his detailed briefing.

We welcome the holding of the September
presidential elections. We support the important role of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in the electoral process. The electoral
institutions must communicate proactively with all
stakeholders and safeguard the integrity of the electoral
process. In the coming days, when the results are
announced by the Independent Election Commission,
we encourage all parties to act responsibly, demonstrate
restraint and direct any future complaints through
existing legal mechanisms. With regard to the search
for peace, we remain convinced of the need for peace
talks and welcome the recent prisoner exchange as a
confidence-building measure. We fully support the
central role of the Afghan Government in the peace
process and call on the Taliban to engage in talks with
the Government.

If a peace agreement is to be sustainable, it must
safeguard the gains made in terms of women's rights at
all costs. Women must participate meaningfully in the
peace process. In that regard, we welcome last month's
launch of the second national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
inclusion of Afghanistan in the joint United Nations-
European Union Spotlight Initiative to combat sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls. We
are also encouraged by the recent inauguration in New
York of the Group ofFriends of Women in Afghanistan,
the goals of which we fully support.

The level of violence seen is totally unacceptable.
Afghanistan is the deadliest conflict in the world for
children, with more than 2,400 children killed or injured
in the first nine months of 2019. Belgium is committed
to facilitating negotiations on a consensual response
by the Council to the situation involving children
and armed conflict in Afghanistan. We welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service
and its partners to reduce the number of child victims
of mines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by enhancing child-centred
risk education.

Belgium notes with concern that explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
remain the second leading cause of security incidents in
Afghanistan and that their use is increasing. We invite
the Afghan armed forces, Afghan security services,
the NATO Resolute Support Mission and civilian
organizations involved in mine action in Afghanistan
to share information on IEDs and their precursors in
order to prevent, insofar as possible, their manufacture
and use by the Taliban and other armed groups.

We strongly condemn the attacks on United Nations
personnel, as well as on human rights defenders and
journalists, and call on Afghan authorities to spare no
effort to identify and bring the perpetrators to justice.
We reiterate that all parties are under obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and to take
immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. The
Government must redouble its efforts to implement its
policy of reducing the number of civilian casualties.
Ensuring justice for the victims and accountability
for the most serious crimes are prerequisites for
reconciliation. Those principles can be a valuable part
of a broader, situation-specific transitional justice
process for lasting peace.
I conclude by expressing my gratitude to
UNAMA and United Nations agencies for their
efforts in Afghanistan to build peace and prosperity.
I am encouraged by the role of young people in that
regard. Belgium will also maintain its commitment
to Afghanistan in 2020, through its support for
European Union and United Nations programmes, as
well as through its participation in the NATO Resolute
Support Mission and its financial contribution to the
Afghanistan National Army Trust Fund.

