Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Allow me to start by
expressing our heartfelt condolences to the people of
Kosovo on the passing of President Rugova. His
peaceful and constructive policies will always be
remembered with great appreciation.

I welcome the high-level delegation headed by
the President of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadic, as well as the Prime Minister of Kosovo, His
Excellency Mr. Bajram Kosumi. May I also extend our
deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report describing the present situation
in Kosovo (S/2006/45). I would also like to thank
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing
today and to commend him and his colleagues for their
tireless efforts.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. Therefore, I shall confine myself to making
some brief comments on a number of points that we
think are of particular importance, as seen from
Turkey.

At the outset, I would like to underline that
Turkey, also a Balkan country, has always been directly
involved in efforts to establish peace and stability in
the region. Within this framework, Turkey contributes
to the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe missions, as well as to the
NATO-led Kosovo Force.

The decentralization process, fair and equitable
representation of all minorities in the political and
administrative structures of Kosovo, respect for the
cultural rights of minorities, the pursuit of economic
reforms, dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina as
well as between all Kosovo communities, and the
return of refugees and internally displaced people to
their homes are the main priorities of my country for
Kosovo. In this respect, we hope and expect that the
future political structure in Kosovo will reflect the
multi-ethnic nature of the region and will be able to
reach out to all communities. We believe that improved
security conditions and region-wide implementation of
property legislation would encourage the returns
process, which remains very slow.

We welcome the holding of direct talks between
Pristina and Belgrade in Vienna on 20 February on the
decentralization issue. We believe that such direct
contacts can and should serve as a platform for the
parties to put forward their respective positions on
concrete issues. Yet we also believe that any
announcement relating to a specific deadline could be
counterproductive at this stage. What really matters is
achieving a sustainable solution.

We also welcome the launch, with the support of
UNMIK, of the decentralization pilot projects, one of
them being the Kosovo Turkish-majority area.
Likewise, we welcome the establishment of the
Consultative Committee for Minorities, which will
provide advice on minority issues. Furthermore, we
deem it crucial that all minorities be engaged in the
status talks. To that end, we believe that a
representative for all minorities, in addition to the one
for the Kosovo Serbs, should be present in the
negotiating team. Another option would be to
institutionalize the relationship between the
Consultative Committee for Minorities and the
negotiating team so that all minorities could share their
views and proposals with the negotiating parties at
each stage of the talks relating to the future status.
Furthermore, we believe that minorities should be
included in the drafting of the new constitution.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the strong
commitment of the Turkish Government to the security,
stability and prosperity of the Balkans, as well as of
Kosovo.

