Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I congratulate Chile and President Bachelet
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for having proposed for this debate
a matter of great importance. I also thank President
Bachelet for her presence here today, her leadership and
her commitment to the work of the Organization.

(spoke in English)

I also thank the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Ms. Leymah Gbowee
for their briefings.

During its latest presidency of the Council, in
February 2011, Brazil proposed the interdependence
between security and development as the subject of an
open debate (see S/PV.6479). The discussion proved
fruitful and was later synthesized in presidential
statement S/PRST/20ll/4. We are glad that the Chilean
presidency of the Council as provided an opportunity
to take another look at this topic, especially the issue
of inclusive development for the maintenance of
peace and security. In recent years, the debate about
the interdependence between peace and security and
development gained momentum with the creation
of the peacebuilding architecture in 2005. Let us
not forget, however, that the Charter of the United
Nations incorporated this notion under Article 55, on
international economic and social cooperation.

Development and security are closely
interconnected, mutually reinforcing and central to the
achievement of lasting peace. We remain convinced
that purely military or security strategies are not
by themselves able to resolve most of the world's
contemporary conflicts. The present debate is important
because the promotion of sustainable peace requires a
comprehensive approach to security.

In South America, we have been making strides
in combating poverty and achieving the social and
economic inclusion of millions of our citizens. As
an example of peaceful and inclusive development,
South America illustrates the benefits for societies of
democratic governance and economic strategies that
promote social justice. More broadly, Latin America
and the Caribbean is the only region in the world where
inequality consistently decreased during and since the
latest global economic crisis.
In analysing this trend, the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean recognized the
positive role of the State as an inducer of development
and inclusion. According to the United Nations
Development Programme, development can be inclusive
and reduce poverty if all groups of people in a society
contribute to creating opportunities, share the benefits
of development and participate in decision-making.
Inclusive development should be participatory,
non-discriminatory and accountable. Most of all, it
should tackle inequality.

Policymakers should never neglect those who
suffer from social exclusion the most, such as migrants,
displaced people, women and children, ethnic and
religious minorities, the elderly, persons with disabilities
and lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals.
There is also a need for a comprehensive approach to
reducing the multiple forms of inequality, addressing
their social, economic and institutional drivers and
focusing on pockets of poverty and exclusion in many
countries, including developed ones.

We must be careful to avoid the misconception that
a lack of security exists only where there is a lack of
development. We should clearly reject any notion that
poverty itself can be a threat to peace. The historical
fact remains that a greater number of serious threats
to world peace originate in highly militarized and
comparatively prosperous societies. It is important that
we ask ourselves whether exclusion itself is a greater
source of instability than, for instance, militarism or
the unilateral use of force. The Council should also be
mindful of its responsibilities towards global security
and avoid tacitly following an agenda that focuses
almost exclusively on conflicts in the developing world.

Brazil believes that peace, development and
human rights cannot be disassociated. Since the end of
the Cold War, there has been a shared understanding
that peacekeeping and the promotion of long-term
socioeconomic policies should be combined in order
to tackle the underlying causes of conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which Brazil had the
honour to chair last year, is particularly well-positioned
to assist the Security Council on issues relating to the
promotion of inclusive socioeconomic development,
notably as a tool to prevent the relapse of countries
emerging from conflict.

The importance and the benefit of integrating
development into security strategies for sustainable
peace is clearly perceptible in the cases of Haiti and
Guinea-Bissau. Since the beginning of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, with the decisive
support of Chile and our Latin American and Caribbean
partners, among others, Brazil has defended mandates
that encompass reconstruction and peacebuilding in
tandem with peacekeeping actions.

Another country where the linkage between
security and development is evident is Guinea-Bissau,
a fellow Lusophone nation that has suffered from
political instability and successfully organized general
elections last year. As chair ofthe PBC's Guinea-Bissau
configuration, Brazil hopes to count on the support of
the international community in assisting Guinea-Bissau
in paving the way to sustainable development.

We would like to underscore the strategic
importance of education for sustainable development
and inclusive economic growth, as well as the
fundamental need to make progress on gender equality
and the empowerment of women as agents of peace.
Safeguarding cultural rights for all and promoting a
culture of peace and reconciliation are equally key.
For the past two decades, Brazil has made social and
economic inclusion one of its top priorities. Inclusive
development strengthens a country's commitment to
peace and stability. We should not lose sight of the fact
that worldwide conditions for peace and development
should be enhanced through improved multilateral
cooperation based on international law.

