Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before we begin,
we would like to welcome and support the German
presidency for its innovation. We hope that drawing
open its curtains and shedding light on the Security
Council will lead to greater transparency in its work
and perhaps ultimately to the reform of the Council
demanded by most Member States, especially the
African States.

We would like to thank Germany for convening this
meeting following the recent developments in Haiti. We
will not thank the briefers, pursuant to the President's
directive, but perhaps it would be appropriate to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti to
our meeting.

At the outset, we wish to welcome the positive
gains and progress made in Haiti, particularly in the
development of the national police force, which showed
its professionalism and efficiency under heavy pressure
during the recent demonstrations.

We wish to express our concern about the
deteriorating security situation in the country. The
recent protests throughout the country not only
exacerbated the humanitarian and human rights
situation but also undermined prospects for the conduct
of peaceful elections in October this year.

I would remind the Haitian Foreign Minister
that those events highlighted the persistent need for
reconciliation in the country. It is worth noting that
a State that takes steps towards reconciliation not
only unites its people and encourages a nationally
owned process but also, through those efforts, creates
environments that are conducive to more effective
institutions. It is in that context that the Foreign Minister
should understand that South Africa supports the call
by the Secretary-General for a national and inclusive
dialogue among Haitians in order to encourage calm
and long-term stability in their country.

The United Nations has historically played a
critical role in Haiti through the Secretary-General and
his good offices, by building the capacity ofinstitutions
like the Haitian National Police, which is critical for
strengthening efforts aimed at the democratization in
Haiti. Furthermore, we believe that it is the role of the
United Nations and the Government, in partnership
with civil society organizations, to bring together
all disputing parties in order to reach an agreement
that benefits the people of Haiti. Civil society has
much to contribute in that regard given its experience
of realities on the ground, including the security
situation, the economic crisis and deteriorating
humanitarian conditions.

South Africa has noted the proposals of the
Secretary-General in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2019/ 198), particularly with regard to the drawdown
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the establishment ofa special
political mission thereafter. We believe it is important
that the Council continue to play a stabilizing role in
Haiti, which would require close monitoring of the
situation on the ground as well as a needs assessment,
particularly in the lead-up to the October elections.
Furthermore, it is important to note that election
processes can give rise to uncertainty but also the
possibility of calm later on. As such, United Nations
support in the run-up to and aftermath of the elections
in Haiti will be important, including by working closely
with the Government and authorities of Haiti to ensure a
smooth transition as the MINUJUSTH mandate comes
to an end in October.

Finally, and ceding some ofmy time to my colleague
from the Dominican Republic, the continued support
of the international community for the Government
and the people of Haiti remains a critical element in
achieving security, stability and inclusive democracy in
the country and the region.

