Mr. Stuart (Australia): Mr. President, I applaud
your decision to conduct this open meeting of the
Council, which provides non-members with an
opportunity to participate in the discussion on an issue
which for my Government remains of particular
importance.

Through you, Sir, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, for his comprehensive briefing to the Council
on the continuing work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

Australia strongly supports UNTAET's role in
guiding East Timor through the transition process. So
far UNTAET has made creditable progress in
developing a transitional administration and laying the
foundations for an independent East Timor. It has done
so in the face of enormous challenges and limited
resources. We commend Mr. Vieira de Mello's
leadership, and we commend the effort and
commitment of all UNTAET's personnel, both
international and East Timorese.

It is important to the long-term success of the
transition that the people of East Timor take an active
and constructive role in governance from an early
stage. Australia welcomes the steps which UNTAET
has taken to promote increased East Timorese
participation in decision-making processes, including
through an expanded National Consultative Council.

We encourage UNTAET to continue to work on
strategies which will facilitate the effective
involvement of the East Timorese in the transition to
independence. We welcome Mr. Vieira de Mello's
account of further thinking within UNTAET and in
discussion with East Timorese representatives about
how this might be achieved.

A successful transition to independence in East
Timor will require careful and effective planning.
Hence we attach great importance to the development
of a considered exit strategy for UNTAET. Among
other elements, this strategy should lay down a set of
realistic benchmarks which reflect the basic conditions
required for East Timor to function effectively as an
independent State. An exit strategy incorporating
benchmarks should be a mutually reinforcing aspect of
continuing efforts to expand East Timorese
involvement in the transition process.

We consider that such a strategy should not be so
detailed as to set the bar unrealistically high for what
can be achieved, yet be specific enough to provide
some focus for the path to independence and an
adequate basis for measuring the progress and
effectiveness of ongoing reconstruction efforts.

A stable security environment will be a key
benchmark and an essential element of a smooth
progression to independence. While improvements
have taken place in the last six months, security
problems remain. Australia was seriously concerned by
the two recent militia attacks on UNTAET
peacekeeping operation forces along the border with
West Timor. These attacks have highlighted the need
for greater action to disarm the militia and curtail their
activities in West Timor as well as the need for the
peacekeeping operation to maintain vigilance,
particularly in the border regions.

Australia also continues to be concerned at the
situation of refugees in West Timor, in particular at the
recent security incidents which have led to the
suspension of the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. We urge the
Indonesian authorities to enhance efforts to accelerate
resettlement and repatriation, including separating
militias from refugees, ensuring that international
agencies have unimpeded access to refugees to
determine their preferences and to supervise
repatriation, and, together with the international
community, plan for permanent resettlement for those
who do not wish to return.

Despite these concerns, improvement in the
security situation, notably in the eastern part of East
Timor, has provided a sound basis on which to
commence a downsizing of the peacekeeping operation
over the coming months. Australia supports UNTAET's
decision to commence a gradual but steady decrease of
troops in the eastern sector.

As for East Timor's future security needs, we
remain committed to engaging fully with all key
players in this important issue, and we welcome in this
respect the commissioning by UNTAET of an
independent study on East Timor's future security
needs and options.

UNTAET's continuing effective operation in East
Timor will rely heavily on the ability of the United
Nations system to deliver the resources needed to
implement all aspects of UNTAET's mandate. We
encourage the United Nations to continue its efforts to
streamline recruitment, procurement and approval
procedures in order to overcome delays in
implementing vital development activities.

As a close neighbour, Australia is a committed
long-term partner in East Timor's reconstruction and
development. The Australian Government has made a
major financial commitment to East Timor last year
and this. Our financial assistance in the financial year
ending at the end of this month will total over
$81 million (Australian) through the Australian Aid
Programme.

In recognition of East Timor's continuing
development needs, the Australian Government
announced in May a commitment of $150 million
(Australian) over the four years beginning this July
through to 2003-2004. This multiyear commitment will
provide East Timor with increased certainty in
budgetary planning over the medium term.

In this context, the results of the Lisbon donor
conference were very positive, especially the very
strong support given to further work to establish an
integrated budgetary framework for East Timor which
coordinates recurrent costs and capital inputs as well as
revenue and contributions from multilateral and
bilateral donors.

While a good start has been made in identifying
domestic sources of revenue, this needs to be pursued
much more actively over the next few months. In the
meantime, it is important for the international
community to continue to provide assistance, not just
for reconstruction efforts but also for the recurrent
costs of the East Timorese administration so that it can
keep basic services running in such areas as health,
education and infrastructure.

Much remains to be done in East Timor. A
successful transition to independence depends heavily
on continuing support from the international
community. Security Council resolution 1272 (1999)
recognized that, in order to fulfil its mandate, UNTAET
would need to draw on the expertise and capacity of
Member States, United Nations agencies and other
international organizations, including the international
financial institutions. Australia urges the international
community to continue its engagement in the progress,
to fulfil the pledges made at the Tokyo conference, to
build on the progress made last week in Lisbon and to
consider contributions to the long-term recurrent
financial and in-kind support UNTAET needs if it is to
be able to deliver its services and to support East
Timor's smooth and timely transition to independence.

