Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): The latest dangerous
escalation of the situation in the wider Middle East
region once again shows us the importance of the
Middle East peace process. Lithuania is extremely
concerned about the continuing wave of violence and
killings in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We
strongly condemn the acts of violence committed by
all parties, and express our sincere condolences to all
those who have lost their loved ones in this deadly cycle
of violence.

Respectforinternationallaw,includinginternational
human rights and international humanitarian law, is
paramount. It is essential to refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric and to uphold the historic status
quo at the holy sites, including the Haram Al-Sharif/
Temple Mount. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities
have the responsibility to restrain inflammatory
rhetoric, prevent the spread of hatred, and immediately
take all necessary measures to end the violence and
restart reconciliation between the two communities.

We urge both sides to commit themselves to
the path of negotiation and to seek new incentives
to reinvigorate the peace process without delay.
Incitement and revenge will only bring more revenge,
leading to more grief instead of useful solutions. The
task of the international community is to remain firm in
insisting that both parties commit themselves to peace
and dialogue. Real and concrete actions must be taken

now. We call on both, and in particular Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas, to do everything in
their power to stop the violence and take all measures
necessary to protect the civilian population.

During the extended Quartet meeting two weeks
ago, my Minister called on the international community
to help the parties to overcome their mistrust. Step by
step, they should relearn to walk together. It is important
for the parties to accept that an all-or-nothing approach
will achieve neither a solution, nor peace nor security.
The mediation role of the United States remains
crucial. The Quartet can and should contribute actively
to this process. Lithuania remains strongly committed
to a negotiated two-State solution of a sovereign,
independent and contiguous State of Palestine living
side by side with Israel in peace, security and mutual
recognition.

