Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda): My delegation would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of
29 February 1996 on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda. The report shows a positive
evolution of the political and economic situation in
Rwanda.

At the close of the United Nations peace-keeping
mission in Rwanda, UNAMIR leaves behind a country
and citizens determined to rebuild a new Rwanda and
assume fully their responsibility for a better future.

In spite of the catastrophe that affected the country
and resulted in the loss of one-eighth of its population
and the total destruction of the economic infrastructure,
the judicial system and Rwandese society, I must admit,
with great pride, that Rwanda has risen from its ashes
with all the indications of becoming an even stronger
nation and a credible partner.

The achievements since the genocide have been
major ones. The Rwandese people have succeeded in
laying the foundation of a new society by setting up a
coalition Government and a Parliament which are
representative of all political groups. This is a major sign
of the beginning of a process of national reconciliation.

For the first time the Government of Rwanda has
established a policy of repatriation of refugees. Before
1994 more than a million Rwandese refugees lived
outside the country. Those refugees were denied their
right to return to their homeland by the former regime,
which, moreover, organized, planned and masterminded
the genocide.

The present Government is committed to the
unconditional return of all Rwandese nationals to their
motherland. The Government has translated its
commitment to the return of refugees into action through
the following measures: advocating national
reconciliation; the restoration of security within our
borders; discouraging revenge through enforcement of law
and order; promoting a culture of transparency by
allowing UNAMIR, non-governmental organizations,
human rights monitors and the media freedom of
movement throughout the country; enforcement of laws;
governing property rights; and resettlement and
reintegration of returnees into the civil service, the
national army and other areas of economic life.

 

These measures have already led to the return of the
phenomenal number of 2.3 million refugees in only one
year, including the former refugees who had been outside
the country since 1959.

On the issues of justice and human rights, the
rehabilitation of the judicial system continues to be one of
the main priorities of the Government of Rwanda. Some
action has been taken in adopting appropriate legislation. At
the end of 1995, 643 judicial personnel were trained.

Regarding the future, the Government and people of
Rwanda look forward to the effective implementation of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda as a major step in
healing the wounds of genocide. Only true justice would
allow Rwanda to heal and rebuild a new society.

Concerning internal security, the Government of
Rwanda has already started to reorganize and strengthen the
gendarmerie and the police, and it intends to proceed with
the demobilization of part of the army.

Economically, significant progress has been made in
just one year since the January 1995 donors' round-table
conference for the reconstruction of Rwanda. The gross
domestic product increased by 20 per cent in 1995 , after a
recession of 40 per cent in 1994, reaching three-fourths of
the level of the gross domestic product before the crisis.

These achievements have been accomplished with the
support of some countries which did not hesitate to help
Rwanda's reconstruction efforts. Among them, I would like
to make special mention of Ireland, whose President has
honoured Rwanda with two official visits - and the
Netherlands and Germany, which have given appreciable
assistance to Rwanda. The contributions of the United
Kingdom and the United States have also been greatly
appreciated. Our gratitude is also extended to Italy and
Spain for their support.

Belgium, with its historic links to Rwanda, also made
a contribution to the reconstruction of the country. I would
also like to thank Australia, Austria, Canada, France, Japan,
Sweden and Switzerland for their tremendous support.

The delegation of Rwanda would like to thank
countries which contributed troops to UNAMIR. I would
like also to pay homage to the soldiers who lost their lives
while trying to protect or to save the lives of Rwandese
during the genocide, especially the Belgian soldiers who
were assassinated by the genocidal regime.

Finally, I would like to pay homage to UNAMIR'S
Chief Commander, General Dallaire, for his efforts and
those of his staff in Rwanda during the genocide.

The people of Rwanda thank all UNAMIR's
personnel and the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for what they have accomplished in
Rwanda. Special mention must also be made of the
efforts of the numerous African Governments that are
setting a good example for the international community
by arresting those accused of genocide in Rwanda. The
Government of Rwanda would also like to express its
gratitude to the eminent African figures and the leaders of
African regional and subregional organizations, all of
whom are playing a major role in helping to resolve the
problems faced by Rwanda and the subregion. They are
demonstrating the importance of dialogue in the
reconciliation process.

Above all, I should like to pay a special tribute to
the Rwandese people, who were repressed by a
totalitarian regime that victimized them with repeated
massacres, crowned by genocide. Homage must be paid
to the survivors who have succeeded in living in harmony
with others without taking revenge. And we must not
forget the Rwandese who continue to exist in refugee
camps against their will, prisoners of the perpetrators of
crimes against humanity.

Special homage must be paid also to those
Rwandese who stopped the genocide.

We take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for recommending the establishment of UNAMIR
to the Security Council. We hope that the Secretariat will
engage in a serious analysis of its most recent experience
with UNAMIR in Rwanda in recent years - before and
after the genocide. There is a need for a truthful and
honest analysis, and a need to ensure that the right
lessons are learnt from the worst experience a nation can
face. These lessons will serve not only Rwanda, but all
African countries - and all developing countries -
which could face the same situation.

The Rwandese Government has done its duty with
regard to UNAMIR. It is therefore with pride that the
Government of Rwanda hands the UNAMIR troops back
to the United Nations who served in Rwanda in a
generally secure environment. In turn, we expect the
Secretariat to comply with its obligation to Rwanda. Some
of the issues raised by my Government have never
received satisfactory attention. We would be grateful to

 

the Secretariat if appropriate solutions could be found to the
remaining problems linked to UNAMIR.

As a follow-up to UNAMIR, the Government of
Rwanda has accepted the most realistic proposal - from
the Secretary-General - which is to maintain a small
political office to support the Government's efforts to
strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the return of
refugees and rehabilitate the country's infrastructure. It is
an ambitious programme, but my Government will give all
necessary support to that office, and is looking forward to
defining, together with the Secretariat, the office's mandate.

In conclusion, the people and the Government of
Rwanda are determined to work towards the reconstruction
of their country and for the healing of Rwandese society.
All cooperation in this area is welcome.

