Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank and congratulate
Ambassadors Ripert, Urbina and Mayr-Harting in their
capacities as Chairmen of the 1373, 1540 and 1267
Committees, briefings on which have just been
presented to us.

First of all, we note with satisfaction the adoption
by the 1540 Committee of its programme of work for
the period from 1 February 2009 to 31 January 2010
(see S/2009/124).

For Burkina Faso, exchanging experiences with
regional and subregional organizations and continuing
training and awareness-raising activities, in particular
regional workshops, constitute important tools for the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The last subregional workshop organized for the
Pacific Island States, in April 2009 in Vanuatu, clearly
demonstrated that by contributing, through direct
dialogue and proximity, to familiarizing concerned
States with the provisions of the resolution and to
helping them better understand their obligations and
identify the difficulties that they are facing, as well as
their assistance needs. We cherish the hope that the
regional workshop for African States will be held in
2009 and that it will be just as successful.

We also await with interest the comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution that the
Committee is about to launch, which will enable it to
assess the situation and to better orient its activities.

Turning now to the 1373 Committee - the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) - the country
visits and the consideration and adoption of the 191
Preliminary Implementation Assessments demonstrate
the depth and quality of the Committee's work during
the reporting period. In addition, we are convinced that
the review launched by the Committee with the
assistance of Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) will make possible recommendations
on the situation in individual States.

Regarding CTED specifically, we are reassured
by the fact that its restructuring has enabled it to
greatly improve its productivity via the activity of five
thematic working groups, the harmonization of
assessment criteria and, especially, the organization
and conduct of assessment visits. The draft technical
guide on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
proposed by CTED is currently being considered by
the Committee and is another laudable result.
Regarding the assessment visits, we would like to
renew our thanks to the CTC and CTED for their good
cooperation with our country, both during the
preparatory period and during the visit to Burkina
Faso. We welcome the results achieved.

The provision of appropriate technical assistance
to support the commitment of Member States that need
it remains a crucial necessity. It is encouraging here to
see that Ambassador Ripert's report, just presented by
Mr. Lacroix, notes an improvement in the dialogue
both with donors and potential recipients of this
assistance.

Let us now turn to the activities of the 1267
Committee. We welcome the progress achieved,
including the adoption of new guidelines for the
implementation of resolution 1267 (1999). These
guidelines, which were adopted at a time when the
Committee was facing significant criticism regarding
its methods of work, will be very useful in the efforts
for increased transparency that the Committee is
currently demonstrating, and in the difficult work of
reviewing of the consolidated list and sanctions,
pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). They will thus
ensure in the future a reliable and clear procedure as
far as listing and de-listing of individuals and entities
on the consolidated list is concerned, as well as
waivers on humanitarian grounds.

In this respect, we encourage the efforts
undertaken by the Committee to make the consolidated
list dynamic in nature, guided by the expertise of the
Monitoring Team and with the contribution of Member
States in this process. One should also note that taking
into account views expressed by national or regional
jurisdictions could, generally speaking, have a positive
impact on strengthening the sanctions regimes.

Along the same lines, the posting on the
Committee's website of the reasons for listing
individuals and entities on the consolidated list
represents, in our opinion, significant progress in the
sense of greater transparency. We are encouraged by
the ongoing activities for information, training and
awareness-raising for Member States. As is the case
with the two other Committees, that activity is
especially important for strengthening knowledge of
resolutions and of the obligations stemming from them.
Indeed, it enables capacity-building for States and their
interaction and cooperation with the Committees and
thus guarantees better implementation of the
resolution.

Because the fight against terrorism must be fully
developed to be fully effective, we wish to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the need to take
urgent steps in the face of the growth of the threat of
terrorism in Africa, especially in West Africa. Indeed,
at a time when all information is in agreement that
terrorism today constitutes a genuine threat in a
subregion already facing numerous challenges, the
Security Council Committees, like the international

community, should immediately address the issue and
strengthen their cooperation with both the relevant
subregional organizations and all the member States of
the Economic Community of West African States.
Given the current state of a situation marked by the
permeability of borders, direct assistance to services
for monitoring and implementing laws, to judicial
services and to institutions such as those that process
financial information will help States in West Africa to
confront the already real threat of terrorism.

Finally, we would like to convey our gratitude to
the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees for their efforts
to harmonize their actions and step up their
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. We reaffirm the need for all actors to
comply with human rights within the framework of the
fight against terrorism, as reflected in relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

