Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti,
Legal Advisor of the Argentine Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, for being here today with us and presiding
over this meeting. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval for the excellent
manner in which she has presided over the work of the
Council this month.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to commend the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
participation and important statements.

On the occasion of World Humanitarian Day and
the tenth anniversary of the bombing of the Canal
Hotel in Baghdad, we would like to pay tribute to those
who have lost their lives in service to peace, including
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to Iraq. Among them also were
two brave Egyptians, Ms. Nadia Younes, Chief of Staff
of the Special Representative, whom I had the honour to
know personally, and Mr. Jean-Selim Kanaan, member
of the Special Representative's staff.

I would like to thank Argentina for the excellent
concept note (S/2013/447, annex) it prepared, which
provides a valuable contribution to today's debate.

It is alarming that increasing numbers of civilians
continue to suffer in armed conflicts around the globe.
Egypt stresses the importance of the contribution of
peacekeeping missions to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We support providing such missions
with the necessary mandates, personnel and equipment
to enable them to become an effective mechanism for
early warning when violations occur. We stress the
importance that United Nations peacekeeping missions
uphold the principles of respect for the sovereignty and
cultural specificities of host countries.

We reaffirm the importance of compliance with
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law by all parties involved in armed
conflicts, regardless of the nature of such parties. All
parties must comply with the principles of distinction
and proportionality in armed conflicts. All parties
must refrain from targeting medical facilities and grant
access to humanitarian assistance. Rapid and effective
accountability for any violations against civilians in
armed conflict must be ensured. Impunity escalates
violations just as much as it increases bitterness and
hostility between the parties to a conflict.

Egypt regrets that today's important debate has
been undermined by three delegations that addressed
issues that do not fall within the legal scope of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, let alone the
mandate of the Council. We reject the reference to the
recent events in Egypt in today's debate. The recent
events in Egypt do not constitute an armed conflict.
The addressing of Egyptian affairs in today's debate
by those delegations demonstrates either a lack of legal
knowledge or the pursuit of narrow political objectives.
We remind those delegations of the following.

First, within the meaning ofcommon article 3 to the
Geneva Conventions, a non-international armed conflict
is a situation in which one or more non-governmental
armed groups are involved. In order to distinguish an
armed conflict from less serious forms of violence,
such as internal disturbances and tensions, riots or
acts of banditry, the situation must reach a certain
threshold of confrontation. Non-governmental groups
involved in the conflict must be considered as parties
to the conflict, meaning that they possess organized
armed forces under a clear military command structure
and have the capacity to sustain military operations.
The recent events in Egypt do not meet any of those
qualifications.

Secondly, the situation in Egypt does not threaten
international peace and security. It is an internal matter
that will be resolved only through an Egyptian-led
political process that includes all Egyptian political
factions that reject violence and extremism. As the
Secretary-General said in his press conference a few
hour ago, it is an Egyptian problem, and the Egyptian
people have the right and the responsibility to resolve it
by themselves for their better future.

