Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Haile Menkerios, for his

detailed briefing. We share the Views we have heard as
to the increased level of interaction between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of ensuring
peace and security in Africa.

In recent years, both organizations have been
endeavouring to use the experience that they have
garnered and their comparative advantages while
working out common approaches in order to overcome
the crisis situations on the African continent. A very
good illustration of that was the meeting held on
19 April in New York, the first annual United Nations-
African Union conference, in the wake of which the
Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, and African
Union Chairperson Mahamat signed the framework
agreement between the secretariats on the issues of
peace and security.

Among the positive points in the interaction
between the United Nations and the African Union
we would underscore the July visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. The delegation
included, inter alia, the Deputy Secretary-General,
Amina Mohammed. This is a clear reflection of the
determination of the secretariats of the United Nations
and the African Union to devise common approaches to
the most complex issues in Africa.

We deem it necessary to continue working very
closely within the framework of annual consultative
meetings between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. The recent 11th
joint consultative meeting of the Council, held in Addis
Ababa, showed that this was very useful in order to
harmonize positions on the more complex issues on the
African continent.

The importance of involving regional and
subregional organizations in the resolution of crisis
situations is reflected in the interaction between
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and the United Nations on South
Sudan. We hope that this tripartite format will prove
its effectiveness and serve as an example for the further
use of United Nations forces on the continent.

We underscore that it is unacceptable to impose
on African countries outside formulas for settlement.
There are many negative examples of such interference,
including those in South Sudan, Burundi and many
other places. We support the idea in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/744) that it is important
to increase preventive efforts on the continent. At
the same time, they must not be in essence a mentor-
like external review of domestic political and human
rights issues and even less so should they force African
countries to correct their ways. We must delegate to the
African Union the role of defusing crises. The situation
in Libya in 2011 and what transpired there afterwards is
a poignant example of such ill-conceived interference.

We agree that we must responsibly approach the
issue of increasing the predictability, reliability and
flexibility of the funding for African operations and
joint missions. At the same time, we think these issues
should not be dealt with in the Security Council. For
that purpose, we have specialized bodies within the
United Nations system, such as the Fifth Committee of
the General Assembly and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions. We must be
sure to follow the existing procedures for considering
and approving budget requests and we must ensure
transparency and accountability in allocating the use
funds. We stand ready to have further constructive
dialogues on this issue and concerning specific work
in that regard.

In November, for example, we are looking forward
to the report of the Secretary-General on the issues of
funding the AU mission in Somalia. We think that we
need to carefully study the specific proposals therein.
Furthermore, we hope that the Africans themselves will
conscientiously approach the implementation of their
own decisions and commitments regarding increasing
their own financial share.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore, once
again, something we said last week in Addis Ababa.
There we made a proposal aimed at enhancing the
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union. More specifically, we suggested that we should
consider the possibility of initiating the appointment
of relevant special representatives of the African
Union Commission to report to the Security Council
during our discussion of African issues. That would
allow Council members to have a more comprehensive
picture of what is going on and to determine the
necessary level of support to mediation efforts through
the African Union.

