Ms. Gunnarsdettir (Iceland): Let me first turn to
the situation in Syria. Iceland condemns the
widespread human rights violations taking place in
Syria. We also condemn the recent terror attacks in the
country. The Syrian authorities must put an immediate
end to the violence. We urge the Syrian Government to
heed the call made by the Secretary-General for a
credible, inclusive and legitimate Syrian-led process of
comprehensive political change that will address the
democratic aspirations of the Syrian people. We also
urge the Security Council to do its utmost to prevent
the situation in Syria from escalating and to contribute
to a solution that will maintain peace and security.

Turning to the question of Palestine, let me at the
outset reiterate Iceland's firm support for the peaceful
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
two-State solution. Developments on the ground, such
as the ongoing settlement activities in the West Bank,
including in East Jerusalem, remain the key obstacle to
peace. Settlement activities, which are carried out
unilaterally by the occupying Power and in violation of
international humanitarian law, continue to create
conditions on the ground that are rapidly making the
two-State solution unattainable. Time is running out,
and the Council has to take that into account in its
deliberations.

Living under occupation in and of itself creates a
security concern for the Palestinians. Settler violence,
including their so-called price tag policy, has
increasingly added an extra concern. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the weekly average of settler attacks resulting in
Palestinian casualties and property damage increased
by 40 per cent in 2011 as compared to 2010, and by
over 165 per cent as compared to 2009. At the same
time, more than 90 per cent of monitored complaints
regarding settler violence filed by Palestinians with the
Israeli police in recent years have been closed without
indictment. We call on Israel to shoulder its obligation
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law to prevent attacks against civilians and their
property and to ensure that all incidents of settler
violence are investigated in an impartial and
independent manner.

Iceland welcomed the agreement between Fatah
and Hamas last spring on reconciliation, but we await
further steps by the two factions. Presidential and
parliamentary elections in Palestine are crucial for
bringing Palestine forward, and we urge the Palestinian
parties to heed the calls of their own people to work
towards the realization of an agreement as soon as
possible.

Since I last addressed the Council (see S/PV.6636), my country has formally recognized
Palestine as an independent and sovereign State within
the pre-1967 borders and established full diplomatic
relations with it. I would like to recall that Iceland
supported Israel when it brought its case to the United
Nations and emerged with statehood. In our view,
Palestinian demands for self-determination and
statehood are equally legitimate. In the middle of a
democratic revolution brought on by the fresh breeze
of the Arab Spring, we cannot deny Palestine its right
to statehood. In fact, it is long overdue.

Iceland reiterates its appeal to the members of the
Security Council to seize the historical opportunity
they have been given to contribute to the realization of
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people for
self-determination by recommending to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations. There is no
contradiction between Palestine seeking membership of
the United Nations and the Quartet-led peace process,
which we fully support. United Nations membership
would be an affirmation by States Members about our
commitment to the two-State solution.

