Mr. Stephen: I wish to thank you, Sir, and
members of the Council for affording me this
opportunity to present the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Somalia. As Representative
of the Secretary-General, I deal with the political side,
whereas we have a resident coordinator and
humanitarian coordinator dealing with the operational
side.

Members of the Council will be familiar with the
report. It tries to set out the salient features of the
humanitarian, security and political situation in
Somalia today. Inter alia, it highlights the serious
humanitarian situation in much of the country. It also
makes clear that the security situation remains difficult.
It describes recent political events, updating members
of the Council since the last report. The Secretary-
General also submits some ideas for further
consultation and consideration, including the
possibility of the establishment of a committee of
friends of Somalia.

I should like, ifI may, to offer some general
observations about the situation in Somalia.

It is 10 years since the collapse of the Siad Barre
regime - 10 years during which Somalia has been
without effective central institutions of any description.
While we know of situations in which States have
ceased to prevail in their territory or in which power
has slipped away from States in parts of their territory,
I do believe that the situation of Somalia is unique: 10
years without any national institutions of any
description.

As a result of that situation, the main focus of
loyalty and source of identity for many Somalis
remains the clan. The task in Somalia is not so much
that of negotiating ceasefires, although that was
necessary at one stage, but helping the Somalis to
devise institutions which are trusted and legitimate and
which command the allegiance of the population over
and above the clan. This was what the President of
Djibouti attempted to do when he convened the
Conference in Arta last year, and I think it is still a
reasonable aspiration for the international community.

It is, at the same time, complicated, but also
rather simple in essence. For example, the clan
situation which is described in the latest report of the
Secretary-General and in previous reports may seem
complicated - the names of the clans and the sub-
clans. It sounds complicated, but the crucial question is
to find a role for all clans within the future structure of
Somalia. As the Secretary-General said in his report of
1998, the restoration of trust is the crucial ingredient
there.

The Transitional National Government (TNG), as
its name implies, is transitional. It was established as a
transition to more permanent arrangements in the
country and the future is up for negotiation. That is the
way I would see it; that is my personal interpretation.
There are those political leaders and others who have
not taken part in the Arta process and, for there to be
common institutions in the country, it seems that the
TNG is a start - as it were, an embryo - on which
the future could be based.

Still, we have the problem of suspicion on a clan
basis. As I informed members of the Council in the
informal consultations on Wednesday, the very bad
experience much of the country had of government
under the dictatorship means that the notion of
government is not a favourable one for many Somalis.
They are suspicious, automatically, of what a central
authority might be. Therefore, presentation is very
important there and we are also stressing the need for
regional participation. It is completely open in the
future. The Transitional National Charter adopted at
Arta says that the future structure of Somalia should be
federal and this is therefore, possibly, an important way
of bringing on board all those elements.

If the problem inside Somalia is therefore one of
trust in common institutions, for the international
community there is another problem. That is the
problem of what was identified a few years ago as the
proliferation of initiatives. It was remarked by a senior
colleague in the Secretariat that there was a
phenomenon called "divide and rule" under colonial
regimes. We have in Somalia, some people say, a
situation of "divide upwards" - in other words,
"divide and no rule" - in which the Somalis make
pitches to various countries, telling them that they are
their favourite negotiators and that they are the ones
who understand the country. Other Somalis then go to
other countries and we do have this quite serious
problem of knowing how the international community
will structure itself in order to facilitate the future
peace process. That, I think, is clear from the report,
but I would draw the attention of members of the
Council to it.

