Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
presenting his report on the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2014/777, annex). I would also like to
welcome the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ms. Mirsada Colakovic'.

Argentina continues to support the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the defence and preservation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The effective implementation of the Agreement,
together with respect for the rule oflaw, is also essential
to achieving a lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We emphasize the importance of critically evaluating
the international community's current focus in order to

enable it to provide the country with effective support
designed to help it achieve permanent progress that
responds to its citizens' aspirations.

We welcome the conclusion of the seventh general
election held in Bosnia and Herzegovina since the
signing of the General Framework Agreement and the
fact that it took place in an atmosphere conducive to
democratic competition. We call for increased efforts to
overcome ethnic divisions and forge a shared vision for
future cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina's
constituent peoples.

Argentina would also like to express its solidarity
with the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
wake of the floods that hit the country in May and
the subsequent heavy rain in August, which affected
thousands who were already in a vulnerable situation,
killing at least 20 people and causing widespread damage.
We acknowledge and appreciate the international
community's cooperation and contributions in helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina deal with the reconstruction
efforts, and would also like to express our respect for
the people and authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in the recognition that we must all work to alleviate
human suffering.

While we see clearly the worthlessness of the
excuses, traps and petty interests of political, economic
or social leaders aimed at restricting or hindering
the effective exercise anywhere of human rights,
democracy and peace, we also know that there are
times in countries, developed and developing alike,
when the legitimate demands of our peoples should not
be ignored. Today our peoples can demonstrate freely
in the streets for more rights and greater participation
and social justice, while we also know that those
demands cannot be satisfied with the wave of a magic
wand. What we do know is that the effort must be made
to respond and the courage shown to find the best
pathway, through better policies, greater democracy
and full participation in society. Like other colleagues,
we believe that development based on economic
growth and social inclusion should be every country's
expression of its free responsibility.

As it has done in the past, Argentina urges that

progress be made in implementing the remaining
requirements of the five objectives and two conditions
needed to close the Office of the High Representative.
At the same time, we should continue to receive reports
on the ongoing Challenges to the authorities of the
central Government from its entities. The challenges
presented by the lack of implementation of the decisions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Constitutional Court
should be taken seriously. We remain concerned about
the reports referring to statements by senior Republika
Srpska officials advocating the dissolution of the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thus challenging the
core provisions of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace and Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial
integrity.

While it has not been possible to hold local
elections in Mostar, owing to the inability to apply
the Constitutional Court's 2010 ruling on the city's
electoral system and make progress in implementing
the decision of the European Court of Human Rights
on the Sejdie-Finci case, Argentina urges that this be
accomplished. With respect, we appeal to the political
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to respond to
repeated requests by redoubling its efforts to reach an
agreement on implementing the Constitutional Court's
ruling, which will ensure respect for the rule of law
and enable elections to be held in Mostar, as well as an
agreement that will ensure the protection of the rights
of its non-constituent peoples. Any negative trend
must be reversed, and the existing obstacles must be
overcome. It is increasingly necessary to get a better
grasp of the underlying reasons explaining the lack of
progress. That would also be a way for the international
community to adopt an approach and continue working
together with Bosnia and Herzegovina, while providing
support in the most effective way possible.

We underscore as a positive development the
progress made in overcoming the deadlock in the group
tasked with considering issues of vital national interest
of the federal Constitutional Court.

In conclusion, Argentina reiterates its support for
the work of the Office of the High Representative in
implementing the civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement,
as well as its efforts to ensure that governmental bodies
are able to satisfy the terms of the Peace Sgreement and
the State Constitution. We believe it is crucial that the
Office continue receiving the sufficient resources and
political support to complete its mandate pursuant to
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

