Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this urgent
meeting of the Security Council. What happened
yesterday is a terrible catastrophe. It is a tragic loss for
the American people. We admire the bravery and
tenacity of firefighters, policemen and the whole
American nation.

I wish to use this opportunity to quote a statement
made by our Minister for Foreign Affairs that conveys
the essence of Ukraine's reaction to yesterday's events
in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania.

"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
expresses its deepest indignation at the
unprecedented outbreak of terrorist acts
committed on ll September in the United States.
This crime, directed primarily against civilians, is
a direct challenge not only to the United States,
but to the entire civilized world. Whoever is
behind this tragedy have put themselves beyond
the laws of human civilization and deserve a just
and inevitable punishment. In this dramatic hour,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
expresses its sincere condolences to the families
and friends of the victims of this malicious and
barbaric act.

"The shocking events in the United States
once again speak for the need to join the efforts
of the whole international community in the fight
against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations."

The magnitude of yesterday's acts goes beyond
terrorism as we have known it so far. With the new
technologies and the changed nature of the world in
which they operate, a handful of angry Samsons and
disciples of apocalypse would suffice to cause havoc.
We therefore think that new definitions, terms and
strategies have to be developed for the new realities.

I want to propose declaring the tragic day of 11
September as an international day to combat terrorism.

Finally, I believe it would be worthwhile to
consider convening a ministerial meeting of the
Council - possibly in the nearest future; maybe in the
week of 24 September - to discuss our response to
international terrorism.

