Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting.
It is my pleasure to warmly welcome the President
of Switzerland, Mr. Didier Burkhalter. Allow me to
congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) in 2014. We have full confidence in his
abilities to strengthen the capacities of the organization
in addressing security issues in a global framework of
cooperation.

The OSCE, like its predecessor the Conference
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, has played an
important and effective role in tackling the issues that
represent a threat to regional stability in Europe. That
helps strengthen security and stability throughout the
world. There is no doubt that, without its contribution,
Europe and the world would be less stable and less
safe than they are today. Jordan therefore greatly
appreciates the OSCE's efforts and its cooperation
with the United Nations with a view to upholding
the purposes and principles of the United Nations as
well as the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. That will inevitably help boost
collective security, in particular in the spheres of
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building measures,
curbing the arms race, tackling transnational threats
and in mediation, reconciliation and negotiation.

In that regard, the OSCE, as part of its three
dimensions in the field of security, has optimal tools
for responding to international challenges and building
stability and peace. Security and peace cannot be
achieved by tackling international challenges via
military means alone; rather, a comprehensive approach
is required, incorporating economic, social and human
elements. That is at the heart of the Helsinki process and
of United Nations efforts to resolve various conflicts.

Jordan, which has been a Mediterranean partner
of the OSCE since 1998, attaches great importance
to the role of the partnership between the OSCE and
a number of Mediterranean countries with a view
to strengthening the security regime in the Euro-
Mediterranean region. It positively supports the pursuit
of partnership in various spheres through this forum
for dialogue and exchanging ideas and knowledge on
regional security. Recent events in the Mediterranean
region have highlighted the need to bolster and advance
that cooperation in a tangible way, based on the concept
of the complementarity of security in the Mediterranean
and Europe.

With regard to the ongoing cooperation between
the OSCE and the Afghan Government in tackling the
challenges to peace and security there, we welcome
the efforts deployed to complement those of the
international community to strengthen democracy and
stability, including through technical assistance in the
organization of the upcoming local and presidential
elections.

We attach particular importance to the various
OSCE initiatives seeking a peaceful resolution to the
crisis in Ukraine and to its efforts towards settling the
crises in the Western Balkans and the South Caucasus
as well as discussions on international cooperation.
The OSCE has proved its ability to play a leading role
in coordination with the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the European Union, in
resolving conflicts and in strengthening peace in the
Balkans. In that respect, we welcome the efforts the
OSCE has made in Kosovo in strengthening democratic
institutions and in enhancing human rights and the rule
of law. We commend OSCE efforts in supporting local
elections in northern Kosovo. The organization's work
in Kosovo, alongside to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, as well as its role as
coordinator with United Nations agencies and regional
offices contributes greatly to developing cooperation
with the United Nations on the ground.

There is no doubt that addressing international
threats and challenges is part and parcel of the OSCE's
main task, which is why it is necessary to cooperate
in finding solutions with the organization to address
repercussions from the dangers of climate change and
natural disasters, which, along with cybercrime and the
threat of weapons of mass destruction, constitute new
security threats. Along with international terrorism,
which remains a genuine threat in all countries of the
world, those challenges require the convergence of
the international community's efforts to confront the
threats at different levels, including the establishment
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the OSCE. We commend the
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2133
(2014), which calls for outlawing the paying of ransom
or political concessions for the release of hostages. We
call upon all States to implement the resolution and to
boost cooperation to put an end to that phenomenon.

In his briefing, the Chairperson-in-Office
highlighted the key elements of the Swiss chairmanship
of the OSCE, including respect for human rights in
combating torture, which is a crime in contravention
ofthe principles of international law. It is necessary for
the international community to work to combat such
actions, because human life and human dignity are at
the foundation of human rights.

In conclusion, we express our support for the pursuit
and intensification of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE by coordinating international
efforts and in drawing up a common strategic vision to
confront common security challenges at all levels.

