Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a true honour to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
briefing, and we take this opportunity to once again
commend the way in which Italy is conducting its
presidency of the Security Council this month.

The challenges affecting security in the
Mediterranean have root causes in the conflicts
currently taking place in the Middle East and North
Africa, as well as the collateral effect that has been
generated in the Sahel region. That in turn has
translated into the difficulty of States embroiled in
internal conflicts to guarantee the security of their own
citizens and establish effective measures to strengthen
their internal order.

Regrettably, one of the dimensions of this crisis,
as we have heard during this meeting, is reflected in
the alarming number of migrants and refugees who
have died in the Mediterranean Sea - amounting to
nearly 3,000 fatalities in 2017 alone. That is a figure
that, according to the report of 13 November of the
International Organization for Migration, represents
more than half of the worldwide fatalities linked to
migrants and people seeking refuge. Furthermore, the
trafficking in migrants and refugees, subjecting them
to slavery, their degrading treatment and the many
cases of sexual exploitation, are other examples of the
serious effects of this crisis, evidencing the existence
and interconnections of terrorist organizations and
networks of transnational criminal organizations. Such
groups take advantage of the fragile security and control
bodies of the States affected by internal conflicts and
exploit people's need to safeguard their lives and their
families lives by fleeing the conflicts in their places of
origin. That generates resources and finances for the
criminal organizations and exacerbates the crisis in
the region.

In that context, we appreciate the significant
efforts made by the agencies of the United Nations
and the various international cooperation bodies to
alleviate the situation of the migrants and refugees who
seek to escape conflicts by crossing the Mediterranean
Sea. We are also grateful for the State and regional
efforts that are being implemented in compliance with
resolutions 2240 (2015), 2312 (2016) and 2380 (2017) to
combat the crime of trafficking in persons, mainly off
the Libyan coast.

We call on all States and the international
community to make the greatest possible efforts to
prevent and put an end to the proliferation of human
trafficking networks operating in the Mediterranean
Sea by developing and strengthening the institutional
capacities of the countries of transit and origin of
those victims. In that regard, Bolivia proposed in June,
during the World Peoples' Conference, the concept
of "universal citizenship", with the aim of reducing
the barriers that prevent refugees from escaping war,
armed conflicts or human trafficking. We believe that
that proposal constitutes a useful tool to deal with the
crisis that is currently occupying the attention of the
international community.

The issue of security in North Africa is an important
element to take into account when analysing the
situation in the Mediterranean according to what was
reported on Friday, 10 November in the joint meeting
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
Sudan. The reports mentioned the presence of foreign
fighters and mercenaries operating in the region who
are moving without much difficulty between the
countries that are embroiled in internal conflicts and are
actively involved in taking up arms and undermining
all efforts to achieve a political and peaceful solution
to those conflicts.

An example of the related effects ofthe crises in the
region was reflected in the final report of the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011)
submitted in 2015, which established that weapons
from Libya considerably strengthened the military
capacity of the terrorist groups that operate in the Sahel
subregion and are currently used to perpetrate attacks
against the national security forces, as well as civilians
and members of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the field.

It is evident that Government vacuums, the
weakening of order and security forces and the
absence of border controls have been, and continue
to be, elements that allow the proliferation of terrorist
groups and irregular combatants, who find the spaces
to commit acts of destabilization, in addition to
perpetrating crimes and violations of human rights,
which may constitute crimes against humanity.

Finally, we believe that those weaknesses and
challenges can be addressed ifthe parties to the various
conflicts commit to engage in sustained dialogue to
resolve their differences, opting to cease hostilities and,
above all, seeking to strengthen the organic structures
of the security forces, generating confidence in State
institutions and reinforcing the presence and control
of States on their borders. In that regard, the efforts
of the Council and the international community should
focus on paving the way to promote and strengthen
peaceful means of conflict resolution. To that end,
we believe that the role of the various missions of the
United Nations established on the ground to facilitate
that work is fundamental.

We reiterate that, to a large extent, the challenges
that today affect security in the Mediterranean are
the direct and concrete result of the application
of regime-change policies, interventionism and
interference in the internal affairs of other States, which
does nothing more than lead to millions of victims,
displaced persons and fatalities.

