Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I thank the presidency
of the Netherlands for convening this timely debate. I
appreciate the briefings by the Secretary-General and
other briefers.

I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

While noting that efforts to make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective and efficient are under
way, priority should be given to the field missions and
the people on the ground. In the light of that, ASEAN
would like to offer the following points.

First, reform should be geared towards enhancing
performance and capabilities and improving and
expediting decision-making processes in the field
missions. Secondly, in order to conclude a mission
successfully, the budget and other resources must
match the mission's mandates. Thirdly, the safety and
security of our peacekeepers is a shared responsibility
of us all in this body. Members of the Council may
rest assured that ASEAN will continue to promote and
support United Nations peacekeeping through ASEAN-
led mechanisms and collective efforts.

I will now speak in my national capacity.

Indonesia has been providing peacekeeping
services for more than 60 years and since 1957 has
deployed more than 37,000 peacekeepers to various
United Nations missions. Today, Indonesia is one of the
ten largest contributors to United Nations peacekeeping,
with more than 2,650 personnel in nine missions, 83 of
whom are female peacekeepers. Last month, I visited
our troops in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, to which Indonesia contributes the greatest
number of troops. I wish to share my observation from
the ground.

First, we need to consider new ideas in protecting
civilians in conflict situations, including new measures
to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers on
the ground. Secondly, we can no longer do business
as usual. Peacekeeping missions and peacekeepers
must be well trained and well equipped, adequately
resourced and geared to win the hearts and minds of
the local community.

Since each conflict has its own dynamic, it is
important to formulate tailored capacity-building for
peacekeepers. For that reason, Indonesia established its
own peacekeeping centre in 2007 as a training ground
for Indonesian peacekeepers and a hub for peacekeeping
training centres in the region. Together, we need to find
a new way to provide cost-effective and innovative
procurement of equipment to address capability gaps in
peacekeeping missions, including the participation of
strategic industries from developing countries.

Thirdly, strong partnership and an approach
coordinated among all stakeholders must be improved.
Troop- and police-contributing countries and host States
should be given more voice in designing mandates. The
Security Council should make sure that mandates are
clear and realistic, have an achievable exit strategy,
and are focused on supporting political processes. The
Secretariat should formulate policies that are flexible
and less bureaucratic, allowing missions to perform
more effectively. We welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts in proposing a reform of the peace and security
pillar of the United Nations system.

Fourthly, engagement with regional and subregional
organizations should be enhanced to support political
processes in peacekeeping missions, and fifthly,
we should have more women peacekeepers. I have
witnessed at first hand how women peacekeepers are
well positioned to help win the hearts and minds of the
locals and to effectively protect civilians, as well as
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse.

As a candidate for non-permanent membership
of the Security Council in 2019-2020, Indonesia
will remain committed to being a true partner for
world peace.

