Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/59),
introduced by his Executive Representative,
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, and our two
colleagues, Ambassadors Frank Majoor and Shekou
Touray, for their presentations. It is good to see
Mr. Von der Schulenburg again in New York.

Over the past two decades, African nations have
seen their fair share of political turmoil, armed conflict
and economic difficulties. Sierra Leone was certainly
no exception, but today Sierra Leone stands as a
shining example of how nations can change their
destiny and take charge of their future. Turkey
welcomes the fact that there is now sustained peace
and stability where, not long ago, there was conflict
and strife. We are indeed encouraged by the positive
developments reflected in the Secretary-General's
report. We applaud the people of Sierra Leone for
having the courage, wisdom and vision to move
beyond past grievances.

To be sure, Sierra Leone still also faces important
challenges, and there is much work to be done. The
task of concurrently fighting corruption, drug
trafficking and youth unemployment cannot be taken
lightly, but with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and the international community, we
believe that the Agenda for Change in Sierra Leone can
be successful. What we are witnessing in Sierra Leone
is the fact that multilateralism does indeed work and
that the United Nations and the international

09-2318}
community can bring about meaningful change for the
better, even in the most difficult circumstances.

There is no doubt that the people of Sierra Leone
deserve the most credit for achieving peace and
stability, but we must also congratulate the United
Nations and all its agencies, as well as Sierra Leone's
international partners, on providing the support that has
been crucial to the success we observe today. In
moving forward, we have every confidence that the
Executive Representative and UNIPSIL will contribute
substantially to the further consolidation of peace,
reconciliation and prosperity in Sierra Leone.

