The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Simonovie
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1997/343, which contains the text of a letter dated 29
April 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council. I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to document
S/1997/348, which contains the text of a letter dated 2 May
1997 from the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
drawing attention to the statement on the elections in
Croatia issued by the European Union on 30 April 1997.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the letter of the
Secretary-General of 29 April 1997 (8/1997/343),
which conveys the conclusions of the Transitional
Administrator regarding the successful holding of the
elections in the region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja

and Western Sirmium in the Republic of Croatia
beginning on 13 April 1997, under the direction of
the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES).

"The Security Council shares the assessment of
the Transitional Administrator that the holding of
these elections has been an essential step for further
progress in the peaceful reintegration of the region
and marks an important milestone for the legitimate
representation of the local population in the Croatian
constitutional and legal system. It urges early
formation of the newly elected bodies of local
government and prompt and full implementation of
the undertakings contained in the Basic Agreement
(8/1995/951, annex) and the letter from the
Government of Croatia of 13 January 1997
(S/ 1997/27, annex), including the establishment of
the Joint Council of Municipalities and the
appointment of local Serbs to the guaranteed
positions in the parliamentary and administrative
structures of Croatia.

"The Security Council underlines the
Transitional Administrator's finding that no
intimidation, violence or electoral improprieties were
observed or reported before, during or after the
elections. The Council welcomes the good-will and
sense of cooperation demonstrated by the parties to
the process.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the two-way return of all displaced
persons in Croatia, as well as the right of residents
of a State to choose freely where they wish to live.
In this context, it welcomes the Agreement of the
Joint Working Group on the Operational Procedures
of Return (S/ 1997/341, annex). It urges the
Government of Croatia strictly to implement this
Agreement. The Council calls upon both sides to
cooperate in good faith on the basis of the Basic
Agreement and stresses the need to respect human
rights, including rights of persons belonging to
minorities, throughout the country, in order to ensure
the success of the process of reintegration.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to UNTAES and to those elements of
the international community, including observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Council of Europe and members of
 

the diplomatic community, whose efforts made
possible the successful holding of elections. The
Council commends UNTAES for resolving technical
difficulties by taking decisive actions, which
contributed significantly to the successful holding of
the elections.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, in the light
of the parties' progress towards fulfilling the Basic
Agreement, for the further United Nations presence in
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium,
possibly a restructured UNTAES, consistent with the
fulfilment of the Basic Agreement, for the six-month
period beginning from 16 July 1997. in accordance
with its resolution 1079 (1996)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 110 pm,

