Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.
I would certainly like to thank the Prime Minister of
Samoa, the Prime Minister of Jamaica and the Minister
of Finance of Seychelles for their insightful briefings.
This debate provides a rare opportunity to discuss the
specific challenges faced by the small island developing
States (SIDS) in relation to international peace and
security.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
today.
The outcome document of the Third International
SIDS Conference in September 2014, the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway (Samoa Pathway), acknowledged the particular vulnerabilities
of SIDS and called for the coordinated action of the
international community to address them in a coherent
and comprehensive manner. Its implementation is of
vital importance for the SIDS, some of which are facing
today, in their own words, "an existential threat".

The concept note (S/2015/543, annex) provided
for this debate lists a number of challenges they
face. Among them, climate change - which, inter
alia, reduces access to and the availability of vital
resources, such as food and fresh water - threatens
the very subsistence of local populations, exacerbates
migratory, health and humanitarian pressures, and
contributes to human insecurity and potentially to new
conflicts. Land is literally disappearing from under
the feet of some of the SIDS. In 2005, Vanuatu's Tegua
residents were among the first to be relocated as a result
of climate change. Climate-related relocation is also the
fate of the people of the Carteret Islands of Papua New
Guinea. They are among the first, but certainly not the
last to be threatened by rising waters.

The Government of Kiribati was forced to buy land
in another country, Fiji, to grow food and eventually
resettle its population. With the continuous rise of
sea levels, States like Tuvalu, Maldives, Seychelles,
Micronesia, Vanuatu and others, as well as also large
parts of low lying countries like Bangladesh, risk going
underwater. The consequences of such developments
would be very serious and have an inevitable impact
on the wider regional and international security. But
as Samoa's Prime Minister said during the Third
International SIDS Conference last year, "Sympathy
and pity will not provide solace nor halt the devastating
impacts of climate change". Small as they are, these
countries are taking important initiatives and are at
the forefront of very important progress being made in
terms of renewable and sustainable development.

The Security Council should fully recognize
climate change-induced risks and tensions and the role
of climate change as a threat multiplier to international
peace and security, and act in a preventive and proactive
manner. Resolute, coherent and consolidated action by
the international community aimed at strengthening
State and regional capacities to manage the effects of
climate change amd promote resilience, sustainability,
and resource and energy security at the global level
has never been more important. In that context, there
is a pressing need to reach a universal and ambitious
climate change agreement in Paris this year.

Oceans hold about 96 per cent of the Earth's water.
Further, ocean acidification, increased flooding and
shoreline erosion, fish-stock depletion and rising
seawater temperatures would have inevitable security
consequences for all humankind. Protecting the oceans
and marine environment from further degradation is a
question of our common future. One issue specifically
mentioned in the Samoa Pathway is the need to address
the long-term effects of sea-dumped munitions and their
impact on human health and the marine environment.
As the main sponsor of General Assembly resolution
68/208 on sea-dumped chemical munitions, Lithuania
fully shares the concerns of SIDS in that respect and
looks forward to close cooperation on related matters.

Due to their size, remoteness and institutional
capacity constraints, SIDS' vulnerabilities are many
and varied. Besides environmental threats, drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, maritime
security and piracy, as well as the less immediate
threats related to cybersecurity and terrorism, are huge
for any one country to tackle, but especially for small,
geographically isolated developing island States. Since
2011, Lithuania has taken part in the international
efforts against piracy off the coast of Somalia in the
Indian Ocean, as part of the European Union Naval
Force Atalanta, Operation Atlanta. We are pleased
to note that such efforts have shown positive results,
leading to a dramatic reduction of pirate attacks since
2013. We appreciate the efforts of Seychelles in that
respect, which established a vigorous judicial system
enabling the quick prosecution and conviction ofpirates
and thus made a significant contribution to the common
effort of tackling the threat of piracy.

Among the multiple challenges that SIDS face,
the illicit trafficking, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons remain a
major concern. My delegation was happy to initiate and
negotiate resolution 2220 (2015) in May, and we hope
that its full implementation will contribute to tackling
those very serious issues, because in the smallest of
States, even a few hundred weapons in the wrong hands
have the potential to plunge countries into chaos.

In the Caribbean region, as the Prime Minister
of Jamaica reminded us, the illegal smuggling of
weapons is a key driver of violence, criminality and the
empowerment of criminal gangs and accounts for up to
70 per cent of murders. The loss of life, predominantly
among the young, hampers long-term socioeconomic
development, with destabilizing effects. While each
situation is different, stockpile management, an
accountable security sector and the rule of law are key
to tackling armed violence. Comprehensive firearms
legislation, including import, export and transit controls,
is also essential. In 2011, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) countries adopted a Declaration on Small
Arms and Light Weapons as their regional framework
for tackling the problem. Such regional cooperation
initiatives are very important and can offer useful
examples for others.

The adoption and entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) represents a unique opportunity to
make relevant legislation more rigorous and uniform
across the regions. We welcome the fact that the
majority of SIDS have either signed or ratified the ATT
and have taken steps to develop model legislation for its
implementation. While terrorism is not yet a major issue
among SIDS, one cannot lower one's guard. Porous
marine borders can be easily exploited by criminal
and terrorist groups, also in view of the evolving links
between terrorism and transnational organized crime,
the pernicious presence of which is already felt by many
of the SIDS. For countries that rely heavily on tourism
as a source of revenue, rampant criminality or an attack
against foreign tourists can cause a serious blow to
local economies, with considerable effects. Preventive
efforts should be taken to ensure that relevant national
legislations are compliant with international norms and
standards and that necessary capacities to deal with
such deadly phenomena are put in place.

While some SIDS have made impressive strides
in building such capacities and fostering regional
cooperation, the CARICOM. Implementation Agency
for Crime and Security and the Regional Intelligence
Fusion Centre can be mentioned in that respect.
Support and assistance by relevant United Nations and
other bodies, including on counter-terrorism, remain
of critical importance given the limited resources and
capabilities of those States.

In Samoa last year, the Secretary-General
called SIDS a magnifying glass whose lenses reveal
vulnerabilities that demand an international response.
In the processes affecting SIDS today, we may be
seeing a harbinger of a global tomorrow. If we fail to
act with all due urgency, the threats and vulnerabilities
affecting small island developing States today may
spread to affect much larger communities, threatening
international peace and security. More often than not,
in terms of prevention the Council has been lacking,
doing too little too late. Acknowledging early and acting
together on the security challenges to SIDS offers a rare
opportunity to take preventive action. That opportunity
should not be missed.

