Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all, let
me join others in offering condolences to the families
of the victims of the terrible plane crash in Indonesia.

Let me thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his sobering
briefing. Let me also thank the humanitarian workers in
Syria for their tireless efforts to improve the lives ofthose
in need. Those colleagues from the United Nations, as
well as from international and local non-governmental
organizations, including the White Helmets, deserve
our deep respect, gratitude and support.

I will focus on three points: first, the need for
humanitarian and cross-border access; secondly, the
need for sustained de-escalation in Idlib and respect for
international humanitarian law; and, thirdly, the need
for a United Nations-led political process.

First, with regard to access, humanitarian needs
remain high throughout the country, after nearly eight
years of continuous warfare. We are deeply concerned
about the lack of access within Syria, even to areas now
in the hands of the Syrian regime. The regime does
not allow inter-agency convoys to reach those most in
need. It has not done so since 16 August. Several areas
to which access is being denied were previously in the
hands of the Syrian opposition. It is unacceptable that
civilians continue to be collectively punished by the
regime for living in former opposition-held areas. The
Syrian Government should not be allowed to continue
interfering in the delivery of life-saving aid. We cannot
accept a situation where so-called hard-to-reach areas
are only hard to reach because of artificial barriers
imposed by the Syrian regime. It has a responsibility
towards all its citizens. The Syrian regime must
guarantee access for objective needs assessments and

for distribution aid to those most in need. These are
crucial preconditions for the delivery of principled
humanitarian aid. We need access for the delivery of
aid, for the independent assessment of needs and for
monitoring the situation in the light of the protection
thresholds of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).

The humanitarian needs in Idlib are among the
most serious in the country. Three million civilians
remain trapped between the Syrian Army and the
Turkish border. On the basis of the information that
Mr. Lowcock has just provided, it is clear that cross-
border assistance is currently an indispensable lifeline
for civilians in Idlib. In September, more than 600,000
people received food aid from Turkey through that
mechanism. The message from the Council should be
clear that it is a matter of life and death to continue this
humanitarian channel until the end of the year. There is
no alternative to cross-border aid if we want civilians
in Idlib to survive.

We are concerned about Mr. Lowcock's report that
the convoy has not yet reached Rukban. The situation of
the 45,000 people in that camp on the Syrian-Jordanian
border is desperate and a long-term solution for them is
long overdue. We call on the parties involved to work
to come up with solutions, taking the dignity of those
trapped there into account.

My second point concerns the need for sustained
de-escalation in Idlib and respect for international
humanitarian law. As others have done, we welcome the
drop in violence in and around Idlib since the conclusion
of the memorandum of understanding between Turkey
and Russia. It has reduced the immediate risk of a
humanitarian catastrophe and brought the people
of Idlib a moment of respite. It is still essential to
preventing an all-out military offensive in Idlib. We
call on all the parties to translate the reduced violence
in Idlib into a sustainable ceasefire that can lead to a
negotiated solution for Idlib.

Respect for international humanitarian law is
an obligation for all parties to the conflict in Syria.
That includes protecting civilians and facilitating
principled humanitarian action. Civilians need to be
able to leave Idlib freely if they wish to do so of their
own free will. In addition, the existing de-confliction
measures should bring an end to the inhumane attacks
on hospitals that we have witnessed throughout the
war in Syria. However, de-confliction should not turn
into a thinly veiled mechanism for granting approval
for humanitarians and doctors to operate. In our view,
humanitarians and doctors must always be able to do
their work. The responsibility for any attack now lies
fully with the Syrian regime and its allies supporting
them from the air. Those responsible will be held
to account.
My third point has to do with support for a United
Nations-led political process. On Friday, when the
Council discussed the constitutional committee
(S/PV.8383), I stressed that the committee is not a goal
in itself but rather part of the broader United Nations-
led political process based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Peace
and stability in Syria can be found only through apolitical
solution that is inclusive of all Syrians. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands therefore strongly disagrees with
premature calls for reconstruction aid and the return
of refugees. There will be no reconstruction aid for
Syria from the European Union until a comprehensive,
irreversible, credible and inclusive political transition is
firmly under way. It should be negotiated by the Syrian
parties to the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique. We see the role
of the United Nations, and especially that of Staffan de
Mistura and his successor, as crucial in this context. I
would once again like to draw the Council's attention
to a statement by eminent jurists setting out clear
standards for reconstruction aid in Syria. They gave us
their legal opinion on 24 September that

"without adherence to these standards, the
provision ofreconstruction assistance can facilitate
past, continuous or new violations of international
law, which would in turn give rise to complicity or
shared international responsibility".

I should also underline that any transition requires
accountability for acts committed during the conflic,
which is also specified in the Geneva communique.
In order to achieve sustainable peace, those suspected
of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria
must be held to account. If the Council continues to
be blocked by a veto in referring the matter to the
International Criminal Court, we will continue our
accountability efforts elsewhere.

At the moment Syria is not ready for the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of refugees, which
can be facilitated only when the protection thresholds
are in place, and UNHCR's involvement is crucial to
monitoring the protection of Syrian civilians.

In conclusion, we fully support the five asks that
Mr. Lowcock presented just now. We need to see
rapid and meaningful improvements for humanitarian
access throughout Syria. Cross-border aid remains
essential to reaching civilians in Idlib, many of whom
are internally displaced and depend on humanitarian
aid for survival. We emphasize the points made by our
French colleague on the need for a sustainable political
solution. Meanwhile, let us make sure that the United
Nations can alleviate the needs of the civilians in Syria
who have suffered so terribly for so long already.

