Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Allow me to
first of all join my colleagues in welcoming the
Secretary-General's statement at this debate. That is
yet another confirmation of the personal engagement of
the Secretary-General in this very important issue for
the Security Council.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate and for the excellent concept paper
that you have circulated. The concept paper is an
effective and enlightening instrument for our work,
enabling us to better understand what has been
achieved thus far, two years after the issuance of
presidential note S/2006/507, and what remains to be
done. Today's debate is of the utmost importance. Too

much time has passed since the last open debate of the
Council on the issue of its working methods. Opening
the Council to all Member States for this debate is a
concrete development that we fully supported during
the consultations in recent weeks.

A reform of the Council's working methods
represents, for Italy, a priority objective in the United
Nations reform process. Maintaining a direct and
focused dialogue with Member States, particularly on
the issue of working methods, has always been of
fundamental importance and a point of reference for
Italy. Our goal is to fulfil the expectations of Member
States and to counter the risk of inertia within the
Council, in order to foster a sense of ownership of the
Council among all Member States and, conversely,
prevent the Council from being perceived as isolated
from the rest of the United Nations system.

Italy's action has long been characterized by a
constructive attitude towards Council reform in all its
aspects. We have actively participated in the work of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I would like to
congratulate and commend Ambassador Arias for his
effective leadership in that Working Group.

We remain committed to a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council in all its aspects. Working
methods also have a clear priority, in order to improve
the imbalance in the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Council. The desire for a
constructive dialogue with the rest of Member States,
including on working methods, has always been a
characteristic of the Uniting for Consensus movement,
and it remains a goal to which we are committed.

For Italy, transparency, openness, efficiency and
interaction with the rest of Member States are crucial if
we are to achieve substantial improvement in the
Council's working methods. Many ideas for
improvements have been voiced: fuller access to the
Security Council, including through better and more
regular communications by the Council to all Member
States; more thematic debates in the General Assembly;
improved and more detailed annual reports to the
Assembly; renewed impetus for public meetings; and
an effective system to prevent overlap and assure
transparency in the subsidiary bodies. We also consider
of the most crucial importance the close and effective
cooperation between the Secretariat and the Council.
In order to achieve better use of the existing
format of private meetings, we believe that, among the
many possible improvements, a mechanism should be
established to allow interested Member States to be
heard confidentially, at their request, in what we could
call private consultations in the Chamber. In particular
circumstances, all Member States should have the
opportunity to explain their position in a formal
setting, in the context of a direct dialogue with
members of the Council.

Those and other tasks will require adequate
redefinition of the rules that govern the working
methods. It is a goal that Council members should
strive for on a daily basis. In that regard, I wish to
praise the decision by the Vietnamese presidency in
July to inform non-Council members of the preparation
of the annual report on the work of the Security
Council.

On interaction with the membership, allow me to
bring up the issues of involving regional organizations
in the Council's activities and the contribution they can
make to its actions. A great deal has been achieved in
that area in recent years. I am thinking, for example, of
the development of regular contact and meetings
between the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and the Security Council with regard to conflict
prevention, crisis situations and the deployment of
peacekeeping missions on the African continent.

To an increasing extent, regional organizations
interact with the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and contribute, for example, to the
effectiveness of global action in the fight against
terrorism and the application of sanctions regimes. In
that regard, the European Union also plays a
fundamental role. It has formed a partnership with the
United Nations to cooperate in the areas of crisis
management and peacekeeping operations. From the
Balkans to the Middle East, from Africa to Asia, the
European Union and the United Nations are working
together on the ground, even under very difficult
circumstances.

Regional organizations are the great new reality
of today's international relations. Let me restate how
crucial it has become to take into consideration that
trend of our time, and may it be adequately reflected in
the Council.

