Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for
the briefings provided by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and by the
Special Representative for the African Union for the
Central African Republic, Mr. Bedializoun Moussa
Nebie, as well as the important statement delivered
by Mr. Mauro Garofalo on behalf of the Community
of Sant'Egidio. We also welcome the presence of
Her Excellency the Permanent Representative for the
Central African Republic.

We would like to again express our concern
about the continuing environment of violence in the
Central African Republic. The situation of insecurity,
asymmetrical attacks and ongoing intercommunal
clashes severely impact the civilian population, in
particular those who are most vulnerable, including boys
and girls. It is also further eroding the humanitarian
situation. In that regard, Bolivia condemns the
constant attacks perpetrated by armed groups against
civilians and the personnel of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

We value and commend the members of the
Mission-military, police and civilianpersonnel - who
carry out their work in a volatile and extremely high-
risk environment. The protection of civilians, security
coverage, support to the Central African Republic State
to expand its authority, inter alia, are activities that
unquestionably strengthen the peace process, which,
unfortunately, has not been concluded to date.

It is clear that the difficult challenges in the process
of building political stability in the country must
be addressed through inclusive dialogue, consistent
demonstration of political will by all stakeholders in
the country, as well as through a serious and sustained
commitment by all parties to the conflict.

We welcome and value the recent visit of the
Secretary-General to the Central African Republic, in
which he reaffirmed the solidarity of the international
community, in particular in dealing with the challenges
of maintaining peace and security, the building of
State institutions and its establishment throughout
the territory, as well as national reconciliation
and development.

Furthermore, fighting and violence have led
to worrisome consequences, and therefore drastic
humanitarian consequences. According to data from
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/865),
during the reporting period approximately 50 per cent
of the population depended upon external support to
survive, 2.4 million Central Africans required urgent
humanitarian assistance, and there had been 600,000
new internally displaced persons, totalling 1.1 million
people since 2016; in other words, one in five people
suffer the effects of forced displacement. Five hundred
tousand refugees live in neighbouring countries, such
as Cameroon, Chad, the Congo and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Food insecurity affects one in
four people, reaching the figure of 2 million people at
risk in the Central African Republic.

Furthermore, violations of international
humanitarian law further aggravate the situation
of hundreds of victims; men, women and children
who are subjected to sexual violence, trafficking in
persons and other crimes. We believe it is crucial to
at last operationalize the Special Criminal Court.
We encourage MINUSCA and the United Nations
Development Programme to continue efforts to that
end with a view to combaingt impunity and prosecuting
those responsible for war crimes.

With that in mind, Bolivia once again calls on all
the armed groups to lay down their arms, set aside
sectarian interests that prevent fruitful dialogue and
achieve agreement to benefit of the civilian population
and stabilize the country and submit to demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration.

Aware of the difficult process that the Central
African people are going through without having
achieved stability and peace, we see with concern that
entire communities have been torn apart by the vicious
cycle of violence. Opportunities to achieve progress in
the establishment of peace and stability seem distant.

Against that backdrop, we welcome the active
support and constant participation of regional
organizations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring
countries, whose support has been and will continue
to be essential, through political pacification and
cooperation initiatives in a lasting reconciliation
process based on the principle of African solutions for
African conflicts and strict respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic.

We must underscore all the efforts of the
Government of the Central African Republic, led by
President Touadera, in the search for ways to establish
an inclusive dialogue and understanding, in addition to
carrying out important reforms, such as establishing
the national strategy for security sector reform, which
was approved on 4 September; the establishment
of 14 courts around the country; in addition to the
adoption of the national reconciliation programme on
11 September, the establishment of a truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission; and the road
map for the operationalization of the National Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms Commission. Those
are important steps to be added to the efforts of the
international community.

In conclusion, we echo the observations and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, first,
with regard to the strengthening of the capabilities of
MINUSCA, and to provide it greater flexibility and
enable it to better deploy in the areas of greatest risk.
However, and as mentioned by the Secretary-General,
the Mission will not restore peace alone; the people
of the Central African Republic themselves have the
primary responsibility for bringing peace and stability
to the country.

The full and committed support of the international
community, the United Nations and regional
organizations must assist the people of Central Africa
to establish peace and security.

