Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We thank you, Mr. President, and the United States
presidency for convening this important debate in
support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.

The message conveyed in the Council today by
Secretary of State Kerry, the Secretary-General, the
President of the World Bank, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary- General for the Great Lakes Region and others
has rekindled our sense of commitment and hope. It is
in that spirit that we align ourselves with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Mozambique and
Uganda on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), respectively.

We would like to add some perspectives to this
discussion, however. First, we reiterate our hopes and
reaffirm our unflinching support for the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The Framework has truly
offered an opportunity to break out of the spiral of
violence and instability that has marred our region for
far too long. That violence has claimed millions oflives
and inflicted wanton suffering on innocent civilians for
many years, as Secretary Kerry pointed out.

With the adoption of the Framework and the
establishment of the regional oversight mechanism,
we have embarked on a unique and important journey
towards the long-sought goal of attaining enduring
peace and stability, as well as prosperity for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire Great
Lakes region. And we thank the Secretary-General
for reflecting those developments in the report that is
currently before the Council (S/2013/387).

Secondly, we wish to echo President Kikwete's
appeal. The solution to the conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be not
military but political, and achieving that goes beyond
the Framework to its implementation. We therefore
welcome some of the positive developments in that
area. Reforms are under way in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Economic Community of
the Great Lakes Countries is being revived and there
are talks of greater integration and cooperation among
some members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, as well as renewed bilateral
and international cooperation in the areas of trade,
investment and commerce.

But there are also matters of concern that require
urgent attention. The political process envisaged in
the Framework must be reinvigorated. There are those
who would be too happy to create distractions to the
challenges we face. Our collective focus and the focus
of the Council must be on the abiding commitment
to succeed, and therefore we should not yield to such
destructive forces.

It is in that sense that we believe the Kampala
talks, under the auspices of the ICGLR, deserve
our support, and we commend President Museveni
and the Government of Uganda for their efforts. We
must ceaselessly continue to call for and encourage
dialogue and negotiations with a view to building
mutual confidence between and among parties that
demonstrably share our vision for peace and stability
in the region. Likewise, we must continue to encourage
concerned regional Governments to engage all
political groups whose rebellion is the main cause of
the protracted violence and instability in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region.

We must also be bold and honest enough to admit
that it is only through an all-inclusive conciliatory
process that we shall meaningfully attain long-term
peace, which has eluded us for decades. We cannot
be sincere in our objectives through the Framework if
we continue to neglect that basic reality. The Council
has been witness to countless instances of avowed
enemies making peace with each other solely through
negotiations and dialogue. Indeed, that is the spirit
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Scapegoating has never been a successful tool of
diplomacy and certainly not of conflict resolution.

Thirdly, we wish to affirm our support to the full
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade, a robust
arm of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), as mandated by the Council, to which
the United Republic of Tanzania is a troop-contributing
country. The Force deserves our full support, and
especially that of the Council. It does not need to be
maligned on baseless and unfounded claims.

The United Republic of Tanzania has had the
privilege to serve on the Council. We took our service as
a mandate of trust for Africa and the global community.
We were mindful that the trust came with certain
responsibilities, prerogatives and probity. It was meant
never to be misused or abused, but to be exercised with
a great sense of uprightness, balance and duty.

Regrettably recent allegations against the Force
Intervention Brigade and its leadership reflect a pattern
that must concern all of us - a tendency to malign
those that are mandated and have acted in good faith in

the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the
recent past, the Group of Experts that was established
by the Council was the subject of such malicious and
unfounded allegations. The Council should demand
proof and act decisively to protect those entrusted with
such noble responsibilities.

We nonetheless commend the Council for its
continued support to MONUSCO in fulfilling its
mandates amidst a barrage of negative campaigns
from some rebel groups and other detractors. In our
view, those campaigns seek only to undermine the
full realization of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and to defeat MONUSCO's mandate. But
we are confident that the international community
will prevail. No force or even destructive propaganda
campaigns should surpass our yearning for enduring
peace, stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes
region. This is the Framework of hope that the United
Republic of Tanzania supports and shall steadfastly
continue to support.

