Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia): May I first of all congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I am confident
that under your wise and able leadership the Council will
continue to cope successfully with its heavy
responsibilities during the current month. May I also
extend my appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Botswana, Ambassador
Joseph Legwaila, for the outstanding manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month. I also wish to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary- General for
his report to the Security Council regarding the
implementation of resolution 1044 (1996).

When Ethiopia decided to bring this grave issue to
the Security Council more than three months ago, it did
so with the conviction that the Council would be so
enraged by the enormity of the crime committed by the
Sudanese authorities that the message it would send to
them would be clear, unambiguous and principled. It was
our hope that the Council would tell the authorities in the
Sudan that our world has no place for a leadership that
sponsors assassination plots against a Head of State.
In such a clear-cut case of an act of terror, in which
the Sudanese authorities were caught red-handed, Ethiopia
thought the reaction of the Council would be as forceful
as the gravity of the crime dictates, and as unambiguous
as the blatant nature of the international terrorism carried
out and sponsored by the Sudanese authorities warrants.
The draft resolution before the Council, however, has
made us wonder whether the confidence we initially had
was warranted and whether those, like the Sudanese
authorities, who engage in State-sponsored terrorism will
ever fully, and with no equivocation, be held accountable
for the crimes they have committed.

The draft resolution to be adopted now and the
events immediately preceding it have indeed caused us to
recall the painful memories of our past. We have so much
been victims of political expediency in the past that we

 

feel justified in being disappointed when our call for
justice is given short shrift and when we see principles
being sacrificed on the altar of expediency and political
calculations.

There is no doubt that the facts about the involvement
of the Sudanese authorities in the assassination attempt are
as clear as day. This has been proved beyond the shadow
of a doubt, and the Sudanese authorities know that they
were caught red-handed. This was also the conviction of the
Security Council when it adopted resolution 1044 (1996),
which calls on the Sudanese authorities to hand over to
Ethiopia for prosecution the three terrorists it is sheltering
in its territory, and to desist from supporting and assisting
terrorists.

Not only have the Sudanese authorities not complied
with the demands of the Council, but they have continued
to ridicule the Council by the many antics and ploys they
have resorted to, starting from the very morrow of the
adoption of resolution 1044 (1996). The latest ploy is the
interview, or the alleged interview, by Mustafa Hamza, the
leader of the terrorist group, vindicating the Sudanese
authorities of involvement in the crime. This, for Ethiopia,
is a veritable insult to the intelligence of the members of
the Council.

The Secretary-General's report makes it abundantly
clear that Sudan has not complied with the Council's
demands contained in resolution 1044 (1996). Obviously,
Ethiopia had no illusion that the resolution to be adopted
would be strong enough to compel the Sudanese authorities
to respect the decision of the Council.

It was precisely for this reason that an arms embargo
would have been one of the most appropriate and proper
steps, which the Council should have taken, in order to put
the requisite pressure on the Sudanese authorities to secure
their compliance with its demands. The call was for a
comprehensive arms embargo applicable to all, and as such
all arguments put forth against such a step by the Council
are patently hollow, extremely unconvincing, and lacking in
transparency, which is so much demanded by the appalling
nature of the crime committed by the Sudanese authorities
and by the serious implications for international peace and
security. The fact that the Security Council has found it
difficult to impose an arms embargo on a leadership which
sponsors and assists, as well as supplies arms to, terrorists
and which, in any case, needs the arms to suppress parts of
its own people whom it has difficulty accepting on the basis
of equality, is indeed difficult to comprehend.

That the Council has found it impossible at this time
to ban the international flights of Sudanese Airways,
which was used and is being used by Sudanese authorities
for shuttling terrorists and for transporting weapons used
by terrorists, is equally perplexing, and no argument can
convince us that this was based on consideration either of
the dictates of justice or those of principles. Here, too,
expediency has the upper hand. And as such the major
instrument of terror in the hands of the Sudanese
authorities is allowed to be unaffected, even though the
proposal would not have affected flights into and out of
Sudan by other carriers, and the step would have hardly
affected the people of the Sudan. The Council is sending
a confusing message to the Sudanese authorities, which
will in no way help enhance its credibility on the matter.

It is the conviction of my Government that trying to
appease those who have consciously chosen terrorism as
an instrument of State policy will not work and will not
produce the desired results. The evidence for this is
abundant and needs no recitation.

The mentality of the Sudanese authorities is such
that, no matter how wrong they might be, they are bound
to view the resolution to be adopted by the Council as a
successful outcome of their ploys and prevarications.
True, we have not yet come to the end of the road on this
issue, and it might be too soon for the Sudanese
authorities to believe that they can continue to carry out
terrorism and target Heads of State for assassination with
impunity. But there is one clear victor today -
expediency. There is one clear loser - principle. The fact
that principles - and very important principles having to
do with international law and with the fight against
terrorism - have been sacrificed today on the altars of
political expediency and political calculations should be
admitted with all candour. It is our hope that we will
draw the proper lessons from the experience, one of
which might perhaps sadly be that the world is not as yet
ready to fight against State-sponsored terrorism with
determination, courage and a sense of responsibility,
justice and solidarity.

As I conclude, I wish to express Ethiopia's sincere
appreciation to all those who chose to focus on the merit
of the case before the Council, independently of other
considerations, and who, despite all the confusion
deliberately created, decided to remain steadfast and acted
on the basis of principles and with the conviction that
State-sponsored terrorism, whether committed in Africa,
Europe or America, remains a crime which should never
be tolerated.

 

