Mr. Walubita: I have travelled all the way from
Africa to come and attend this very important meeting.
I arrived this morning at 7 o'clock, and I am already
seated before the Council to demonstrate to it how
important the item on the agenda this morning is to us
in Africa.

I want to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Republic of Angola for the initiative you have taken, as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November, to ask for this open debate on the proposed
international conference for the Great Lakes region. I
must humbly thank you for that initiative.

You will recall that the last time Angola brought
me here is when I was Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Zambia, during our temporary
misunderstandings; we sat here together. I am very
happy that an opportunity has been extended to me to
be here today in my capacity as Special Envoy of the
African Union. I must thank Mozambique's Minister
Madeira for his statement on behalf of us all on the
African continent.

I wish also to thank Minister Shareef, Deputy
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Tanzania, for representing us in the Great Lakes region.
I must, of course, thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his briefing this
morning. Let me thank for having given this process a
very able diplomat in the name of Ibrahima Fall, whom
I have known for many, many years; to us, in this
process, it is a rare gift. His commitment to the process
has been tremendous.

I must admit that, without his efforts, we might
not have moved a step further forward in responding to
the challenge of the international community to prepare
for an international conference for the Great Lakes
region. I am therefore very grateful to the Secretary-
General for having given us a person who has done so
much within a short period of time. The Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nairobi has expanded in order to respond to the
challenges involved in preparing for this process.

In February 2002, I was appointed Special Envoy
of the African Union to the Republic of Liberia, and I
laboured in Liberia to try to bring understanding. By
October 2002, when I was being transferred from
Liberia, a process had already been undertaken that
involved the possibility of a dialogue between the
Government and the rebels. In October, I was
appointed Special Envoy of the African Union to the
Great Lakes region, to work with my own brother,
Ibrahima Fall, in preparing for this international
conference.

It has not been easy for us in the African Union to
respond 100 per cent to the demands of this process,
but I want to assure you, Mr. President, that in the
African Union, with President Konare as the new
Chairman of the Commission, everything is being done
to respond to these challenges before the international
community.

My own belief - that we have done so much
already - has been echoed in the various statements
we have heard this morning and at consultative
meetings we have held. All six core countries,
obviously, have agreed that we proceed, and they have
agreed to appoint national coordinators and national
preparatory committees. We have tremendous support
from the six core countries with respect to moving
ahead in arranging for the international conference on
the Great Lakes region.

When we started, we had three terms of
reference: to fight for peace and security for the Great
Lakes region; to fight for democracy and good
governance for the Great Lakes region; and, of course,
to fight for economic development and regional
integration for the Great Lakes region. But through
various consultations a fourth cluster in the terms of
reference has been added, namely on social and
humanitarian affairs, so as to address the challenges the
Deputy Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania
alluded to, that is, issues relating to victims of
violations of human rights, displaced persons and the
larger issue, the refugee situation.

The third approach was to consult the
neighbouring States of the Great Lakes region. My
brother Ibrahima Fall and I travelled extensively to
more than 20 African countries, consulting with each
one of them. As you see in our reports, the response
has been tremendous. All have agreed, to a great
extent, that we go ahead with the preparatory process.

There are two issues here; first, the participation
of Zambia, which geographically is part of the Great
Lakes region, connected by Lake Tanganyika, and
secondly, the proximity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to the region, which is an issue that needs to
be clarified as we go along. We held the first
conference of national coordinators in Nairobi. The
importance of that conference was that it provided us
with a road map and a time frame for certain activities
to take place. But here I want to mention one obvious
difficulty. Although the six core countries agreed to
appoint national coordinators and to set up national
preparatory committees, by the time we met in Nairobi
only one or two countries were able to submit to us the
full details of the members of their national preparatory
committees. Therefore, it might not be possible for us
to hold, before the end of the year, the regional
preparatory meetings, because of the absence of input
from most of the six core countries.

But hope is not lost. I want to assure you, Sir, that
when President Konare recently met Ibrahima Fall in
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, he assured Mr. Fall that this
process will be given first priority. However, we have
very serious financial constraints in the African Union,
and the arrangement for the Special Envoy still remains
ad hoc. I still have to commute from Lusaka to Nairobi
and to Addis Ababa for these meetings, although there
are plans to set up an office in Nairobi for the Special
Envoy, so that we have daily interactions with Ibrahima
Fall. But that has not yet been possible.

Yesterday I was asked to travel here to present the
African Union position this morning, but I want to
assure you that our partnership with the United Nations
in this process will be continuous and is crucial. There
is no way the African Union will move backwards. We
shall continue to be very active partners in the process.
I want to assure you that President Konare and
President Chissano are very determined that we
proceed as planned. A possible meeting is already in
the pipeline, to be facilitated by the African Union, that
will consist of African subregional groups, including
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States (COMESSA). There is also a
proposal for a meeting to take place in Addis Ababa
before the end of November 2003. The main idea is
that the regional subgroupings of Africa must also
participate in the process.

One part of our mandate in this process is that we
should not interfere with the ongoing peace processes
in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We want to assure you - here we agree with
Minister Madeira and Minister Shareef - that we are
actively watching the situation, so that the two peace
accords can mature irreversibly, even before the
conference proceeds. We are very hopeful, because of
the signs we have seen in Rwanda, in Congo and in
Burundi, that we will be able to proceed, not only with
the preparatory process, but also with the holding of
the conference.

There are already, according to our time frame, a
number of meetings set. Most importantly, by May next
year we hope to have the first meeting of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Great Lakes region to prepare
for the first round of the summit in June 2004 to be
held in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. At this stage, I want
to thank the United Republic of Tanzania for offering
to hold the first summit of the conference. As a result
of this positive gesture from Tanzania, Nairobi has
already indicated to us, in the preparatory process, that
they are willing to host the second summit of the
conference.

The appeal from the African Union is for
logistical support. We require financing. I want to
assure you that our involvement will not take the
process backwards, but forward. But above all, once
again let me thank Angola and thank the Security
Council for the support that they are already giving us.
I believe my brother Ibrahima Fall will shed more light
on a number of consultations that he undertook in that
connection. From our side, however, we want to say
that President Konare has firmly undertaken to give
this process first priority and that is why I am here.

I want to assure you that we will participate fully,
and I join the calls, already made by the Secretary-
General and the ministers, that we require logistical
support from the international community and the
donor community, while we try to help ourselves on the
African continent. This is merely a brief statement and,
perhaps later on in the debate, we will be given an
opportunity to answer some of the queries or
shortcomings that the United Nations Security Council
might have observed.

In conclusion, on behalf of my delegation from
the African Union, I thank you, Sir, for this very valued
opportunity to address the United Nations Security
Council.

