Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): On
the basis of the report of the Secretary-General and the
debate in the Security Council, we can conclude that there
are two main challenges facing the Angolan peace process:
a UNITA announcement regarding the quartering and
disarmament of its troops in line with the timetable adopted
by the Joint Commission on 31 October 1996, and
agreement by all parties regarding major pending political
tasks. We believe that meeting these challenges will make
it possible to bring peace to Angola. If they are not met,
the political situation will remain fragile.

Further, we believe that any delay in implementing the
Lusaka Protocol and the agreed timetable will diminish the
credibility of the peace process and will make it impossible
to achieve the necessary confidence for the new phase on
which the people of Angola are embarking. Military
questions must be settled, and this requires the cooperation
of both parties. These questions include the incorporation
of some 26,300 UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces and the re-establishment of Government authority
over the whole national territory. We hope that President
Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will meet inside Angola and
that such a meeting will lead to a solution of pending
questions including Mr. Savimbi's special status as the
leader of the largest opposition party, the inclusion of
UNITA leaders in the new Cabinet, and participation by
UNITA in the legislature and national, regional and local
administration. This requires that UNITA become a
political party that functions with complete legitimacy and
legality.

My delegation remains convinced that the
demobilization of some 100,000 soldiers from both sides
and their reintegration into civil society is one of the
major challenges under the Lusaka Protocol. We support
the Secretary-General's comments in paragraph 20 of his
report regarding participation by the United Nations
Development Programme in the rehabilitation of ex-
combatants with a view to facilitating their reintegration.

These programmes are particularly vital in a country
where, according to the report, the unemployment rate is
45 per cent and the inflation rate is more than 3,000 per
cent. We hope that the donor countries will continue to
provide financial and technical assistance to implement
these programmes without delay in this fraternal country.
Egypt supports the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to continue the phased withdrawal of UNAVEM
III military units through August 1997. We are convinced
that in the coming period the political aspects of the
settlements will be emphasized more than the military
aspects, which have almost been settled between the two
parties.

Angola will surely continue to need the United
Nations, but the importance and nature of the United
Nations presence will of course be different. The
opportunities now available to the Angolan parties
because of the presence of the largest United Nations
Mission should not be lost. Extending the Mission's
mandate in the absence of real progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol would be difficult
to agree to, in view of the United Nations financial crisis.

The responsibility incumbent on the parties in
Angola is twofold: they must avail themselves of the
international presence in Angolan territory in order to
encourage the international community to continue to

 

provide humanitarian, economic and technical assistance to
the Angolan people in the future.

The Egyptian delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of the Mission in Angola until 28 February 1997.
We support the draft resolution before the Council.

