Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. My
delegation welcomes His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaci, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them both for
their statements.

Malaysia joins other countries in welcoming
the recent formation of the Government in Kosovo,
following the legislative elections in June of last year.
After a six-month delay, we applaud the power-sharing
agreement between the coalition parties, based on a
spirit of compromise and inclusiveness. We commend
the key role played by President Atifete Jahjaga in
facilitating that outcome, as well as her unwavering
efforts to engage with the political leaders in Kosovo.
With the formation of the coalition Government,
we call on all parties to close ranks and work closely
together, based on the collective responsibility to a
democratic, stable and prosperous future. We also take
note of the agreement between the coalition parties to
establish the association of Serb municipalities within
several months' time, and look forward to seeing
progress on that long-contentious issue.

Malaysia fully supports the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia and welcomes the
resumption of the political dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade, facilitated by the European Union (EU)
in Brussels, next week. Despite the stalled dialogue at
the highest level, due to the delay in the formation of
the Kosovo Government in the second half of last year,
Malaysia is pleased to note that the EU-led dialogue has
nevertheless continued at the technical level.

In December 2014, Serbia's Constitutional Court
declined a request made by the Democratic Party of
Serbia to review the constitutionality of the 19 April
2013 First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
Given the Court's decision, Malaysia hopes that all
parties in Serbia and Kosovo will remain committed to,
and ensure the full implementation of, the agreements
signed by their Governments under the auspices of the
European Union in Brussels. Indeed, that is the only
way forward towards a better common future for both
Serbia and Kosovo.

Malaysia also wishes to see progress in the
establishment of a specialist court, agreed to between
Kosovo and the EU, to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force last
year. Progress in establishing the specialist court to try
possible crimes against humanity is vital in promoting
reconciliation and closure among the communities in
Kosovo.

Malaysia welcomes the stable security situation
in Kosovo, as reported by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zarif. We fully support the
important role played by UNMIK to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region. We also welcome the continuing mandate
of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
to further strengthen the rule of law and the judicial
institutions in Kosovo towards the path of European
integration.

Based on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/74), from October 2014 to January 2015 a
number of peaceful demonstrations were held in
Kosovo, mainly to protest against prevailing social
and economic conditions. Malaysia hopes that the
new Government will take heed of the demands of its
citizens for political, social and economic reform to
improve their living standards.

Malaysia welcomes the ongoing cooperation
among the religious communities in Kosovo, including
in protecting cultural and religious heritage. Such
cooperation could serve as a bridge in building
confidence and trust among the religious communities
in Kosovo. We strongly condemn any attempt to spread
hate and instigate interreligious violence, including by
desecrating cultural and religious sites.

As a multiracial and multireligious country,
Malaysia has its share of difficulties and challenges in
ensuring a united, stable and prosperous country. We
believe that the value and practice of moderation is
crucial in bridging differences, as it calls for mutual
respect, acceptance and understanding among the
various groups.

We also need to prevent political, social and
economic marginalization in order to ensure unity
and stability in a multi-ethnic society. In that regard,
Malaysia stands ready to support Kosovo on its
path towards nation-building, inclusive democracy,
reconciliation and economic progress.

