At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his valuable briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2020/964). I also wish to welcome His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Haradinaj-Stubbla. My delegation reiterates its appreciation for the important role of the United Nations, and in particular that of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, in promoting security and political stability in Kosovo and the region as a whole amid the ongoing repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We commend UNMIK staff on its efforts to confront the crisis. Despite the enormity of the pandemic-related socioeconomic challenges, we are satisfied that, during the period covered in the report, there were positive signs of progress in dialogue leading to a comprehensive political settlement. In particular, long-suspended dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina resumed, facilitated by the European Union, and a meeting was convened at the summit level in July, on the initiative of France and Germany. In that regard, we reaffirm our support for the efforts of the European Union Special Representative for Kosovo aimed at advancing political dialogue in the hope that the two parties will build on the progress made thus far in discussions, moving towards a settlement of the various issues, in particular the return of displaced persons, economic cooperation and the implementation of the relevant agreements. This, in turn, will help to create conditions conducive to a consensus-based, comprehensive political solution within the framework of relevant Security Council resolutions, and foster respect for human rights, particularly the rights of women and girls. We once again urge the parties to overcome their differences and continue to build upon the progress achieved to date. We call for intensified efforts aimed at promoting a climate conducive to building confidence. Any steps that might exacerbate existing tensions or affect the political settlement process should be avoided, and the participation of women in the process should be promoted.
