Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for the initiative to return to the question of
the protection of civilians during armed conflict. We
are grateful to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Under-Secretaries-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their comprehensive briefings.
Despite steps taken by the international community,
the situation with regard to the protection of civilians
in times of armed conflict leaves much to be desired.
From Afghanistan, Syria and other theatres of armed
conflict throughout the world, reports continue to
arrive of civilian casualties. Naturally, we condemn
deliberate attacks on civilians as well as civilian deaths
as a result of indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. We would highlight in particular the very topical
problem of civilian casualties resulting from the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones.

There is no doubt that the protection of civilians
is a priority for all parties to a conflict. An important
role here is played by peacekeepers, whose mandates
increasingly include such functions. However, we
do not agree that peacekeeping should be viewed
exclusively in terms of the protection of civilians and
facilitating the provision of humanitarian assistance,
notwithstanding the importance of those tasks. The
priorities of peacekeepers are the establishment and
the maintenance of peace, the facilitation of political
processes and ensuring security in countries of
deployment.

We view the protection of civilians as an important,
but not the only task often assigned to peacekeeping
operations. We believe that the modalities for the
practical implementation thereof should be tied to
specific mandates defined by the Security Council for
each country situation.

The modalities assigned to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) might not work
in a different situation; they might even do harm. In
United Nations practice, there have been cases, for
instance in care d'Ivoire in 2010, where peacekeepers,
in breach of their mandate and the main principles of
peacekeeping, rendered support to one of the parties to
a conflict and were therefore dragged into that conflict.
That led to an intense armed-conflict phase with well-
known serious repercussions.

On the other hand, there are other examples.
Although the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has a very robust mandate on the protection
of civilians, it fell well short of accomplishing the
tasks assigned to it. In that regard, we believe that we
should be very cautious when adopting a one-size-fits-
all approach to the protection of civilians. We believe
that the critically important benchmarks in this sphere
should be the Charter of the United Nations and the core
principles of United Nations peacekeeping: consent by
the host country, neutrality and the use of force strictly
in line with the mandate.

Of course, operational mandates must be
clear, realistic and situation-appropriate, and each
peacekeeping operation should have a clear political
goal, stabilization strategy and command and
should be endowed with the requisite strength and
wherewithal, including police and civilian components.
Protection-of-civilians tasks should be carried out in a
rational manner.

It is not enough today to just put on paper powers
for the protection of civilians. It is high time to instil
among personnel an understanding of the standards
of international humanitarian law. To improve the
effectiveness and efficiency ofthe work ofpeacekeeping
operations, what is necessary is a clear division of roles
among their components so as to prevent any duplication
in their activities. A priority is also forging constructive
daily contact between peacekeepers and the relevant
local authorities, who bear direct responsibility for the
protection of their own populations.

We believe that we should focus primarily on
assisting national Governments in this area. What is
important in this regard is to work to prevent and avert
conflicts as well as the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants. It is important
that efforts in this area be duly coordinated. Nor should
we forget that the protection-of-civilians component in
peacekeeping operations should not supplant functions
for the maintenance of public order and ensuring the
security of the population, which is the responsibility
of States.

Actions to protect civilians must be based on a
clear Security Council mandate which, in turn, should
unswervingly be complied with by those who assume
responsibility for such tasks. We condemn any action
taken under the guise of the protection of civilians that
in practice pursues far-reaching geopolitical goals.

