Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me too
begin by congratulating the representative of Malaysia
on his presidency and his hard-working team on their
effectiveness this month. My team was so keen that I
should offer my personal reflections that they declined
to give me formal remarks for this debate, so I am going
to see how I go. I want to offer some reflections on the
substance of what we have achieved this month and also
on the way in which we achieved it, or failed to achieve
it.

We have had some very good debates and a very
good outcome in relation to children and armed conflict
(see S/PV.7466), and I want to commend Malaysia for
making a very substantial contribution to international
lawmaking in that area. I thought that the discussion
on peacebuilding was also very interesting and, once
again, exposed some of the areas into which we must
be prepared to go if we are to make best use of the
peacebuilding machinery beyond the Council.

We also had good results in relation to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (see S/PV.7468) and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) (see S/PV.7478), even though there
were some rather deep-seated differences among
delegations regarding whether those mandates needed
to be adjusted. I welcome the fact that we managed to
overcome those differences and adopt the mandates as
a united Council. I hope, as I said yesterday, that the
new mandate of UNAMID will, in particular, provide
an opportunity for a better relationship between the
Government of the Sudan and the Council.

If we look beyond the formal outcomes that we
achieved this month, however, to consider the problems
of the world, we must acknowledge that we have not
done all that well. In Syria, Yemen and Libya, we have
real problems. There are peace talks fitfully under way
in Libya and perhaps under way in Yemen, and nothing
at all in Syria. We have real problems in Burundi, where
the difficulty of genuinely engaging in prevention is
being demonstrated. If the other party does not want
to talk, it is very difficult to be an engaged participant.
That is a real difficulty, and we have just heard some
graphically horrible statistics about what is happening
in South Sudan. Those situations reflect very badly on

all of us, not only the members of the Council but the
international community as a whole.

There are some problems for which, I think, the
Council can properly take responsibility, but we must
also admit that there are limits to what it can do. Its
members have few arrows in their quiver, particularly
if other countries are not prepared to put their troops on
the line or authorize more aggressive use of force. Even
if they were prepared to do so, we know how difficult
such outcomes are to achieve. I do not, therefore, mean
to say that the problems are all the Council's; they are
not. Particularly in the case of Syria, however, we have
a real problem, because the Council is divided, and
similar divisions are in evidence in relation to Yemen.
Because of such divisions, we cannot really talk to each
other and instead seek to score points, which is not
helpful.

Some comments have already been made on the way
in which we go about our business, and I want to fully
endorse what the Ambassador of the United Kingdom
said about the need to engage more informally with
each other. After all, our consultations are intended to
be informal, and yet we have managed to build up a
cadre of practice that is so self-denying that it is hard
to believe at times what one can and cannot talk about,
and the way in which one can talk about it.

I also agree with the delegation of Spain that we
need to think about penholding and the ways in which
resolutions are negotiated. One option might be the
co-penholder proposal, but I would at least ask the
permanent members to imagine the impression given
to the non-permanent members when a draft resolution
is submitted by one of the permanent members to the
other permanent members first, and only then to the
non-permanent members, when it is to be put to a vote
in a day or two. That is not exactly the most useful form
of engagement.

I also think that we as Ambassadors have a
responsibility to engage more in the products that are
negotiated and adopted by this Council. While we of
course recognize the great work done by experts and
political coordinators, we are ultimately responsible for
such products. Yet how often do we really talk about
them? How often to we actually have a conversation as
ambassadors about what we are doing? I believe that we
need to do that, to reach out and suggest that we bring
a given matter to the room and talk about it as a group.

Those are sneak previews of what I would like to
explore next month when I am President. I do not know
how I will get on, but I do hope that you will help me.

