Mr. Shin Dong-ik (Republic of Korea): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Madam, for presiding
over this timely debate on international cooperation
in counter-terrorism. I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban; Ambassador Quinlan, Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities; and Ambassador Murmokaite, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, for their
informative briefings.

I also wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
families ofthose who were executed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), most recently American
aid worker Abdul-Rahman Kassig, also known as Peter
Kassig. The Republic of Korea strongly condemns these
barbaric acts. These are tragic reminders of the brutality
of ISIL and the need for the international community to
strengthen efforts to put an end to terrorism. In this
regard, my delegation strongly supports the adoption
of the draft presidential statement before us today,
which lays out steps for Member States and the United
Nations to implement counter-terrorism measures in a
comprehensive and practical manner. In particular, we
note its emphasis on curbing the financing of terrorist
entities.

At the Security Council summit in September
(see S/PV.7272), the Council demonstrated its resolve
to tackle the challenge of terrorist entities, such as
ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front (ANF), as well as foreign
terrorist fighters, by unanimously adopting resolution
2178 (2014). ISIL and ANF terrorize, extort and
sexually enslave innocent civilians. They also embroil
regions with violence and terrorism, while fanning the
flames of sectarianism. This clearly goes against the
very values of Islam they claim to represent.
In particular, the security implications arising from
the increase of foreign terrorist fighters affect not only
Iraq and Syria, but resonate far beyond the Middle East.
Radicalized and disaffected foreign terrorist fighters
can return to their home countries with advanced
terrorist tactics acquired on the battlefield. The less
restrictive border controls spurred by globalization
are enabling foreign terrorist fighters to move around
the world with relative ease. At the same time, the
terrorists' increased and adept use of the Internet has
made their recruitment and propaganda more pervasive
and toxic.

Against this backdrop, at the Security Council
summit in September President Park Geun-Hye
expressed her strong commitment to thoroughly
implementing resolution 2178 (2014). Accordingly,
the Korean Government has been making efforts to
meet this commitment. First, Korea has launched
an interagency process to review relevant laws and
systems to identify gaps in border control, financing
and information-sharing. We look forward to sharing
each others' best practices with other countries in this
area.

Secondly, we have strengthened measures to
monitor the travel of foreign terrorist fighters.
In addition to restricting the entry of individuals
designated by the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
we are tightly monitoring those who are traveling to
or through the Republic of Korea by making use of
INTERPOL databases and the Advance Passenger
Information System. We are also increasing efforts to
share information on suspected individuals with other
countries. Such efforts helped Korea to successfully
host the 17th Asian Games and the Plenipotentiary
Conference of the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) in recent months. In fact, it was
encouraging to note that relevant authorities in other
countries of Asia and elsewhere have recently become
more proactive in sharing information.

Thirdly, Korea is actively engaging in regional
counter-terrorism initiatives. We supported the recent
adoption of the East Asia Summit statement on terrorist
groups in Syria and Iraq. We support the initiative of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to hold a regional counter-terrorism workshop
in North-East Asia next year, where judges, prosecutors
and police officers will discuss ways to strengthen law
enforcement in combating terrorism.

Fourthly, as the host of the Seoul Conference on
Cyberspace, the ITU Plenipotentiary Conference and
the forthcoming workshop with the International Atomic
Energy Agency on cybersecurity, we are endeavouring
to contribute to global efforts to end the malicious use
of information and communications technology by
terrorists. Our authorities are strengthening measures
to prevent terrorists from inciting violent extremism
through the Internet, while keeping the Internet open,
free and secure. In this regard, we look forward to
working with the United Nations , including the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
and CTED to address these threats.

Lastly, a more fundamental approach to addressing
the conditions that lead to violent extremism is critical.
We should explore socioeconomic strategies to address
the root causes of terrorism. To this end, Korea will
continue to expand our official development assistance
by providing training and increasing employment of
young people in developing countries.

The United Nations is well positioned to play a
central role in countering global terrorism by providing
analysis and strategic direction. Korea hopes that the
United Nations system will continue to strengthen its
counter-terrorism capacity by improving coordination
among relevant United Nations agencies, most notably
CTITF and CTED, while strengthening cooperation
with other international organizations such as
INTERPOL. In addition, the capacity gap of Member
States to address terrorism, as illustrated by the 1373
Committee Chair today, underscores the need for the
United Nations to make efforts to provide increased
technical assistance and coordination to Member States.

Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) , Korea would like
to point out that we should remain vigilant in deterring
terrorists' access to weapons of mass destruction. In
this regard, Korea hopes that the United Nations will
also come up with a more comprehensive analysis and
recommend ways to adopt a sustained and holistic
approach to countering violent extremism. We look
forward to the Council's further deliberations on this
significant topic.

In closing, we wish to express our appreciation to
Australia for its hard work in reinforcing cooperation
to counter terrorism in its capacity as Chair of the 1267
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) during the past two years.

