Mr. Mladenov: Today I will devote my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the tenth report on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
covers the period from 25 March to 10 June 2019.

Let me reiterate that developments during this
reporting period cannot be divorced from the broader
context of Israel's continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory and settlement activity; Hamas'
continuing hold over Gaza and its militant activity;
the persistent threat of war; unilateral actions that
undermine peace efforts; and severe challenges to the
fiscal viability of the Palestinian Authority. All those
developments collectively erode the prospects of a two-
State solution.

From the outset, I would like to also highlight
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to face significant financial challenges. It is
now operating on the basis of a projected shortfall of
$211 million of its $1.2 billion budget for the year and
is facing serious cash-flow issues. That could impact
operations, including UNRWA's ability to maintain
food assistance to over 1 million Palestine refugees in
Gaza. I note that UNRWA's annual pledging conference
will take place on 25 June here in New York. I call upon
Member States to continue their support.

Paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Israel to
"immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, [and to] fully respect all
of its legal obligations in this regard".

No steps were taken to that effect during the
reporting period.

During the reporting period Israeli authorities
advanced, approved or tendered nearly 6,000 housing
units in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. That constitutes the largest settlement
advancement in two years and includes plans for
approximately 4,450 units in Area C settlements,
of which at least 200 have reached the final stage
of approval.

Those plans include 700 units in Efrat and 600
units in Ma'ale Adumim - two large settlements in
strategic locations that hamper the possibility for a
contiguous Palestinian State and north-south, east-west
connectivity. Another of the plans would retroactively
regularize, under Israeli law, the illegal outpost of
Haresha by incorporating it into the existing Talmon
settlement. Tenders were also announced for some 950
housing units in Area C settlements, and for 550 units
in East Jerusalem. Approximately 20 per cent of all
the plans advanced or tendered are in settlements in
outlying locations deep inside the West Bank.

In addition, on 3 June, Israel's National
Infrastructure Committee rejected a series of
objections against a controversial plan to construct a
cable car between West Jerusalem and the Old City and
submitted the plan for Government approval. The plan
has raised concerns among Palestinian residents of East
Jerusalem and Israeli non-governmental organizations
that it seeks to deepen Israel's control over the area.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities also continued during
the reporting period. Citing the absence ofIsraeli-issued
building permits, 92 Palestinian-owned structures were
demolished or seized, resulting in the displacement
of some 104 people. As the Middle East Quartet
highlighted in its 2016 report (S/20l6/595, annex),
those permits are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
obtain. Demolitions in East Jerusalem also peaked in
April, reaching 58 - more than any other single month
since the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) started monitoring in 2009.

The situation in the Wadi Yasul area, in the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, is also of concern.
Eleven people, including seven children and two
women, were displaced on 30 April, after their homes
were demolished. Some 50 legal cases concerning other
homes and structures in that area are pending in Israeli
courts. Punitive demolitions also continued during the
reporting period, with the authorities demolishing four
homes belonging to families of Palestinian perpetrators
ofvarious attacks. As a result, three families comprising
13 people, including six children, were displaced.

In addition, the Israeli army continues to conduct
military training exercises in areas designated by the
army as firing zones in the Jordan Valley and the West
Bank. As a result, approximately 184 Palestinians,
80 per cent of whom are women and children, from
the Tell Al-Khashaba, Lifjim and Humsa Al-Baqai'a
communities were forced to temporarily evacuate their
homes on 11 occasions, including during Ramadan.
On 22 May, the Israeli High Court of Justice rejected
a petition against the recurrent displacements of
those communities.

Paragraph 6 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls for

"immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as
well as all acts of provocation and destruction".

However, the reporting period saw a very dangerous
escalation of violence in Gaza and continued violence
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
I reported to the Council last month (see S/PV.8532)
that over the course of 48 hours, on 4 and 5 May,
Gaza saw the worst escalation since 2014, with Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad launching more than
700 projectiles towards Israel: several houses, two
kindergartens, a school and a hospital were directly hit
by rockets fired from Gaza. Four Israelis were killed
and 200 were injured during those incidents.

Meanwhile, in Gaza, the Israel Defence Forces
(IDF) stated that, in retaliation, it had hit more than
300 militant targets. Twenty-one residential buildings
were hit by air strikes, one of which was a residential
building in northern Gaza. Twenty-seven Palestinians,
including two children were killed and 150 injured.

On 30 March, 50,000 Palestinians demonstrated,
largely peacefully, marking the anniversary ofthe Great
March of Return, and, although violence at the Gaza
perimeter fence declined during the reporting period,
nine people, including three children, were killed by
Israeli fire during the demonstrations.

Incendiary kites, balloons and other devices also
continued to be launched from Gaza, starting fires in
southern Israel. At least 70 fires were reported, resulting
in the burning of over 30 hectares of land during
the reporting period. The period also saw continued
violence in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. Four Palestinians, including one child,
were killed by the Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes and various security operations.
Meanwhile, two Israelis were injured by a Palestinian
in a stabbing attack.

On 27 March, a 17-year-old Palestinian medic was
shot by the Israeli security forces near the Dheisheh
refugee camp in Bethlehem, dying of his wounds later.
On 24 April, following the arrest, tying and blindfolding
of a 15-year-old Palestinian boy on allegations of
stone-throwing, soldiers shot him twice in the lower
body as he attempted to escape while still blindfolded.

On 31 May, in a stabbing attack, a Palestinian
severely injured an Israeli civilian and a child in the
Old City of Jerusalem. The perpetrator was shot dead
by the Israeli security forces. Later the same day, a
16-year-old boy was killed and a 21-year-old man was
injured by the Israeli security forces as they attempted
to cross the separation barrier between West Bank and
Jerusalem near Bethlehem.

The situation at the holy sites also remained
tense during the reporting period. For the first time
in decades, Israel's Jerusalem Day commemoration
coincided with the final days of Ramadan. Israeli
authorities announced that Jews would not be allowed
to visit the compound towards the end of Ramadan,
in keeping with previous practice, but later declared
that limited visits would be permitted based on the
circumstances on the ground. Against that backdrop,
on 2 June clashes erupted between Israeli police forces
and Palestinians inside the compound.

Settler-related violence also continued during the
reporting period. According to OCHA, one Palestinian
was killed, 32 were injured and 41 incidents of damage
to property by settlers were reported. On 17 May, on
two separate occasions, Israelis were filmed torching
Palestinian lands in Nablus, and the Israeli security
forces later confirmed that one of the perpetrators
was an off-duty soldier, who has since been suspended
pending a police investigation. In the same period,
OCHA reported that seven Israelis were injured and
22 incidents of damage to property by Palestinians
were reported.

During the reporting period, there were some
developments regarding ongoing cases before Israeli
authorities pertaining to the perpetrators of various
acts of violence. On 14 May, the Israeli minor accused
of killing Aisha Al-Rabi, the Palestinian mother of
eight, in 2018, was released on bail to house arrest
with electronic monitoring. Prosecutors also reached a
plea bargain with the Israeli suspected of conspiring
to carry out the 2015 arson attack that killed the
Dawabsheh family. According to the deal, the suspect,
who was a minor at the time of the attack, will plead
guilty to conspiracy to commit arson out of racist
motives, as well as for other hate crimes. His trial
over the remaining charge of membership in a terrorist
organization will proceed.

Meanwhile, on 15 May, the Israeli Military Police
Criminal Investigation Division closed its investigation
into the killing of a double amputee at the Gaza fence
demonstrations in December 2017. It concluded that
there was no evidence that the man was killed by direct
Israeli army fire.

Several Palestinians were prosecuted for
involvement in attacks on Israelis, including one indicted
for planning under Hamas' instructions a suicide car
bombing on Israel's election day, and two other men for
planning a shooting attack at Tel Aviv's beach.

Paragraph 7 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon
the parties "to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric". Unfortunately,
such actions continued during the reporting period. On
15 May, a senior Hamas official addressed a rally in
Gaza and warned Israelis that the "day of your slaughter,
extermination and annihilation is near". He called for
them to leave and search for a place "in Europe, or in
hell, or in the sea". The official Hamas television channel
also repeatedly continued to glorify perpetrators of
terror attacks against Israelis, and broadcast songs with
graphic lyrics encouraging viewers to blow up Jews.
Fatah's official social media pages also continued to
glorify perpetrators of terrorist attacks.

Israeli officials continued to make highly
provocative statements as well. An outgoing member
of the Knesset confronted families of Palestinian
prisoners and threatened to "eliminate them [and] bury
them with pigs". Another politician called on the Prime
Minister to allow hunger-striking Palestinian prisoners
to die, while many boasted about the damage Israel was
causing in strikes in Gaza in response to rocket attacks.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. Some
positive developments were witnessed during the
reporting period, most notably with regard to addressing
the critical humanitarian and socioeconomic needs in
Gaza, but they were significantly overshadowed by the
negative trends.

The international community has continued its
efforts to address the dire situation in Gaza. The Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians met in Brussels on 30 April
and reiterated its support for the implementation
of a package of urgent humanitarian and economic
interventions in Gaza by the United Nations.

On 7 May, the State of Qatar announced its
continued provision of financial assistance to the
Palestinian people, including a pledge of $480 million,
of which $180 million is intended for humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, some of it to be implemented
by the United Nations; $250 million as loans for the
Palestinian Government; and $50 million as grants for
projects in the West Bank. That commitment has made
a very positive impact on the efforts to de-escalate
the situation in Gaza. However, what remains is the
necessity to find a sustainable and comprehensive
solution that addresses the dire economic and
humanitarian conditions and establishes the conditions
for lasting peace. In that regard, the United Nations
currently has funding to extend the fuel programme
that will provide electricity to Gaza until the end of the
year. In parallel to that effort, we are actively working
on more sustainable solutions in the energy sector.

The United Nations is also advancing on the
creation of dignified jobs for Gaza's men and women.
The ongoing temporary employment programmes,
which the United Nations Development Programme
and UNRWA started with Swiss and Qatari funds, are
already making a critical difference to people's lives.
So far, more than 7,500 people have been employed in
temporaryjobs, with at least 2,500 more likely to follow.
The programme, we hope, can be expanded soon.

Nevertheless, as I said, negative trends continue
to overshadow positive developments. In Gaza, despite
the intensified efforts, the humanitarian, security
and political situation remains deeply worrisome, as
the Egyptian brokered intra-Palestinian agreement in
October 2017 on the return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza remains unimplemented. The situation was
also worsened by the temporary closures of the Erez
and Kerem Shalom crossings and a series of reductions
in the fishing zone introduced by Israel as tensions
continued to fluctuate. Seized fishing vessels have yet
to be returned to their owners by the IDF.

The reporting period also saw serious movement
and access constraints being placed on national staff
from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Gaza.
Some 250 personnel, including 149 United Nations
staff and 103 NGO staff, are prohibited from obtaining
Israeli-issued permits for travel from Gaza to the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, for a period of 12
months. Those numbers reflect a significant increase
from 2017, when only 40 United Nations staff faced
similar prohibitions.

The reporting period also saw no resolution of
the Palestinian Authority's financial crisis, following
Israel's decision to withhold part of the clearance
revenues of the Palestinian Authority. That was followed
by the Palestinian leadership's refusal to accept any
transfers from Israel less than the full amounts owed
to it. The fiscal crisis and related austerity measures
are severely impacting the Palestinian economy, with
the outlook for the private sector remaining very bleak.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Member States

"to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967".

We are not aware of any such steps taken during the
reporting period. Paragraph 8 of the resolution also
calls upon

"all parties to continue [inter alia] to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations".

No credible efforts have been made in that
direction either.

In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the implementation of the
resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.
The expansion of Israeli settlements has no legal effect
and constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016). It must cease
immediately and completely. Settlement expansion in
occupied East Jerusalem, which further undermines the
viability of the two-State solution with Jerusalem as the
future capital of both Israel and Palestine, is particularly
concerning. During the Israeli election campaign,
statements were made by some politicians expressing
support for the unilateral annexation of all or parts of
the West Bank. Such a prospect would be devastating
to the potential of reviving negotiations, regional peace
and the very essence of the two-State solution.

The persistent threat of demolitions and the
displacement of Palestinians in Area C, East Jerusalem
and Hebron's H2 area are also of concern. Only 13 per
cent of East Jerusalem is designated for new Palestinian
residential construction, an estimated one-third of
housing units in East Jerusalem are built without a
permit, and an estimated 13,000 demolition orders
issued against Palestinian-owned structures in Area
C since 1988 are still outstanding. The demolitions
and displacement in Area C and East Jerusalem affect
women and girls in particular. Women have to shoulder
additional daily responsibilities to ensure their own
survival and that of their families in unfamiliar
circumstances. A 2018 report by UN-Women on
Palestine has shown that the burden of family
responsibility, coupled with the anguish and trauma of
sudden loss, takes a huge toll on the women's health and
well-being.

Israel has declared some 18 per cent of the West
Bank as firing zones for military training, while
civilian presence is prohibited by military order
during training exercises. There are 38 Palestinian
herding communities and a population of over 6,200
people located within these areas who are impacted
by a range of measures, including evacuations. There
are also 11 Israeli outposts located either partially or
completely in the designated firing zones, which have
not been subjected to similar evacuations. The practice
of evacuating Palestinian communities located in these
areas should also cease.

The situation in Gaza continues to be perilous, with
the persistent threat of another major escalation and
the continued suffering of the population. It is tragic
and unacceptable that people continue to be killed
and injured unnecessarily during demonstrations by
indiscriminate rocket attacks or other hostile acts. The
launching ofrockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian
populations is prohibited by international humanitarian
law, and Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad must
cease this practice immediately. Consistent with
international human rights standards, Israeli security
forces have the responsibility to exercise restraint and
should use lethal force against demonstrators only
when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.

I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians and call on all to refrain from
violence and on leaders to clearly condemn such acts
when they occur, as called for by resolution 2334
(2016). All perpetrators must be held accountable for
their crimes.

The situation of the Palestinian population and
human rights defenders in the H2 area of Hebron
following the withdrawal of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron remains worrying. United Nations
staff and the diplomatic community have been harassed
and intimidated since the departure of the Temporary
International Presence. Humanitarian actors and
human rights defenders must be allowed to carry out
their activities freely and safely and to ensure that any
attacks are thoroughly, impartially and independently
investigated and the perpetrators held accountable.

I am deeply concerned about developments
relating to the clearance of revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. The Palestinian Government is facing a
very serious financial crisis that, unless resolved, risks
triggering a series of dangerous developments that
will be difficult to mitigate and contain, including the
potential collapse of the Authority and the undermining
of 25 years of international investment in supporting
the two-State solution and the Oslo process. I echo the
call of Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayeh
on Israel to restore the revenue transfers in full and
call on both sides to engage in a constructive manner
to ensure compliance with the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

I remain deeply concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza. Funding
received to date has enabled the temporary increase in
energy supply. However, sustainable solutions for the
energy crisis must be advanced without delay. At the
same time, while acknowledging its legitimate security
concerns, Israel must continue to ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza,
with the goal of ultimately lifting them. It is crucial

to ensure that calm is sustained in order to gradually
introduce longer-term projects that will support
Gaza's development.

I reiterate my call on all Palestinian factions to
actively engage with Egypt on reconciliation. Despite
the challenges, it is critical that these efforts continue.
The United Nations remains steadfast in its support of
Egypt's efforts in that regard, and I call on all factions
to take concrete steps to ensure the reunification of
Gaza and the West Bank under a single, democratic and
legitimate national Palestinian Government. Gaza is
and must remain an integral part of a future Palestinian
State as part of the two-State solution.

Finally, I take note of the upcoming workshop
convened by the United States and the Kingdom
of Bahrain to discuss the potential for economic
investments and initiatives that would be made possible
by a future Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement and a
solution to the final-status issues. Humanitarian and
economic support for the population is crucial to creating
an environment conducive to viable negotiations.
However, I must emphasize that the conflict cannot be
resolved through economic measures alone. Such steps
can only be complementary to a legitimate political
process that ends the occupation and addresses all
final-status issues in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions.

In closing, let me reiterate that I remain deeply
concerned by the state of our collective efforts
and the weakening of the international consensus
on achieving an end to the occupation and the
realization of a negotiated two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the 1967 lines,
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements.

In the absence of any progress to resolve all
final-status issues, creating conditions for the parties
to return to meaningful bilateral negotiations remains
critical. Yet we must be clear. On its own, no amount
of humanitarian or economic support will resolve the
conflict. It requires political solutions. In Gaza, our
efforts consist in continuing to try and de-escalate
the situation and provide a semblance of hope to the
population, but Gaza's future will rest on the ability of
leaders to summon the political will to devise concrete
and sustainable solutions to the crisis. At the same
time, the West Bank continues to simmer as it faces
a range of challenges that threaten to upend decades
of Palestinian and international efforts to support a
Palestinian State.

