Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset I would like to thank
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her briefing and
report and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of
UNICEF.

It is a pleasure for my delegation to join the
Council in this important debate. We are grateful for
the opportunity to share with the Member States of the
United Nations our vision of this problem, which we
know close up. Therefore we believe we can contribute
to a better understanding of this matter, given our
experience and the measures we have undertaken. We
know that the decisions the Council makes, if focused
correctly, have an effect on the solutions that States are
able to provide.

The welfare of children affected by conflict must
be the central motivation that brings us together to find
definitive solutions. Policies of prevention and
cooperation undoubtedly are more effective than
finger-pointing and excluding Governments from the

debate, from the exchange of information and from the
search for solutions.

Since resolution 1612 (2005) of July 2005, it has
been recognized that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism must operate with the participation of and
in cooperation with national Governments and relevant
United Nations and civil society actors. In this
instance, the Council has once more reiterated the
primary role of Governments in the protection and
rehabilitation of children and has reaffirmed that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities must be
designed to support and supplement the efforts of
national Governments.

What has happened in recent years is that the
Governments of affected countries have been excluded
from the debate and the working mechanisms. This
trend takes us farther away from definitive solutions
with regard to the protection of affected children,
because it is Governments that must take corrective
actions. In this context, we would like to underline
that, as stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/250), the results so far obtained are the
product of actions by Governments, peace processes or
the end of conflicts.

Resolution 1612 (2005) indicates that the
monitoring and reporting mechanism must support and
complement the capacity of national Governments for
the protection and rehabilitation of children. Since
2005, when the mechanism was created, there has not
been much progress towards solutions, but there has
been an increase in blaming. We believe that
strengthening each country's capacities - an
fundamental principle of the United Nations response
to this problem - has been insufficient. The United
Nations must go further than denouncing; it must use
its experience, working more decisively with States in
the search for solutions.

Allow me to speak in a blunt and realistic way. It
is entirely naive to think that the United Nations or any
other multilateral organization can change the minds of
terrorist organizations that for decades have struck fear
in civilian populations, that profit from illicit activities,
that utilize terror as a modus operandi, that use
children as their tools to those ends and that have
always ignored national and international norms. For
that reason Colombia believes that the stated intention
of agencies of the United Nations system to attempt to
talk to those groups directly and without the consent of
Governments is inadmissible and unacceptable.

Colombia is a State where the rule of law
prevails, a solid democracy where we fight to have a
peaceful country, and to spare our population the
nightmare of illegal armed groups financed by drug
trafficking. I reiterate this point today because this year
it was discussed by the Group of Experts.

We are convinced that we would have more
results if the United Nations realized that it could
strengthen the goal of protecting children affected by
recruitment if it maintained its commitment to national
Governments. That commitment is fulfilled through the
cooperation and participation of the Governments. In
this context, we do not share the generalities of these
resolutions, since every situation is different and
particular. Developing lists creates difficulties and
complicates the search for solutions for each country.
We stated this in 2005, and time and the state of this
debate today have proven us right. Progress is made
through concrete projects fitted to the realities of each
society and each situation.

Without a doubt, changing the focus to emphasize
cooperation and dialogue among the Members of this
Organization, working in countries in a way that
respects the guiding principles of the United Nations,
and turning Governments into allies in the promotion
and protection of the rights of children affected by this
plague is the way to achieve results and to have no
more children deprived of freedom. We hope for
greater understanding that we, the Member States and
the United Nations, can work together on the same
path. Only in this way will their work be strengthened.

Colombia has implemented a prevention plan. We
have always believed that prevention should guide the
actions of the Council and the United Nations.
Unfortunately, neither this resolution nor the other ones
on the matter have considered prevention as a strategy
in its central policies, missing the opportunity to carry
out actions so that children may truly have a different
life with opportunities and a future.

For many years we have been promoting the issue
of the rights of children in local and regional policies.
We receive our greatest support from the International
Organization for Migration, to whom we extend once
again our gratitude for the way in which it has, over the
years, made the effort to work on this issue with our
Government. That is why we have proposed to the

United Nations system that it work under one single
plan in a comprehensive manner and to focus on 29
municipalities that are especially vulnerable to
recruitment by illegal armed groups. I appreciate the
support of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whose
help has been essential to getting the system in
Colombia to commit to carrying out this project. In the
coming months, several projects will be running with a
social, educational, recreational and training focus to
provide opportunities for children and young people in
at-risk areas.

With that in mind, and considering the best way
to attain results, we propose that a serious and
unpoliticized evaluation of the effect and
implementation of the resolutions on this matter be
carried out. Such an evaluation must include a review
of the mechanism in order to assess its effectiveness.
We consider a review imperative, because we have
been discussing this issue for a decade with few
results. Colombia, whose children have been the
victims of these practices and who has combated them
for many years, considers that an in-depth reflection
concerning this painful subject is in order.

