Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's important meeting on South Sudan. We also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. David Shearer and our sister, Ms. Betty Sunday, for their briefings. We commend them and their teams for their work in South Sudan and their contribution to the country's stability. We also welcome our colleague and friend, the Permanent Representative of South Sudan, to the Council Chamber and look forward to his presentation on the developments in his homeland. I will limit my intervention to three issues, namely, the political, security and humanitarian situations and the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). On the political situation, South Sudan's leaders have presented their country with a dawn of renewed hope through sacrifice and compromise. In that regard, we would like to congratulate the Government of South Sudan and all political parties on the overall progress achieved to date in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. South Africa applauds President Salva Kiir Mayardit, Mr. Riek Machar and the leaders of the other opposition groups for reaching an agreement to form the inclusive revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity on the agreed date of 22 February. With that renewed hope, we encourage all parties to continue to address the outstanding issues pertaining to the implementation of the peace agreement, as well as to sustain the dialogue that has allowed them to make notable progress to date. In that regard, we look forward to the convening of the national dialogue conference on 16 March. The progress needs to be translated into peace dividends that ordinary people in South Sudan can see in their daily lives, through socioeconomic development, security and sustained stability. South Africa commends the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union and the international community for their role in facilitating the formation of the revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. Furthermore, we also commend the Community of Sant'Egidio for facilitating the Rome declaration with the non-signatory groups, which agreed to a ceasefire in South Sudan and to joining the peace process. This is a critical process that addresses inclusiveness with a view to averting spoilers in the political process that could undermine the valuable progress that has been made to date. We also welcome the valuable role played by the women of South Sudan, and through Ms. Sunday and through Ambassador Malwal we would like to pay particular tribute to ordinary women in the far corners of South Sudan who have supported the peace process. We want to thank the women in the Government and in the political parties who have made sure that women's voices are not only heard but are respected and influence the current political developments in the country. Women of South Sudan deserve to be at the table, and the 35 per cent or more quota should be fulfilled throughout the stages of the political process. The Government of National Unity will have to deal with security sector reform and the formation of unified security agencies. It will have to create an appropriate environment for internally displaced persons and refugees to return home, schools to open where they had been closed, and children to pursue their dreams. Like my colleague from Viet Nam, we call for the concomitant removal of sanctions to support these positive developments. On the humanitarian and security front, we are encouraged by the sustained cessation of hostilities, which is a testament to the political will of the leaders. However, we would like to raise our concern over the intercommunal violence and sub-clan clashes in the Jonglei and Pibor regions resulting in civilian deaths and internal displacement. We urge the Government to address skirmishes of intercommunal violence that could threaten peace and stability; they have already claimed significant lives and displaced millions. The dire humanitarian situation requires our collective action. We call on international donors to support the South Sudan Humanitarian Response Plan 2020, which requires $1.5 billion to meet the life-saving needs of 5.6 million people. Furthermore, we urge all parties to fulfil their commitments to ending and preventing violations against children. In this regard, we welcome the signing by the Government of a comprehensive action plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children. On the mandate for UNMISS, we first have to commend the Mission for the important role it continues to play in South Sudan. We are also encouraged by its continued cooperation with the Government and call on it to continue on this trajectory in supporting the Transitional Government of National Unity. In this regard, it is important that we maintain the Mission's current capacity and ensure that it has the requisite mandate and capacity to discharge its duties. Lastly, we have reached a crucial milestone. However, this is just the beginning. As the international community, we need to sustain our valuable support to all aspects of the peace process in order to prevent a relapse into conflict. In this regard, South Africa remains steadfast in its commitment to supporting the peace process in country with the overall aim of building a peaceful, stable, united and prosperous South Sudan.
