Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
would like to thank the delegation of Lithuania for
convening this important debate. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, which
reflects the commitment to support the efforts of the
United Nations to promote the rule of law.

In the Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), we see that the rule of law is a key
to the development of the pillars on which the work
of the United Nations is based - international peace
and security, human rights and development. Mexico
supports the principle that the rule of law should be a
sine qua non in the post-2015 development agenda. The
rule of law and development are very Closely linked and
mutually strengthen each other. We believe that progress
in the rule of law is crucial for sustained economic
growth, as well as for the eradication of poverty and
the fulfilment of all fundamental freedoms, including
the right to development.

It is crucial for the decisions ofthe Security Council
to respect and strengthen the principles of the rule of
law in order to guarantee legitimacy for their actions,
and also, of course, for the Security Council to comply
with international law.

Our Constitution states that respect for international
instruments is essential to preventing conflicts.
Although the Security Council has made progress in
this area, it has yet to ensure that the actions that it
decides upon must be undertaken based on international
law in every way.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is part of our
history and diplomatic currency. Mexico has resorted
several times to the means provided for in Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations as a party to arbitration
proceedings or trials by international tribunals, as
a friendly activist on behalf of and promoter of such
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of conflicts in
the Latin American and the Caribbean region and in the
defence of its citizens' rights.

The Declaration of the High-level Meeting also
recognizes the contribution of the decisions of the
International Court of Justice regarding disputes
between States and the value of the Court's promotion
of the rule of law. We reaffirm States' obligations to
comply with the Court's decisions in cases in which they
are involved. We therefore also urge those that have not
already done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of
the Court in accordance with its Statute. Mexico calls on
States that have expressed non-technical reservations
to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice
to consider withdrawing such reservations as soon as
possible.

The permanent members of the Security Council
have a special responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Therefore, their
acceptance of the Court's compulsory jurisdiction
would encourage other States to follow that example
and to comply with international norms on the rule of
law. A key issue is the role the Council should play in
complying with the Court's rulings. Non-compliance
with the Court's rulings has occurred in the past
and could occur in the future. Mexico reiterates that
non-compliance with the rulings and decisions of the
Court is in direct contravention of international law. It
is clear that, in cases of non-compliance, Article 94,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations sets
out the process to be followed in such cases. We would
recall that the States involved in a dispute before the
Court can resort to that option or request the Secretary-
General to employ his good offices to facilitate and
ensure the implementation of a ruling.

As the very insightful report of the Secretary-
General states, the promotion and strengthening
of rule-of-law mandates and their impact have an
intrinsic connection to the work of maintaining and
consolidating international peace and security as laid
out by the Security Council.

Mexico welcomes the decision to appoint a global
focal point responsible for issues concerning the police,
justice and prison systems in the context of the rule of
law in post-conflict situations and other crisis situations.
We also welcome the proposal by the Secretary-General
to develop a series of assessment principles to enable
measuring the impact of the support provided by the
Organization to Member States. We are at a unique
juncture, where Member States can continue to promote
the rule of law, consolidate peace and justice and put
an end impunity. We must not waste the opportunity
afforded to us.

