Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation takes this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his report
contained in document S/ 1997/240, dated 16 March 1997,
on the worrying situation in Afghanistan, which constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.

I would like to begin my remarks today by stating six
principles which will guide Kenya's assessment of the
situation in Afghanistan. First, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan are paramount. Secondly,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries
must be maintained. Thirdly, the peaceful settlement of
disputes through negotiation is cherished by all of us.
Fourthly, equal rights and equal opportunity for all,
including women, must be upheld. Fifthly, the right of the
Afghan people to determine their own destiny is a
prerequisite that is not only enshrined in international law
but also a normal moral and political obligation. Sixthly,
the United Nations must continue to play the central role
in mediating the conflict and coordinating the peace
process.

We are particularly concerned about reports of
renewed fighting in Afghanistan, which has caused further
significant displacement of civilians, forcing them to live
under the most demeaning and intolerable conditions. This
upheaval exacerbates an already fragile political and
humanitarian situation. We are encouraged that
international humanitarian organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross, are mobilizing
more resources to cope with this crisis, and we commend
their cooperation with the Afghan Red Crescent, which
now directly helps nearly half a million people throughout
Afghanistan. My delegation also strongly supports the
appeal for financial and material assistance to ameliorate
the effects of the conflict, and encourages donor nations
to assist quickly. In addition to the threats to international
peace and security, it is this alarm over the precarious
humanitarian situation, in particular that of suffering
children, which motivated Kenya to support concrete
corrective measures initiated by the Security Council. We
will continue to support all other efforts geared towards
addressing these problems. In this regard, my delegation
supports the Non-Aligned Movement' s declaration on this
subject following the New Delhi meeting, and is ready to
work with other delegations to come up with suitable
action following the meeting.

We note with apprehension that, as the Taliban are
in almost total military control of Afghanistan, they
clearly lack an incentive to concede anything in any
negotiations. Given their current military advantage, we
are not very optimistic that the Taliban will heed calls for
a ceasefire and commence meaningful negotiations with
the Supreme Council for the Defence of Afghanistan
(SCDA). Indeed, this obvious military advantage has, in
the view of my delegation, made it almost impossible for
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to
obtain any meaningful concessions from the Taliban or to
report substantive progress in negotiations for a ceasefire
and the future of Afghanistan. My delegation does not
believe that a fresh spring offensive by the Taliban is a

 

gesture of peace or a signal confirming their willingness to
discuss the future of the country with anyone else. If
anything, it is a clear attempt to solidify their military gains
and effectively extend their hegemony throughout the
country. This is not the action of an entity willing to
negotiate. We think, however, that total military success on
their part will not result in a complete political solution of
the crisis. Indeed, it will heighten the need for them to sit
down and seriously negotiate with the SCDA alliance. We
hear encouraging news that General Dostum of the alliance
is now ready to meet Mullah Gawooz, the Taliban Minister,
and hope that they will do so soon in an appropriate neutral
location. We only hope that the impact of a renewed
offensive will be softened by the concerted activities of
humanitarian agencies.

It is obvious to any student of history that,
unfortunately, sustained conflict of this nature is in most
cases supported and encouraged from outside. Afghanistan
is no different. There are credible reports of continued
material and financial support to both the Taliban and the
SCDA Alliance; this aggravates the already volatile
situation and increases the great need for a resolution of the
conflict. To their supporters we say: there are no winners.
There have never been winners in such conflicts. We
strongly urge all external meddlers to assist in de-escalating
the conflict by immediately stopping the reported supply of
weapons and military personnel. Indeed, we support the
primacy and urgency of this call, as contained also in the
Non-Aligned Movement's final declaration on this issue,
dated 8 April 1997, in which the Movement's Foreign
Ministers

"called upon all States to strictly refrain from any
outside interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, including the involvement of foreign
military personnel and the supply of arms to various
parties".

Further reports of private oil companies colluding with
foreign intelligence agencies on the side of one party to the
conflict muddies the water even further. We urge them to
stop interfering and to conduct their business in an ethical
manner. Nothing can justify such actions, if these are
proven to be true.

My delegation is also very concerned about allegations
that one of the parties runs terrorist-training camps and that
parties to the conflict are involved in the growing and
distribution of opium and its derivatives. We think these
two evils, drug trafficking and terrorism, are global threats
that must be addressed under the auspices of the relevant
international instruments designed to combat them, and
we urge those involved to refrain from engaging in them.

As the search for peace continues, the role of
countries with influence over the parties to the conflict
becomes even more important. Being close to the
situation, they have better insights into the problem and
a detailed understanding of how to proceed. My
delegation is therefore encouraged by their unrelenting
efforts to arrive at a meaningful solution to the crisis,
especially with specific reference to the Istanbul meeting
of 5 January, the Tehran meeting of 25 and 26 January
and the Tashkent meeting of 24 and 25 February 1997.
While the impact of these meetings is not easy to gauge,
the primacy and validity of engagement cannot be
emphasized enough.

However, we are quite concerned that some of these
countries with influence continue supporting one party
against the others. This fans the flames of violence, and
my delegation strongly supports the Secretary-General's
call urging them to refrain from these unhelpful activities.
In addition, their efforts need to be coordinated, and this
can be done only through the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan.

In this vein and at this juncture, let me on behalf of
the Kenya delegation commend Mr. Holl, the Head of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, and his
team for performing well under difficult circumstances.
We are still hopeful that his efforts, spearheaded by the
Secretary-General, will eventually bear fruit, and we
encourage him to continue vigorously engaging the parties
to the conflict. We concur with the Secretary-General's
view that a negotiated settlement under the auspices of
the United Nations is the only solution to the conflict, and
we encourage him to convene an intra-Afghan meeting of
the parties when conditions are suitable.

I cannot end my intervention without revisiting the
unsettling humanitarian aspects of this crisis. On another
occasion, regarding this same matter, my delegation had
the opportunity to point out that the precarious human
rights predicament of women and girls in Afghanistan
cried out for urgent attention. These concerns have not
been alleviated. In fact, the plight of women and girls
does not seem to have improved, although we understand
that there are some pockets of hope in Khost and other
parts of Taliban-controlled territory. The right to
education and employment has been denied to them,
especially in a situation where the war has made
thousands of women widows and therefore the sole

 

breadwinners in their families. Denying them employment,
however well-justified on the basis of any principle or
religion, is condemning them to destitution. We urge those
nations with any influence in this matter to address it most
expeditiously.

On 21 and 22 January 1997, an International Forum
on Assistance to Afghanistan was held at Ashgabat under
the auspices of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs and
in cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme. During this meeting important information and
ideas were shared on the future humanitarian and
development requirements of Afghanistan. We understand
that more work is being done by the Department to develop
a strategic framework that will address immediate relief
issues, as well as long-term development needs and
rehabilitation in the country. My delegation believes that
the post-conflict reconstruction of Afghanistan is a critical
piece in the jigsaw puzzle of the evolving situation.

We think, however, that concrete plans or actions
should not be laid on the table only after a resolution of the
conflict, but should be addressed in tandem with the
ongoing search for a political solution to the crisis. This
approach may in fact galvanize internal support for the
overall peace process and can be used as a tool in the
ongoing United Nations mediation efforts. This approach is
also relevant in the context of the need to broaden the base
of political dialogue to include the millions of Afghans
living outside Afghanistan who have a stake and therefore
a voice in the future of their country.

We cannot encourage or allow the creation of an
environment that precipitates any form of forced
displacement, giving rise to "ethnic cleansing". We have to
speak out loudly against this now, instead of later when
more people will have been displaced and more lives lost.
The unhappy lessons of Rwanda in 1994 and now Burundi
with the policy of regroupement, teach us that quick,
resolute action is critical if tragedy along these lines is to
be averted. We therefore note with hope the assurance
given by Mullah Rabbani to the Special Mission that the
displaced male Tajik farmers will be allowed to go back to
their farms to tend their crops and that their eventual
complete return will be honoured.

Finally, the Kenyan delegation completely supports
Security Council resolution 1076 (1996) of 22 October
1996 in all its provisions, especially those that rightfully
place the United Nations in a positive coordinating position,
which enables it to play a central role in the mediation
effort. We think that while the efforts of interested parties
are important, their efforts must be closely coordinated in
order to achieve the best results.

