Mr. Hajihosseini: It is my pleasure at the outset,
Mr. President, to extend to you greetings from the
Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), His Excellency Mr. Abdelouahed
Belkeziz, and to express our sincere thanks for the
promptness with which you have convened this
important meeting at the request of the OIC. I should
like also to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of August. We are confident
that under your able leadership the work of the Council
will be carried out in a constructive manner.

I am speaking on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference. We share the views of many
previous speakers, especially our member States, on
the grave and deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, as a result
of the unwarranted escalation of the Israeli military
campaign against the Palestinian people, Israel's illegal
seizure of Orient House and other Palestinian
institutions in occupied East Jerusalem, and the illegal
and inhumane Israeli practices against the Palestinian
population, which continue unabated.
Anyone following the ongoing events in Palestine
would conclude that the present Israeli Government is
indulging in the worst draconian practices ever
undertaken by an occupying Power in the present era,
an era which we thought would be the epoch of self-
determination, human rights and the preservation of
human dignity and livelihood, even in occupied
territories.

A glance at television newscasts these days will
give a clear picture of the tragedies that are befalling
the Palestinians in the occupied territories at the hands
of the Israeli occupation forces. We are constantly
witnessing through the media all those scenes of
horror, terror, indiscriminate devastation, persecution
and repression of Palestinians at the hands of those
forces. We are seeing young children wandering and
roaming around amid the rubble of what used to be
their homes, now blown up or demolished and removed
by Israeli bulldozers. We are watching funeral
processions of martyrs, including children and infants,
day after day throughout Palestine. We are also
witnessing the assassination of civil society leaders by
Israeli forces. We are hearing about Israel using the
most destructive military warplanes to level to the
ground houses and civilian installations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, and we are seeing land being
confiscated by force and without any legal basis and
being turned into construction sites of illegal colonial
settlements. Furthermore, we are hearing about the use
of "excessive force", to borrow the now familiar
expression, against the Palestinian people.

There are countless other such Israeli practices,
which I need not elaborate and describe further but
which tear apart the Palestinian territories. They
include the siege and starvation of the Palestinian
people and depriving them of their most fundamental
right to dignity, for no other reason than because they
seek an end to the Israeli occupation of their land. We
know that Israel, the occupying Power, has practically
shrunk the Palestinian presence to a small portion of
the Palestinian territory - no more than some 20 per
cent of it. Israel is attempting to further shrink that
portion to forcibly disperse more Palestinians from
their lands and ancestral homes in which they have
lived for thousands of years, thus joining the waves of
Palestinian refugees that have been in exile and in
diaspora over the past fifty years.

By doing so, Israel is luring new Jewish
immigrants from all over the world to the land usurped
from its Palestinian owners, to live in illegal colonial
settlements. Israel keeps on building these settlements
despite the denunciation of such actions by the
international community.

Most of the illegal and inhuman Israeli practices I
have just referred to, which can be corroborated by
millions of television viewers all over the world, can
certainly be regarded under international law as war
crimes whose perpetrators should be liable and
accountable for these crimes.

As a continuation of the practices I just spoke of,
the Israeli authorities recently came out with a very
dangerous precedent in the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
when they resorted to the closure of Orient House, the
institution and headquarters of the Palestinian
delegation to the peace talks and of Palestinian
institutions that extended social and humanitarian
services to the Palestinians in the city of Al-Quds.

It is noteworthy that these Palestinian institutions,
recognized by Israel, had been regularly engaged in
handling Palestinian affairs in occupied East Jerusalem
since 1967. East Jerusalem is considered in the
resolutions of this Council as part and parcel of the
occupied Palestinian territory, to which all international
provisions regulating the affairs of occupied territories
should apply. In fact, as several speakers have pointed
out, Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres actually
wrote to his Norwegian counterpart when signing the
Oslo Agreement in 1993,

"The Palestinian institutions of East Jerusalem
and the interests and well-being of the
Palestinians of East Jerusalem are of great
importance and will be preserved."

The Israeli Government' s recent illegal measures
show only one thing: that Israel is reneging on the
guarantees and commitments it made. Instead, it is
snatching away and depriving East Jerusalem of its
special status, which served also to protect Palestinian
institutions in the city. This unwarranted action is a
grave development and a new Israeli provocation of
Muslims worldwide, who have a deep-rooted
attachment to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and have religious
and spiritual ties to it dating back thousands of years.

Based upon what has been stated thus far, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference urges the
Security Council to take the necessary measures to
provide protection to the Palestinian people and to
compel Israel to put an end to its bloody military
campaign against them, to restore Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem and to lift the restrictions
imposed upon entry to Al-Aqsa Mosque and other
Muslim and Christian places of worship in the city.
Violence can only beget violence, and the
excessive inhuman subjugation and suffering to which
the Palestinian people have been subjected since 1967
are driving them to despair. It leaves them with no
other option but to undertake a legitimate and just
resistance to the Israeli occupation, which is one
internationally recognized right of self-defence.

The protection we seek should restrain Israel
from continuing its illegal and inhuman practices
targeting the Palestinian people and clear the air for the
resumption of the peace process, which has been
deadlocked for years as a result of the procrastination
and delaying tactics of successive Israeli Governments
in implementing the resolutions and decisions of
international legitimacy based on relevant Security
Council resolutions and the land-for-peace principle.

It has become crystal clear to any observer of the
question of Palestine and the Middle East as a whole
that there will be no peace as long as the occupied
territories have not been liberated and as long as Israel
continues to reject the spirit and letter of the decisions
of international legitimacy, thus preventing the Council
and the United Nations from discharging their basic
and legitimate role in the settlement of the Middle East
conflict.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting and express the hope that the
Council' 5 deliberations will prevail in relieving the
Palestinian people and the populations of the occupied
Arab territories of the suffering and injustices being
imposed upon them by the Israeli occupation forces. In
doing so, the Council will move towards restoring its
own prestige and authority, which is needed in
maintaining international peace and security.

