Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting and for
providing us with an opportunity to interact with the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation in Libya. I also wish to thank the
Prosecutor, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his briefing to the
Security Council. We are particularly impressed by the
speed with which the investigations were completed.

Our delegation not only supported resolution
1970 (2011), but indeed co-sponsored it. Our support
for referral to the ICC was based, inter alia, on South
Africa's support of the international community's fight
against impunity and the concern that we had voiced
over the escalation of violence in Libya. As a State
party to the Rome Statute, South Africa will continue
to support the Prosecutor in relation to the conflict in
Libya. As we stated in our statements during the
adoptions of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011)
(see S/PV.6491 and S/PV.6498), South Africa has been
and remains concerned about the crimes against
civilians and the human rights violations committed in
the context of the conflict in Libya.
As a starting point, we note that the standard of
proof for the decision to initiate an investigation is far
lower than that required for a successful prosecution.
Therefore, we encourage the Prosecutor to leave no
stone unturned in the search for further evidence to
strengthen the cases against those who may have
committed atrocities. We hope that the Prosecutor will
look at all atrocities committed on either side of the
conflict.

As the report of the Prosecutor notes, the current
situation in Libya now amounts to an armed conflict.
Crimes may have been committed by Government and
opposition forces alike. To protect the Court's integrity
and to ensure that all who were caught in the crossfire
of the conflict are protected, all crimes, regardless of
the perpetrators, should be considered. Of course, such
a statement is without prejudice to the Prosecutor's
determination of who bears the greatest responsibility
for the most serious crimes.

Finally, a number of delegations have asked
questions about the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011). In particular, questions have been asked about
whether the actions of the implementing States have
been consistent with the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1970 (2011). We are aware that paragraph 6
of the resolution establishes a caveat designed to
exclude the jurisdiction of the Court in such cases.
Nonetheless, we would recall that the caveat in
paragraph 6 is limited to actions established or
authorized by the Security Council. Therefore, any
actions that fall outside the scope of resolution 1973
(2011) should not benefit from the protection offered
by the caveat. It is our sincere hope that, in considering
the evidence, the Office of the Prosecutor will also
consider any actions that may have been committed in
the purported implementation of resolution 1973
(2011).

Let me conclude by assuring the Prosecutor that
South Africa will continue to cooperate with the
activities of the ICC. We look forward to hearing from
the Prosecutor in the next six months and hope that, by
then, the ICC will have issued indictments against
those most responsible for the atrocities committed in
Libya. We are pleased that the Council intends soon to
present a case to the ICC, seeking arrest warrants
against three individuals. We hope that, in time, the net
will be cast even wider.

