Mr. Sardenberg: The mission of the Security
Council visited Haiti from 13 to 16 April in
conjunction with a visit by the Economic and Social
Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti. The
mission and the Group acted in accordance with their
respective mandates. Some of their meetings in Haiti
were held in common.

I take this opportunity to thank the Haitian
authorities for their hospitality and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Juan Gabriel
Valdes, and his team for their support. In the same
vein, I wish to commend the leadership and personnel
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for the excellent and professional work
they are performing, frequently under very trying
conditions.

The visit by the Security Council mission, which
I had the privilege to lead, was the first of that type to a
Latin American or a Caribbean country. The decision
to make it was adopted in the course of the open debate
on Haiti, promoted by the delegation of Argentina
during its presidency last January. Indeed, the further
decision to implement the first decision was proposed
by the delegations of Argentina and Brazil.

The activities of the mission benefited from a
high degree of participation, as all 15 Council members
were represented. Fourteen ambassadors were present,
of whom 10 were Permanent Representatives,
including the President of the Security Council
himself. That attendance constituted a clear sign of the
concern of the Council over the current crisis in Haiti
and the need both for immediate action and for long-
term solutions to Haiti's many problems.

The Council mission met with the members of the
Transitional Government, including Interim President
Boniface Alexandre and Interim Prime Minister Gerard
Latortue, as well as with representatives of the main
political parties and of civil society. In addition to its
stay in Port-au-Prince, the mission visited the cities of
Gonai'ves and Cap Haitien. It also met with
MINUSTAH leaders, including the Force Commander
and the Civilian Police Commissioner.

Members of the mission interacted with various
Haitian actors and collected updated information
regarding central aspects of the present situation in the
country. In four different areas - the creation of a safe
and secure environment; dialogue, elections and
reconciliation; the observance of human rights; and
social and economic development - the exchange of
views was quite constructive and particularly useful.

Despite the tragic losses of four peacekeepers to
date - one of which was of an accidental nature - the
mission assessed the Haitian security situation as
gradually improving, as compared to the second half of
2004. Since the deployment of most of its military and
police forces last December, MINUSTAH has, in
conformity with the mandate given by resolution 1542
(2004), conducted several successful security
operations in various parts of the country, including the
neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince. Recently,
MINUSTAH's police and military forces have been
able to improve coordination with the Haitian National
Police (HNP). It is recognized that, as foreseen in its
mandate, one of MINUSTAH'S main roles is that of
assisting the Transitional Government, including HNP,
in their tasks relating to the creation of a secure and
stable environment.

Notwithstanding all the progress made, the
security situation in Haiti remains fragile and there
have been discussions on possible additional measures
to assist the Transitional Government in the
constitutional and political process now taking place in
Haiti.

Mission members condemned all violence and
called on the Haitian authorities to implement a
comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme to disarm all illegal armed
groups, with the assistance of MINUSTAH.
Reintegration is a crucial aspect of that problem. In
that connection, it was deemed necessary to provide a
concrete response to the social demands of members of
the former military with a view to reintegrating them
into the formal economy as an essential element in the
promotion of peace and stability in the country.

Mission members are of the opinion that the
nationwide dialogue has become an important tool for
fostering a common understanding on critical themes
relating to the future of the Haitian political and social
processes. The Transitional Government, as well as
representatives of civil society and political forces,
have indicated their intention to participate in the
comprehensive and inclusive dialogue and recognize
that such a dialogue is an essential condition for long-
term stability in the country.

The mission heard representatives of the main
political parties, including Lavalas. Most of them
pointed out that all actors who publicly renounce
violence should be neither excluded from the national
dialogue nor prevented from participating in the
electoral processes. In turn, the Archbishop of Cap
Haitien delivered to mission members a letter from the
Conference Episcopale de Haiti that calls for a
peaceful transition towards democracy, as well as for
social and economic development.

On the coming elections, the main message from
the members of the mission was that of encouraging
the Transitional Government to persist in its firm
commitment to holding free, honest and transparent
elections in 2005, in accordance with the established
timetable, and in its intention to hand over power to the
new, democratically elected authorities on 7 February
2006. The mission also encouraged the Haitian people
to mobilize and participate fully in the upcoming
elections, and just started to consider the possibility of
international observers being sent to follow the
electoral process.

It was frequently mentioned throughout the
conversations held by the mission that the holding of
elections in accordance with the established calendar
constitutes an essential step towards building
democracy and political legitimacy in Haiti. Mission
members and their interlocutors alike showed a clear
awareness that many long-term structural problems
will persist in Haiti even after the newly elected
authorities take office, but they were confident that the
new political climate would significantly facilitate the
resolution of those problems.

Mission members conveyed to the Transitional
Government the message that respect for human rights
standards contributes to reinforcing stability and
security. They expressed the opinion that all actors
should abide by internationally accepted human rights
standards and that HNP should be reformed. It was also
pointed out that there is a need to ensure the end of
impunity in Haiti while promoting due process and the
rule of law, particularly through strengthening the
judicial system. In turn, the Transitional Government
called for increased international support with a view
to implementing reforms conducive to a credible,
accountable and respected police force in Haiti. The
Interim President himself underlined the need to update
Haitian codes and legislation, which date back to the
nineteenth century. Finally, as Secretary-General Kofi
Annan stated in his latest report on Haiti, it is
necessary to encourage the efforts to expedite pending
sensitive cases, such as that of former Prime Minister
Ivon Neptune, and to ensure due process for all
citizens.

Dramatic poverty conditions were recognized as
the main root cause of conflict and political unrest in
the country. The Haitian interlocutors and the members
of the Council mission alike stressed the need for a
long-term strategy to promote development and combat
poverty. In that regard, mission members renewed the
Security Council's appeal for the accelerated
disbursement of the funds pledged by international
financial institutions and donor countries since the
holding of the International Donors Conference on
Haiti in July of last year. The mission members also
recalled that many of the projects identified at the
conference held recently at Cayenne should now be
implemented without delay.

The Interim Prime Minister pointed out the need
to ensure that cooperation projects conform to the
needs identified by Haitians themselves, and not only
the priorities adopted by donors and international
financial institutions. According to him, it is
imperative to address the country's infrastructure -
especially roads and the energy sector - as well as to
combat deforestation and environmental degradation.

Mission members reiterated their intention to
fully respect Haitian sovereignty, to contribute to the
achievement of stabilization and development, and to
ensure a long-term United Nations presence in Haiti.
They believe that, as the United Nations assists Haiti, it
should preserve the fundamental role played by Haiti's
people and Government. Elections will usher in a new
and more promising phase in the country's political
history. Haitian representatives to be elected later this
year should be prepared to seize this unique
opportunity and to carry out all State responsibilities
that naturally belong to the citizens of a nation such as
Haiti, which is proud of its sovereignty, history and
culture.

New ideas were presented by our interlocutors
and by MINUSTAH leaders and personnel, to whom I
would like to reiterate our appreciation for the quality
of their work on the ground.

The draft mission report is now being finalized
and will be discussed among Council members. It will
contain a detailed description of the mission's activities
and findings in the areas of security, political
transition, elections, human rights, development, the
humanitarian situation, institution-building, regional
relations and the organization of MINUSTAH. It will
not be a short report. It will also contain
recommendations addressed to the Interim Government
and to MINUSTAH. We are now considering the
possibility of calling for a debate on the question of
Haiti after the report is finalized and presented, with a
view to collecting additional opinions from Member
States concerning the renewal of MINUSTAH'S
mandate.

