Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to thank Ms. Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Mr. Stephen Rapp,
Prosecutor of the Court, for their work. The gravity of
the crimes perpetrated during the civil war called for a

response commensurate with the violence. It was a
matter of fighting impunity for those who committed
those serious violations of international humanitarian
law. That is why, since the Court's establishment in
2002, France has provided full political support for the
activities of this criminal court established jointly by
the Government of Sierra Leone and the United
Nations.

In that respect the trial of Charles Taylor is a
good example, because it is the first trial of a sitting
head of State indicted by an international judicial body.
His trial, which has just entered the defence phase, is
being followed fervently not only in Sierra Leone but
also, and especially, in Liberia. That illustrates the
sometimes tragic interweaving of the history of those
two countries and the fragility that persists, particularly
in Liberia - a fragility that can be addressed only by
Liberians themselves.

In that context, it is noteworthy that the United
Nations has succeeded in adopting an approach with a
regional orientation: in Sierra Leone, the Special Court
is guarded by a contingent from the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. That should encourage us to
continue on that path, including the transformation of
the United Nations presence in Sierra Leone into an
integrated office, linked with the inclusive approach
advocated within the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

From today's briefings, I understand that the
Special Court for Sierra Leone will complete its work
by 2011 at the latest. The Council should therefore
express itself on the Court's completion strategy soon.
In that regard, France hopes that the final strategy will
be financially sustainable. The Sierra Leone court
system should be closely associated with this and
should play its full part in taking over residual
functions; likewise, other countries could provide
support so that those convicted by the Special Court
can serve their sentences on the territory of those
countries.

