Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
thank Special Adviser Khan for being with us in person
today and for his thorough and serious briefing to the
Security Council.

The plight of Iraq's ethnic and religious minorities
is of critical importance to the United States. We will
not waver from holding the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) accountable for the atrocities it has
committed against all Iraqis. The United States remains
a strong, committed supporter of the Security Council
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
to collect, store and preserve evidence ofISIS atrocities
that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.

We are pleased that the Security Council reiterated
its unanimous support for UNITAD's mandate during
the Council's first-ever trip to Iraq last month, where
Council members had a chance to engage with Special
Adviser Khan and his team. The United States welcomes
the rapid initiation of UNITAD's critical activities on
the ground in Iraq over the past year and the details
that Mr. Khan provided us this morning. The recent
appointment of Iraqi experts to UNITAD, working
alongside international experts, is critical to the Team's
success, as demonstrated by the appointment of Deputy
Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji, who joins us today and
whom I welcome.

The United States contributed $2 million in support
of UNITAD's first exhumation of mass graves sites in
Sinjar, which took place earlier this year. UNITAD's
access to those sites is vital to the professional and
impartial evidence collection of the unimaginable
atrocities that the Yazidis suffered under ISIS. We
express our thanks to Member States that have also
stepped up to contribute to UNITAD's operations
through funding and support means, including the
United Kingdom, Germany, Qatar, the Netherlands,
the United Arab Emirates, Sweden, Turkey and Saudi
Arabia, and call on other Member States to swiftly
support UNITAD in order for the Team to collect
critical evidence before it is too late.

Of course, money alone will not guarantee effective
evidence collection. We welcome the Government of
Iraq's commitment to working closely with UNITAD.
Such close cooperation between UNITAD and the
Iraqi Government is essential for the Team's success,
as demonstrated by Special Adviser Khan's frequent
meetings with key Iraqi political, religious and societal
leaders over the last year.

We call on the Government of Iraq to continue
to give UNITAD the space to operate effectively.
Independence and impartiality will be essential to the
Team's credibility moving forward. No segment of
Iraqi society has escaped ISIS terror, and it is important
to develop a balanced and accurate account of events.
That will give voice to all Iraqis, including members
of all Iraq's religious and ethnic groups who have been
subjected to unspeakable atrocities.

Iraq needs accountability and reconciliation to
begin in order to recover from the trauma that ISIS
inflicted on the Iraqi people. In recent weeks, UNITAD
has taken the important step of beginning evidence
collection in Mosul - once a former ISIS stronghold.
UNITAD's work there will send an important message
to all Iraqis, including the Sunni community, that the
international community has not forgotten the atrocities
that they too endured.

It is especially important for Iraq to work through
a law-based process to hold ISIS perpetrators and
collaborators accountable. UNITAD plays a critical role
in that effort, including by ensuring that exhumations
and evidence collection are conducted in accordance
with international standards.

We extend our appreciation to the entire UNITAD
team for aiming to assure that justice is never beyond
the reach for the heinous acts that ISIS committed.

