Archbishop Welby: Let me put on record my
sincere thanks to the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Her Excellency Dame Karen Pierce,
for her invitation to address this organ during this
open debate on the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is also a great honour to speak under
the presidency of Lord Ahmad. He is an outstanding
representative of the British Government.

I would also like to express my sense of loss after
the death of one of the greatest servants of the United
Nations, and indeed of peace, Mr. Kofi Annan. His life
was lived with a vision of reconciliation and with a
personal integrity that will earn him lasting renown.

It is a privilege to follow the Secretary-General's
words. We could not have asked for a better opening
briefing to set the context of this debate. I greatly look
forward to hearing from our civil society representative.

I am honoured to be here today, speaking in a dual
capacity as a member of the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation and as a religious leader within a global
Church. Anglicanism is a global Church in which the
average member is poor, a woman or someone living in a
conflict or post-conflict setting who has the aspirations
of all vulnerable people, above all a longing for peace.

The Church and other faith communities are
intimately present where there are conflicts. We cannot
and will not walk away from them. For example, in
South Sudan, Church leaders, including the leader of
the country's Anglican Church, Archbishop Justin Badi
Arama, play an increasingly important role in moving
the whole peace process beyond the current roadblocks
that representatives know so well.

However, mediation can be effective only when it
is in the context of structures of reconciliation. Where
mediation is about resolving conflict, reconciliation
is the process of transforming violent conflict into
non-violent coexistence where communities have come
to terms with history and are learning to disagree well.
Mediation by itself, however skilled, is like using a
garden hose to put out a forest fire, when what is needed
is rain over the whole area so as to let new life grow and
sustain itself.

We therefore need to complement mediation - in
fact, the whole conflict cycle - within the framework
of reconciliation. The vision of the United Nations
founders was no less than to abolish conflict. Many
of them were responding to the words of Jesus Christ,
applicable to all parts of the Earth, in the Beatitudes:
"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God". The very life of Jesus was given
in the cause of peace with God, with oneself and
with others.
There are and always will be profound differences
among and within nations, but the terms on which
those differences are dealt with look very different
today to 70 years ago. We have avoided global nuclear
war, yet not its continuing menace. However, today
the international rules-based order is struggling.
National interests are still too often allowed, even in
the Chamber, to overcome the wisdom that those who
lived through global war learned. Without dealing with
even passionate disagreement peacefully, no national
interest can prevail. Short-term advantage for one
interest leads to long-term destruction for all through
great wars and small conflicts.

Reconciliation is not an act that comes at the end of
the conflict cycle. It must become the framework that
enables us to sustain peace and to prevent conflict cycles
repeating with an ever-increasing destructive force. A
British football coach, a manager of the Liverpool team,
once famously told his team to get their retaliation in
first. If we are to transform conflict, we need instead to
get our reconciliation in first.

I ask representatives whether the approaches to
reconciliation are currently adequate, especially using
local, religious and traditional sources ofpeacemaking?
Even in this time of uncertainty and renewed
international rivalry, for the sake of future peace we
must invest in reconciliation and learn how to support
transformation in human relationships.

The role that an institution such as the Church plays
in that regard is significant. Religious institutions are
often the only functioning institutions in a fragile or
pre-conflict situation. They are present before, during
and after conflict. They provide early warnings of signs
of conflict in communities. Working with and through
religious and other institutions to provide pre-emptive
reconciliation frameworks can prevent conflict
becoming violent or returning to violence. It can set it
on a different path. Their work is done by the young and
the elderly, by women and men and by the rich and the
poor. They seek a people's peace.

If we can learn how to set conflict transformation
in a framework ofreconciliation, including at the grass-
roots level and not only by elites in conferences, we
open ourselves to working together in new and more
effective ways as we strive for peace, as the Secretary-
General has just said. We enable mediation to be orders
of magnitude more effective. As I have already said,
the United Nations is the most extraordinary example
of a framework of reconciliation, but that framework
needs to be embedded in current ways of working
and analysis.

A cross-agency and cross-departmental reconciliation
strategy, supported by the necessary resources, will
open up current ways of working to new and innovative
ways of negotiating strategies for peace, offering
more options in an increasingly complex international
system. There is already much good work taking place.
The work of the Mediation Support Unit, which also
provides excellent Secretariat support for the High-
level Advisory Board, is vital. The Advisory Board
itself is an important and innovative step towards a new
way of approaching conflict transformation.

Partnership between United Nations offices
and groups, such as the Network for Traditional
and Religious Peacemakers, helps to build a shared
understanding. The work of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
particularly the production of the Plan of Action for
Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to
Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes, provides
an important framework for how religious communities
need to contribute to preventing the escalation of
conflicts. I also want to acknowledge the important
work of the United Nations Inter-agency Task Force on
Religion and Development.

However, it is overdue for the United Nations to
move beyond those still fragmented efforts. Enabling
transformative reconciliation must be at the core
when we build United Nations partnerships with
faith communities. Let me pledge my support to the
Secretary-General in that work. I have the privilege of
having assembled a team in my office that is already
learning from past experiences. Many of its members
have worked with the United Nations. Together, we
can reach out to counterparts from other faiths to
encourage their involvement and support, as they are
already doing. That is our collaborative offer to the
United Nations in this time of global pain.

Large tracts of territory around the world are
violently contested in situations where government
has failed. They are differently governed spaces, where
no official Government rules. Even there, the Church
and other faith groups, sometimes existing precariously,
provide a form of hope and mediation in those
extraordinarily difficult contexts. As we think about
new and innovative approaches to conflict prevention,
this is an example of how the United Nations, Member
States and faith actors can be allies, with the potential
for transformational results.
As the Secretary-General has stated, women's
and youth participation in mediation and conflict
transformation is especially essential to success. In the
Anglican community, we are developing a programme
called Women on the Front Line, which offers support
and equips women based on their contexts. It has already
been used in several places with severe conflict. It will
need to be complemented by youth on the front line, as the
Council emphasized in the year 2000. Earlier this year,
I hosted an Emerging Peacemakers Forum in London,
bringing together 50 young Christians and Muslims
from around the world in pre-emptive reconciliation
to learn about leadership in peacebuilding. The superb
work done by my colleagues liberated participants to
inspiring visions of peace. They will serve peace for
many years.

In conclusion, I again thank the United Kingdom
for the opportunity to address the Security Council at
today's open debate. I am grateful to the Secretary-
General for his leadership on the issue and willingness
to take innovative steps to seek out new ways of
working. At a time when the United Nations is debating
and pointing to the horrors in Myanmar, we are
reminded that conflict destroys dignity, hope and all of
our best dreams and is often intractable. While I would
like to thank all ofthose who will speak today on behalf
of their States, I urge the Security Council to commit
to the ongoing transformation of violent conflict into
non-violent disagreement and eventually into a truly
inclusive approach to participation in mediation and
reconciliation, now and for future generations.

