Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
I should like first to thank you, Mr. President, for having
given me the opportunity to address the Council on the
question now before it: the situation in Somalia.

Allow me, Sir, sincerely to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, whose
business, I am convinced, you will conduct with your
customary skill and wisdom. I should like also to pay
tribute to Ambassador Albright for the very distinguished
way in which she conducted the work of the Council last
month.

The Chairman of the African Group, the
Ambassador of Tunisia, has made a statement on behalf
of our Group, and the Chairman of the Arab Group, the
Ambassador of Jordan, will be stating the position of that
Group. I associate myself with those statements.

A year ago, the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II) withdrew from Somalia without having
attained the goal for which it was created - resolution of
the conflict, national reconciliation and the restoration of
peace and security in that fraternal African country.

Since that time, the various Somali factions, left to
their own devices, do not appear to have made any
meaningful progress in the quest for a peaceful, lasting
solution to their conflict, despite the many attempts and
initiatives taken to that end. It is true, however, that thus
far a spread of the conflict and an increase in the fighting
have, relatively speaking, been avoided.

The regional administrations established thanks to
the efforts of the leaders of the various factions and many
of those created with the aid of UNOSOM. are certainly
in operation. So-called "Koranic" tribunals are fighting
illegal schemes in many of these regions. All these efforts
and achievements have helped to bring about relative
peace in several areas of Somalia, which has allowed the
United Nations programmes to continue their activities
almost normally, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
his latest report to the Security Council.

Other regions, however, such as that running from
the south of Mogadishu to the end of the Djouba Valley,
including the Bay and the Bakool regions, are less secure,
and the humanitarian situation seems to be rather
precarious there. In his latest report on the situation in
Somalia, the Secretary-General raised an alarm as to the
conflict's consequences on the humanitarian situation in
these regions, and the efforts of the international
community should take into account the urgent needs of
that part of the country.

The situation does not seem to have improved since
UNOSOM. II came to an end. We think that its chances

 

of improvement will continue to diminish daily so long as
the international community does not show the necessary
resolve to put an end to this terrible conflict.

The conflict that has so battered this fraternal country
unfortunately shows no signs of an imminent national
reconciliation that would guarantee a restoration of peace
and stability. Each time a faction takes an initiative, another
faction quickly undermines it and destroys it. Neither the
domestic efforts made by the faction leaders nor the
regional efforts, such as those of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC), have managed to make any progress
towards finding a solution that could be agreed to by all
Somalis. Unfortunately, this is the situation reflected in the
report of the Secretary-General of 19 January 1996.

It is true that the Somalis have the primary
responsibility for finding a solution to their conflict, but, in
our View, the international community should lend them
greater assistance in their efforts, and not abandon them.

To that end, the Security Council, the principal organ
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and
security, must reflect further on this matter in order to
devise ways to put an end to this seemingly endless
conflict, whose consequences could jeopardize peace and
security throughout the region.

A meeting was held today to launch the special
system-wide United Nations initiative for Africa. The
moving appeal made by the Secretary-General should
prompt us to take action. He said, basically, "We cannot
abandon Africa." We would add: "Let us begin by not
abandoning Somalia."

We hope that the Security Council will take a similar
initiative with regard to settling the many conflicts that still
ravage Africa. We cannot imagine economic development
and social advancement where insecurity and political
instability continue to prevail. We are convinced that the
United Nations should continue its tireless efforts, not only
in the humanitarian area but also to help to promote
dialogue and national reconciliation.

In this respect, we support the initiatives of the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts, and we encourage
the various bodies of the United Nations to continue their
work in order to avert another humanitarian crisis. We hope
that the international community will respond generously to
their appeals so that they can accomplish their work. This
must, of course, go hand in hand with the efforts for
peace and national reconciliation.

