Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I thank you for convening this open
debate and for issuing the aide-memoire, which puts
the issue in perspective for the debate.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
precise report on the matter. For Guatemala, the
increasing attention being accorded the issue of small
arms is both timely and appropriate.

I wish also to associate myself with the statement
made by the representative of Guyana on behalf of the
Rio Group.

This debate, which is not the first that the Council
has held on this issue, is particularly important because
it is taking place on the eve of the Conference to
Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. While the Programme of
Action is the result of an initiative by the General
Assembly, the Security Council's contribution to its
implementation is essential, given that the Council is
the organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is from that
standpoint that we view the role of the Security
Council in this area.

In 1999 the Council recognized that the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms contributes to
the intensity and duration of armed conflicts and that it
can be a contributing factor to undermining peace
agreements, complicating peacebuilding efforts and
increasing the vulnerability of civilians, due to the
indiscriminate use of such arms. Likewise, the Security
Council expressed particular concern about the
humanitarian, social and economic repercussions of the
excessive stockpiling and transfer of small arms.

It is with these concerns in mind that I will
confine myself to some specific comments on certain
aspects of the recent report of the Secretary-General,
which is of particular importance in this debate.

While Guatemala supports the implementation of
the first recommendation made by the Secretary-
General, we continue to believe that the character and
the ambitious scope of the recently adopted
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons does not meet the
needs of the most affected countries. We had hoped
that that Instrument would complement the
commitments we have undertaken under the Inter-
American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition,
Explosives and Other Related Materials.

However, we believe that that goal is one that we
will achieve later on and that at this time we must strive
to achieve better results on the Programme of Action's
other provisions of an international nature that have yet
to be addressed. For example, there will be an opportunity
with respect to the process involving the illicit brokering
of small arms and light weapons, as noted in the
Secretary-General's fourth recommendation.

The spirit of recommendations 5, 10 and 11
relates to one of the Security Council's main areas of
responsibility in this area: the creation of appropriate
mechanisms to monitor the effective implementation of
sanctions, especially arms embargoes. An overall
approach will require not only the resolute and timely
application of arms embargoes by the Council but also
the Council's strict monitoring of their rigorous
application.

In that connection, we would like also to
commend the efforts of the sanctions Committees and
of their monitoring mechanisms to ensure compliance
with the measures provided for to combat the illicit
trade in small arms. Moreover, it must be noted that
their work will become increasingly beneficial as
Member States gradually include in their respective
legislations measures aimed at preventing violations of
embargoes imposed by the Council.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
contributes not only to the creation of conflicts but also to
their recurrence - hence the importance of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
as essential elements in conflict prevention and in post-
conflict peacebuilding. Thus it is essential, as noted by
the Secretary-General in his recommendation 7, that
the Council include relevant DDR provisions in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, including the
destruction of excessive stockpiles, so that they clearly
address the issue of arms control.

In that connection, it is heartening to see that that
is already being implemented, and we welcome the fact
that, in its presidential statement issued under the
symbol S/PRST/2005/7, the Council stressed

"the importance of a comprehensive international
and regional approach to DDR that is not limited
to the political and security aspects of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, but addresses also its social
and economic aspects, including special needs of
child soldiers and women".

Lastly, my delegation believes that the efforts of
the international community to address the problem of
small arms as well as the impetus given to this issue in
the General Assembly will be strengthened by today's
Security Council debate. That, we believe, will provide
additional political impetus to the implementation of
the 2001 Programme of Action and ensure that the
United Nations continues to play a key role in
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects.

Guatemala will shortly be hosting the regional
Latin American and Caribbean meeting to be held from
5 to 9 May in the city of Antigua Guatemala. We hope
that that meeting will represent a contribution on the
part of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States to the forthcoming Review Conference on the
illicit trade in small arms.

Solving the problem of small arms and light
weapons will no doubt require a comprehensive effort
on more than one front. There are no easy ways of
tackling this issue, but the scope of the political
commitments made to combat the problem could help
to chart a new course. In that regard, the Security
Council has a key role to play in focusing world
attention on this scourge.

