Mr. Matussek (Germany): First of all, I would
like to thank Special Coordinator De Soto for his
impressive presentation today.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Serbia, and the European Free Trade Association
country Iceland, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this declaration.

The international community is faced with many
a challenge in the Middle East. It is, however, the
ongoing standstill in the Middle East peace process
that could ultimately prove to be the most serious
threat to stability and security in the region, if not on a
global scale. It is therefore up to all of us to move the
peace process forward and to intensify our efforts to
do. First and foremost, it is up to the parties to the
conflict to become further engaged; but the
international community is no less called upon to
contribute. It is up to the members of the Arab world,
and especially to the Middle East Quartet, to
become- and to continue to be - increasingly
involved.

The European Union has repeatedly emphasized
its determination to play an active role within the
framework of increased Quartet activity. Let me
therefore stress, as stated in Washington on 2 February,
the Quartet's intention to provide active follow-up to
meetings between Israeli and Palestinian leaders and to
remain closely engaged at this time of increasing
dialogue. The Quartet has also reaffirmed its
commitment to meet according to an agreed calendar
and to monitor developments and actions taken by the
parties. The European Union thus looks forward to the
forthcoming meetings of the Quartet, including those
with the parties and other regional partners.

At the core of the issue, of course, is the need for
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to launch a process with
the goal of ending the occupation that began in 1967
and creating an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. The European Union thus
expresses its full support for the forthcoming meeting
among Prime Minister Olmert, President Abbas and
Secretary of State Rice, scheduled to take place in the
next couple of days.

We call for continued international assistance to
the Palestinian people and welcome the recent
extension of the temporary international mechanism,
which, in coordination with the Office of the President,
is providing essential relief to a large part of the
Palestinian population. It presently reaches out to some
150,000 households. Once again, we call on Israel to
carry out the immediate transfer of all withheld
Palestinian tax and custom revenues, and we encourage
Israel to do so through the temporary international
mechanism.

Furthermore, strengthening Palestinian
institutions of governance and developing the
Palestinian economy are of critical importance. In that
context, I would like to recall the tremendous
importance of full implementation of the Agreement on

Movement and Access and urge that Rafah and all
other crossing points be reopened and remain open. Let
me also, at this stage, reaffirm the European Union's
continued commitment to the European Union Border
Assistance Mission in Rafah.

The European Union welcomes the fact that an
agreement was reached in Mecca last Thursday on the
formation of a Palestinian national unity government.
Here, I would like to pay tribute to President Abbas for
his sustained efforts to that end. The European Union
stands ready to work with a legitimate Palestinian
government that adopts a platform reflecting the
Quartet principles.

Allow me to add that we sincerely appreciate the
work of the Saudi Arabian Government, and in
particular the valuable efforts of King Abdullah, to
bring about this meeting. I would also like to commend
the initiative of the Governments of Jordan and Egypt
in reconciling the Palestinian factions.

In the light of recent developments on the ground,
the European Union reiterates its call for an immediate
and unconditional end to all acts of violence and terror.
It also calls on the parties to consolidate the ceasefire
in Gaza and to extend it to the West Bank.

The European Union condemns in the strongest
terms the suicide attack perpetrated on 29 January in
Eilat, where three people were killed and many others
wounded. On behalf of the European Union, I offer our
sincere condolences to the victims' families and our
sympathy to the injured. Such attacks are aimed at
innocent civilians with the goal of derailing the peace
process.

In this regard, the European Union urges the
Palestinian leadership to do everything in its power to
put an end to terror and to bring to justice those who
support terror. It is vital to continue the genuine
progress made in recent weeks in the search for peace,
notably through the courageous efforts of both the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian President to
build confidence. The European Union also urges the
parties to fully implement steps discussed at the
23 December meeting, to refrain from taking any
measures that could predetermine issues to be resolved
by negotiations and to seek to fulfil their obligations
under the Sharm el-Sheikh understanding of 2005.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the recent authorization of settlement activities by the
Israeli Government and the ongoing construction of the
barrier on Palestinian lands. These developments are
contrary to international law and to the Road Map. We
call on Israel to desist from any action that threatens
the viability of an agreed two-State solution.
Settlement activities in and around Jerusalem as well
as in the Jordan Valley are of particular concern. The
European Union will not recognize any changes to the
pre-1967 borders other than those agreed by both
parties.

With all this in mind, the European Union looks
forward to the next Quartet meeting at principals level,
which is scheduled to take place in Berlin in just over a
week from now, to further discuss the way forward.

On Lebanon, the European Union welcomes the
success of the international conference in support of
Lebanon, held in Paris on 25 January 2007. By
pledging more than $7.6 billion in aid, the international
community has sent a strong message of support to the
people of Lebanon and to its legitimate and
democratically elected Government.

The European Union and its member States
contributed more than 40 per cent of the total aid
pledged at the Paris conference. These contributions
are intended to provide Lebanon with the resources it
needs to meet the challenges of reconstruction and
macroeconomic stabilization. In this respect, the
European Union reiterates its support for the reform
programme adopted by the Lebanese Government on
4 January 2007, notably its social component, as well
as for the commitment in principle to the signing of a
post-conflict agreement with the International
Monetary Fund. The adoption of the EU-Lebanon
European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan will
enable further deepening of our existing cooperation
within the framework of the Association Agreement
and of the Barcelona process.
34

Having said that, the European Union condemns
in the strongest terms the targeted attacks on two buses
in Lebanon which today claimed several lives and left
many injured. Once again, we offer our condolences to
the victims' families and our good wishes to the
injured. The European Union also expresses great
concern about the renewed violent clashes of the past
weeks in Lebanon, which claimed several lives and
caused numerous injuries. The European Union urges
all parties to refrain from all forms of violence and to
do everything possible to prevent an escalation of the
situation. A solution to the current political deadlock
should be sought only through dialogue and with full
respect for the democratic institutions of the country.
The European Union urges all Lebanese actors to
actively engage in such a dialogue and reiterates its
appreciation for all constructive international
mediation efforts, in particular those by the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States, to facilitate an
intra-Lebanese agreement.

The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Lebanon. It renews its call for the full and speedy
implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006), 1664
(2006) and all other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and reminds all parties in the region of their
obligations thereunder. The European Union also
reiterates its call on Syria and other countries in the
region to refrain from interfering in the domestic
affairs of Lebanon. They must, instead, actively engage
in the stabilization of Lebanon.

