Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to your
country, Canada, and to you in particular, Ambassador

 

Fowler, for your dedication and your dynamism during the
Council's intensive work this month.

Likewise, we want to thank the members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to participate in this
important debate. The Council has on various occasions
drawn attention to the difficult and often distressing
situation of civilians in armed conflict. We attach great
importance to the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General to strengthen the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we believe that the scope of
those recommendations should be examined exhaustively by
the General Assembly.

Actions motivated by political, ethnic or religious
hatred often disregard fundamental principles of humanity
and are therefore challenges to individual conscience and to
the collective feelings of nations. The millions of persons
caught against their will in the crossfire of current armed
conflicts are rightly a source of concern for the
international community. As we were reminded last year by
the campaign of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, even wars have limits. The Committee's
humanitarian work deserves our appreciation and support.

My country joins others who have spoken in this
debate to reject and condemn the use of prohibited methods
of combat in internal conflicts, particularly the actions of
some non-State actors against civilian populations - such
as the taking of hostages for the purpose of extortion,
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian
installations and the use of hunger as an instrument of war.
But will the outcry of the international community be
heard?

Among the recommendations for the protection of
civilians that are before the Council, we wish to underscore
a few that we consider indispensable to preventing future
conflicts and sparing civilian populations further suffering.

With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
believe that the Security Council must adopt a more
forceful attitude to that illegal traffic, when considering
current armed conflicts. This phenomenon is linked to
transnational criminal organizations which use money
laundering as a means to internationalize violence. The
availability of these weapons in areas of conflict fuels a
spirit of discord and is a direct cause of the loss of many
civilian lives. For that reason, my country has been
advocating stricter control of the international arms trade in
the framework of preparations for next year's conference.

With regard to the recruitment of minors, our
delegation believes that under no circumstances should
children participate in war. We are pleased to note the
agreement reached at the beginning of the year regarding
the protocol on the participation of children in armed
conflict. The Government of Colombia categorically ruled
that no person younger than 18 years of age can serve in
the national armed forces and encourages other countries
to adopt the same age limit for recruitment. We also
condemn the use of minors in the ranks of irregular
armed groups in all parts of the world, and we appeal for
a united attitude of rejection of this practice.

We underscore the constructive approach of
promoting confidence-building measures among the
parties involved in internal conflicts, with the active
participation of civilian society in this process. This is an
approach that is useful either at the beginning of conflicts
or in the peace-building stage. We hope that it will be
possible soon to have the handbook of good conduct in
the field, the publication of which has been announced.

Regarding coercive measures against massive and
ongoing abuses, the Secretary-General presented to the
Council several criteria for the adoption of coercive
measures in cases of internal conflicts that present grave
violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We believe that the United Nations must act with
prudence and extreme care in this field in order not to
undermine principles of international law that are firmly
established, and without which we might be cast into
great confusion. We express our strong preference for
examining situations carefully on a case-by-case basis and
to use procedures for cooperation among States before
resorting to sanctions mechanisms.

On 9 April 2000, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Cartagena at the
thirteenth Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned
Movement, addressed the question of the erosion of
respect for the norms and principles of international
humanitarian law and the question of the considerable
increase in the number of refugees and displaced persons
caused by conflict situations. On that occasion, among the
various measures adopted, the Ministers appealed to the
parties to a conflict to respect international humanitarian
law and human rights law and to ensure the safety,
security and protection of humanitarian personnel. They
also advocated greater international financial efforts to
help the victims of humanitarian emergencies and
reaffirmed the distinction that must be made - a vital
one - among actions of a humanitarian nature,

 

peacekeeping or peacemaking operations and operational
activities for development.

My country agrees with what was expressed by the
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement. It welcomes the
measures to be adopted by the Security Council today and
reiterates that other organs of the United Nations should
also broadly consider the various means of strengthening
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

