Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to very warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Didier Burkhalter, Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and to thank him for his briefing on the
priorities of his chairmanship and, above all, for the
strong commitment that he has expressed to meet the
challenges facing his organization.

As Mr. Burkhalter has pointed out, the OSCE is the

largest regional security organization in the world, with
57 States members in Europe, North America and Asia.
The OSCE has been recognized since 1992 as a regional
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Beyond the regions it covers, the OSCE
can play an important role in the settlement of conflicts
that the international community faces. The priorities
of the Swiss chairmanship for 2014 in the three areas
covered by the organization - politico-military,
economic-environmental and human - will
undoubtedly contribute to improving the situation in
member States confronting the challenges ofinsecurity
and violations of human rights, whether linked to the
environment or to transnational crime. The approach
chosen by Chairperson-in-Office Burkhalter is
intended to strengthen initiatives aimed at dialogue,
transparency and prevention, whether in the area of
conflict or in the environmental sphere. He would also
like to make the most of mediation and solidarity, which
are appropriate tools to strengthen the organization's
efforts. Strengthening institutions by reforming the
OSCE is also among his priorities, because he must
provide the organization with an effective means to
face the challenges of the day.

Opening up the OSCE to new members and civil
society should contribute to bringing them together
and providing a fresh impetus to the organization.
Unfortunately, the OSCE will face no shortage of
difficult challenges when it comes to peace, given
the conflicts that have taken place recently in certain
countries and regions, which is the case in Georgia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Western Balkans, Kosovo,
Nagorno Karabakh and the Southern Caucuses. The
recent events that we have seen in Ukraine in recent
days will be a fresh challenge to overcome.

Issues related to respect for human rights are also
part of the many problems to be addressed, as is the
fight against the growth of transnational crime. In
that context, strengthening collaboration between the
United Nations and the OSCE is of major importance.
The OSCE deserves special attention from the Security
Council, commensurate with the scale ofthe difficulties
it faces. That is why we support the comments made
by the Chairperson-in-Office, and we call upon the
Security Council to unreservedly strengthen its
cooperation with the OSCE and, in particular, with
its Chairperson-in-Office in order to successfully
accomplish the priorities set for the chairmanship in
2014.

