Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his comprehensive
briefing, and Ambassador Tanin for his words.

We continue to welcome the positive signs coming
from Afghanistan. The assumption of full security
responsibilities by Afghanistan, the momentum
achieved in preparation for the 2014 elections with
the agreement on key legislation, the positive signs in
terms of the country's engagement with its neighbours
and the significant progress in the operationalization of
the Istanbul Process are promising developments. Yet,
we must remain cautious and vigilant.

Political, economic and security challenges remain.
The transition is marked by uncertainty. The number
of casualties among Afghan security forces and
civilians is rising. The future of the peace process is
unclear. Natural disasters, epidemic diseases, drought
and chronic poverty pose grave humanitarian threats.
The most vulnerable segments of society, especially
children, women, girls and elderly people, continue to
be at risk.

It is essential to remain in touch with those
realities on the ground. I would like to touch upon four
buzzwords that we deem important for the future of
Afghanistan.

The first is local ownership. We strongly welcome
recent announcements by Afghanistan indicating a
clear desire to assume responsibility for its own future
in security, the economy, electoral processes and human
rights.

The second, capacity-building, complements local
ownership. Achieving good governance and the rule
of law is key to a successful transition. Free, fair and
accountable elections in 2014 should be backed by
efficient institutions. An inclusive and comprehensive
peace and reconciliation process, owned and led by
Afghans, is also necessary.
International support to Afghanistan must
continue. As Afghanistan's regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to a
secure, peaceful and self-sufficient Afghanistan. That
is in our mutual interest.

Finally, transforming the heart of Asia into a

zone of peace, stability and prosperity requires strong
regional commitment. As international forces are
withdraw, regional cooperation gains have increased
the importance of achieving sustainable peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan and beyond. Further
connectivity will facilitate economic development,
stability and self-sustainability and help create a more
favourable business environment in Afghanistan.
The region must come together to transform common
problems into mutual interests. In that regard, we
welcome the momentum in the Istanbul Process and
appreciate China's offer to host the next ministerial
conference next year. We are also grateful for the
pledges made by supporters of the Istanbul Process and
are convinced that their practical implementation will
help to operationalize the Process even further. We also
welcome trilateral and quadrilateral initiatives and the
constructive role played by the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in support of Afghanistan.

Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the
Afghan people and continue to contribute to a safe,
secure and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done
for many decades.

In concluding my statement, I would like to voice
our strong belief that the United Nations will continue
to play its crucial role during and after the transition.
I would particularly like to commend the valuable
efforts of the United Nations - and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in particular - and
express our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kubis and his hard-working
team.

