The President (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful to Ambassador Oshima for urging the
international community not to abandon the fight
against terrorism and to support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.

I would like to thank Ambassador Andrey
Denisov, Chairman of the CTC, and Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, Executive Director of the Executive
Directorate of the Committee, for their work.

Briefly, I should like to say that combating
terrorism has become one of the main priorities of the
United Nations, as has been demonstrated in recent
years. Argentina shares the international community's
concern on the need to advance towards an effective
response to the scourge of terrorism.

The reports that have been circulated to the
Council set out the important progress achieved in
recent months and prospects for the coming quarter.
We should like briefly to note Argentina's hopes for
the coming months.
First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
should deepen its dialogue with the Member States in
order to solve, inter alia, the problems connected to
delays and inefficiencies in the submission of reports.
With the help of the Executive Directorate, we should
analyse various ways to streamline cooperation by
offering advice to States that require it in order to make
it easier for them to comply with the Council's
resolutions and, in particular, to submit their reports in
a timely manner. We believe that the first visit to a
Member State, to be carried out in March, will
undoubtedly set an important precedent in the
cooperation of and assistance to Member States,
helping them better to assess the assistance that the
United Nations may provide. Argentina will participate
actively in the CTC's adoption of the guiding
document for visits to States.

Secondly, it is essential that we develop the best
possible level of cooperation between the CTC and the
various international, regional and subregional
organizations, as has already been noted. That is why
we wish to point out the importance of the fourth
special meeting of the CTC in Almaty next week. We
are especially grateful to Kazakhstan and to the
Commonwealth of Independent States for organizing
that meeting.

We should also like to prioritize cooperation
within the United Nations system, be it between the
CTC and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) or, more particularly, between the
CTC, the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, which I chair on behalf of Argentina. A
good example of such cooperation was the seminar
held in Asuncion, Paraguay, in December 2004. The
seminar on drafting counter-terrorism legislation,
organized jointly by the Government of Paraguay and
the United Nations, was attended by the CTC, UNODC
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The outcome was held to be most satisfactory,
and we commend the organizers.

We also hope that the CTC's work will be more
effective once the Executive Directorate becomes fully
operational. The cooperation and assessment tasks
entrusted to the Executive Directorate will undoubtedly
be of vital importance to the CTC.

Finally, we wish to add that United Nations
counter-terrorism activities must be effective and serve
as an example to the entire international community.
To be effective, they must be seen by civil society to be
impartial, transparent and respectful of the principles
of the Charter, international law and, most especially,
human rights. I reaffirm the resolute commitment of
my Government, as a member of the Security Council
and Chairman of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, to the struggle.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now call on the representative of Luxembourg
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

