Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I
should first of all thank you and the other members of
the Council for giving my delegation the opportunity to
say a few words in connection with the final extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL). Today's decision marks
yet another important phase in the process of
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. It comes only nine days
after the adoption by the Peacebuilding Commission of
a Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework for Sierra
Leone.

As UNIOSIL prepares its exit or completion
strategy, we recall the departure of the Organization's
operations under the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) exactly two years ago, after the
successful completion of its peacekeeping mission. In
the next several months, the Security Council is
expected to authorize the establishment of yet another
type of office in the country.

All these developments suggest at least two
things. First, in spite of many seemingly
insurmountable challenges, Sierra Leone has made and
continues to make remarkable progress in the
consolidation of peace after a devastating ll-year
armed conflict. Secondly, the United Nations has not
abandoned Sierra Leone, and it is thus prepared to
adapt its post-conflict presence and mandate in
response to the emerging situation in the country.

In this regard, we are grateful to the Security
Council for responding positively to President
Koroma's request for the extension of the presence of
UNIOSIL as currently structured, and also to the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for a new
office to replace UNIOSIL at the end of September
2008. In his letter to the Secretary-General of
22 October 2007 (S/2007/659, annex), President Koroma
acknowledged the important role that UNIOSIL has
played during the past two years in the consolidation of
peace in Sierra Leone. My delegation joins the Security
07-65497
Council in commending what the Council rightly
describes as the valuable contribution that the Office
has made to Sierra Leone's recovery from conflict and
to the country's peace, security and development.

We welcome the fact that the Council has
emphasized the importance of UNIOSIL providing
assistance to national commissions and institutions in
fulfilling their respective responsibilities. We already
have a relatively large number of such bodies for
elections; the promotion of good governance and
accountability; combating corruption; the promotion of
human rights, including the rights of the child; and
constitutional review. They should be seen in the
context of national ownership. They are an integral part
of the structure of peacebuilding and sustainable
development.

Accordingly, there is an urgent need to support
and strengthen them. We note with satisfaction that the
Council has requested the Secretary-General to ensure
that there is adequate capacity, expertise and resources
07-65497
within UNIOSIL to assist the various commissions and
institutions.

Of course, the Government acknowledges that it
bears primary responsibility for peacebuilding and
long-term development in the country. We would
therefore like to reiterate that the Government, bearing
in mind the mandate it received in the recent national
elections, is determined to intensify its effort to ensure
that the people of Sierra Leone see and enjoy the
dividends of peace within the shortest possible time.
We continue to count on the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations system
and bilateral and multi-national partners in fulfilling
this objective.

