The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001 (the Counter-Terrorism Committee) on the work of the Committee, and
other reflections by members of the Committee
on its work so far.

The Security Council recalls the note by its
President of 4 October 2001 (S/2001/935) which
recorded that it would undertake a review of the
structure and activities of the Committee no later
than 4 April 2002. The Council welcomes and
confirms the continuation of the current
Chairmanship and Bureau arrangements for a
further six months. It invites the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to continue its work as set
out in the work programme for the Committee's
third 90-day period (S/2002/318), including to
explore ways in which States can be assisted to
implement the resolution; to build a dialogue with
international regional and subregional
organizations active in the areas covered by
resolution 1373 (2001) in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and relevant Security
Council resolutions; and to identify issues on
which concerted international action would
further the implementation of the letter and spirit
of the resolution.

The Security Council considers it essential
that those Members States which have not yet
submitted a report pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1373 (2001) do so as soon as possible.

The Security Council invites the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to report on its activities at
regular intervals and expresses its intention to
review the structure and activities of the
Committee no later than 4 October 2002."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2002/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4:35 p.m.
