The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, Permanent
Representative of Kuwait, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of February. We were
impressed by the great quality of his work. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Alotaibi and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Report of the Secretary-General on progress
in the implementation of the 31 December 2016
political agreement (S/2018/128)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2018/174)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2018/128, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on progress in the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 political agreement, and

document S/2018/l74, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Recalling the Security Council's latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, members and non-members of the
Council alike, to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct
and to focus on key issues. Briefers are encouraged to
limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.

I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.


