Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your leadership of the Council
for this month, and to pledge our full cooperation
during the remainder of your presidency. I would
also like to thank Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS); Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide;
and Ambassador Fode Seck of Senegal, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), for their briefings.

I would like to begin by expressing our appreciation
to you and the members of the Council for giving us
the opportunity to share our Views on the Secretary-
General's letter of 9 November to the Security Council
and his reports on the security and humanitarian
situation in South Sudan (S/2016/950) and the role of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951).
There are allegations in the reports whose accuracy
is debatable; our intention is not to contest them but
simply to help the Council and all the parties concerned
to get a better understanding of the root causes of the
problems so that we can develop appropriate remedies.

South Sudan fully understands that the motive
behind the work of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other international partners is their
growing concern for the security, safety and general
welfare of our people. We share that concern not only
because we are the country affected, but also because
we are part and parcel of the United Nations and the
international community, and we share the same moral
values and normative principles. We also remember,
with deep gratitude, the support we received from the
international community in the struggle for liberation
that led to our independence. The support of the
United Nations and the international donor community
for our newly independent country that led to the
establishment of UNMISS is also something for which
our Government and people remain deeply grateful.

Our people's long struggle, which went on
intermittently for half a century before we achieved
independence, was basically a quest for the ideals that
the United Nations stands for - peace, security and
the enjoyment of all human rights. In other words, it
represented the pursuit of universal human dignity.
That being the case, we must ask why South Sudan has
suddenly descended into its current crisis.

To answer this question, the starting point must be
that the objective of restoring peace and security and
addressing the humanitarian needs of our people is first
and foremost the major concern of the people and the
Government of South Sudan. If we fail, it should be
recognized that the explanation lies not in a lack of will
but in the limits of our national capacity to respond. The
conflict has intensified divisions among our leaders
and their people. We should, however, be all aware that
the crisis in South Sudan - indeed, as in many other
countries experiencing conflict - is a result of internal
and external factors alike. Rather than pointing fingers,
we should all cooperate and understand that we are in
it together and, in one way or another, all affected and
share the responsibility for the crisis.

In the hierarchy of shared responsibility, we
fully recognize what the Secretary-General has
highlighted in his observations on the situation and
that the primary responsibility to protect all citizens,
without discrimination on the basis of their ethnicity
or political affiliation, rests with the Government. We
also acknowledge that it is the responsibility of the
Government to meet the humanitarian needs of its
people. That is the core of responsible sovereignty.

In the case of South Sudan, the critical question
then becomes one of strengthening the capacity of the
State to discharge these national obligations effectively,
bearing in mind the principle that the international
community has the complementary responsibility to
provide a State in need with supplementary assistance
to meet its national responsibility. It should be recalled
that South Sudan was grossly neglected by the colonial
administration and has been devastated by the long war
that erupted in 1955, a few months before independence
on 1 January 1956. It should therefore be recognized that
the country continues to lack the capacity necessary to
deal with its grave challenges in a robust manner. These
challenges emanate from internal and external factors
alike, particularly the continuing legacy of the long war
between the north and South Sudan. Both sets of causes
require the diligent efforts of the two countries and the
international community to be effectively addressed in
a constructively dialogue.

The necessary support of the world bodies to
address these interconnected crises must strengthen the
institutions whose primary responsibility is to protect
the people. This support should be based on a genuine,
mutual and respectful cooperation that does not infringe
on the sovereignty of the Republic of South Sudan.
It should also be premised on the fact that there is an
elected and legitimate Government in South Sudan that
fully represents the will of the people. It is, of course,
undeniable that the country is now divided and that it
is also the responsibility of the Government, supported
by the international community, to restore the unity of
the leaders and their people. However, nowhere in the
world can a sovereign Government accept an armed
rebellion. As we have seen in comparable situations,
it is the responsibility of the international community
to assist Member States in stopping and eliminating
armed rebellion against an elected Government.

South Sudan also agrees with the Secretary-General
that the inclusion of all ethnic groups and political
factions should be the desired objective so long as these
groups adhere to the democratic principles and the
rule of law. The international response to our situation
has, however, been characterized by a persistent
tendency to strike a moral equivalency that does not
apportion accountability for the crises or recognize
the difference between the elected Government and an
armed rebellion. It is important for the international
community to identify those who are genuinely striving
to find workable solutions through legal institutions
and those undermining efforts to restore peace, unity
and stability, particularly by resorting to violence.

An example of this misleading tendency towards
moral equivalency is the statement in the report that
categorically asserts the lack of inclusivity in the
political process and the increasing feelings of political
marginalization among other ethnic groups, many
of which believe that the Government is pursuing a
policy of Dinka domination across the country. Rather
than make an assertion based on presumed feelings, a
responsible observation must look into the composition
of the Government at all levels. It is a glaring fact that
members of the Nuer group and other smaller ethnic
groups have always been well represented at the senior
levels of the Government and the army, and indeed
throughout the bureaucracy.

It should be remembered that the Dinka are
the overwhelming majority across the country, and
their numbers cannot be minimized by any notion of
proportional representation. But although the Dinka
are the largest group in the country, South Sudan
has over 60 ethnic groups and there is no way for
one group, out of self-interest, to dominate all the
other groups. If anything at all, the Dinka national
leadership has tended to bend over backward not only
to ensure the representation of all groups, but also to
counter any fears of Dinka domination. To assert the
opposite is to be blind to the facts, stress the tendency
to stigmatise one group and promote a self-fulfilling
dangerous propaganda.

As the popular saying goes, actions speak louder
than words. President Salva Kiir, in his commitment
to peace, security, stability and the general welfare
of all his people, has repeatedly demonstrated his
determination to end the crisis in the country. Far from
promoting Dinka domination, he has promoted the
unity of South Sudan by incorporating Nuer militias
into the Sudan People's Liberation Army, to the
point at which over 70 per cent of the army is Nuer.
It is however, those former militias who became Riek
Machar's rebel army. And yet, Nuer representation in
the Government and the army remains significant, and
the President has maintained his commitment to the
policy of inclusiveness.
We want to draw the attention of the Council to
the appointment of General Taban Deng Gai as First
Vice-President so that the peace process is not held
hostage by the absence of Riek Machar from the country.
First Vice-President Gai is already demonstrating his
commitment to move the peace process forward. It
should be remembered that he was a signatory to the
initial security arrangement of the Machakos Protocol
in 2004 and his contribution to the liberation struggle is
well known to the people of South Sudan. He was also
the leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition (SPLM-IO) negotiating team.
Since his appointment as First Vice-President, Gai has
been given full support by the President to implement
the agreement and through its established modalities,
address the grievances of our people.

While there is no intention to exclude any citizen
from the politicalprocess, there is nojustification, locally
or internationally, to support Riek Machar's continued
armed rebellion against an elected Government. It is
a misleading assumption to assert, as the report does,
that Rick Machar retains significant political and
military support. The implication is that such support
is from the Nuer community. But in addition to Taban
Deng Gai's role as First Vice-President, and a number
of other Nuers in important positions in Government,
significant numbers of the Nuer ethnic group fled into
Dinka areas and are living peacefully with their host
Dinka communities. There are, of course, genuine
grievances among members of various groups, including
sections of the Dinka that need to be addressed. The
Government is however committed to correcting the
differences among groups, some of which go deep into
the history of inequitable development in the Sudan
and now South Sudan, but this should not be confused
with the tendency of political entrepreneurs to exploit
ethnic politics.

We must acknowledge that recognizing the efforts
of the Government is a source of encouragement to
continue positive reforms, while disregarding such
efforts can be a disincentive. In addition to Gai's
appointment, the President recently made several
decisions by republican order - one instructing the
Ministerial Committee of the Transitional Government
of National Unity, charged with the implementation of
the joint communique and resolution 2304 (2016), to
expedite and complete its work within 14 days, and the
other establishing a Humanitarian High-level Oversight
Committee led by the Minister of Cabinet Affairs to
work towards removing all impediments affecting
humanitarian operations in the country. The President
also established by republican order a National Planning
Committee, chaired by the Minister in the Office of the
President, to enhance the security and production of oil,
launch infrastructure projects and stimulate external
support.

As such entities are intended to address the
relevant aspects of the crises confronting the country,
their active coordinating role should be recognized and
respected by our international partners to ensure more
effective partnership in providing assistance to the
country. Close partnership with existing Government
institutions is crucial not only to achieving positive
results, but also to enhancing the capacity of the
Government to be more effective in the delivery of vital
services to the people of South Sudan.

Permit me now to comment on two other issues that
have been of concern to the international community
and considerable debate recently - the proposed
Regional Protection Force and the formation of a
hybrid court. Both proposals have been accepted by
the Government of South Sudan. It must, however,
be recognized that there are significant challenges
associated with both the force and the court that should
be constructively addressed.

The Regional Protection Force should be
approached in a spirit of cooperation and with the
active engagement of the Government of South Sudan
and in a manner that reinforces and strengthens
the command and control of our armed forces and
respect for the rule of law. International involvement
should be a supplement or reinforcement, rather
than a replacement, to the Government's efforts to
protect its own people, in accordance with its national
responsibility. The hybrid court should also be seen as
complementary to the national judicial responsibility
for justice. In that connection, it must carefully
balance the quest for justice and accountability with
the promotion of peace and national reconciliation.
For both the protection force and the hybrid court to
succeed, cooperation and constructive partnership with
the Government are crucial. As such, we have agreed
to implement the agreement of the joint Transitional
Government of National Unity and Security Council
communique' of 4 September, in the spirit of cooperation
to advance peace, security, stability and reconciliation
in our country.
I would also like to comment on the proposed
arms embargo on all parties engaged in the conflict.
Although the motive of that proposal as it aims to end
the Violence that continues to devastate the country,
it is unfortunately another indication of the moral
equivalence that does not distinguish between a
legitimately elected Government and an armed rebellion
intent on overthrowing the Government. We continue to
stress that it is the responsibility of the Government to
protect all its citizens and defend its borders. To deny the
Government the necessary means for discharging that
responsibility is to basically undermine its sovereignty,
which is totally unacceptable.

Finally, much has been said about increasing
violence targeting ethnic groups and Violations of
the UNMISS status of forces agreement. Without
challenging the accuracy ofsuch allegations, what should
be highlighted is that they do not in any way reflect
Government policy. It is undeniable that incidents occur
on the ground that responsible authorities may not be
aware of and, therefore, cannotbe control on the spot. It
is, however, important that the report of the Secretary-
General document specific cases where measures were
taken by elements at the lower levels of the operational
hierarchy, in Violation of the agreed guidelines, which,
when brought to the attention of senior authorities, were
corrected. This further underscores the problems of
capacity and the need for the capacity-building support
of the international community.

To conclude, we recognize that our country is
confronting severe challenges and that our national
capacity to deal with the crisis is severely constrained.
We need the complementary support of the international
community not only because South Sudan is a State
Member of the United Nations, but also because the
Government and the people of South Sudan are the
beneficiaries of that cooperation. However, such
cooperation should not in any way come at the cost of
our hard-won independence and national sovereignty.
We trust that the United Nations and our international
partners will respond to our aspirations and concerns to
promote constructive and productive partnerships.

I also take this opportunity to thank Ms. Ellen Laj
for her service with UNMISS in South Sudan, and wish
her the best in her future endeavours. We pledge our
cooperation with her successor.

