Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation is grateful to you for
having included on the Security Council's agenda this
public debate on the overall situation in the Middle
East at a particular point in time marked by the recent
legislative elections in both Palestine and in Israel, and
also by the latest developments in the situation in
Lebanon.

With respect to the legislative elections in
Palestine and Israel, we commend the two peoples for
the democratic choices they have just made, calmly
and in accepting the outcome of the vote by the
electorate. My delegation has an unspoken hope that
the new political paradigm thus expressed will lead
beyond the appearances and political posturing that
have been greatly deplored recently to movement
towards the objective that is set forth in the road map,
which is ultimately to create a Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace and security. This is
why my delegation urges both parties to undertake
dialogue and negotiation on the road map, the only
credible alternative to violence.

Indeed, occupation is intolerable and always
carries within it the seeds of violence and suffering, but
it is urgent to exit this cycle of violence and repression
and to opt resolutely and responsibly for negotiation
within respect for international law. The latest
statements of key Israeli and Palestinian political
officials provide us some glimmer of hope, although
there are certain conditions. My delegation, however,
strongly encourages both parties to create conditions
for a dialogue and negotiation.

To do this, it would be desirable that confidence-
building measures be established through, on the one
hand, recognizing Israel, accepting the agreements
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority and
renouncing violence, and on the other hand, ending
unilateral acts and the policy of a fait accompli,
dismantling settlements that are disputed and ending
the building of the separation wall, targeted
assassinations and acts of collective punishment.

Now is the time to call upon the international
community to support the peace plan in Palestine,
particularly the efforts of the international Quartet and
the other players in the Middle East crisis. My
delegation also believes that the Palestinian people,
who are experiencing very difficult living conditions,
should not be left on their own and that the primary
donors need to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance and emergency assistance to them under
these difficult circumstances.

On Lebanon, my delegation welcomes the fact
that the political leaders of that country have decided
to overcome their infighting via national dialogue. We
welcome the significant progress they have made in
restoring the sovereignty of the Lebanese people
throughout their territory.

My delegation strongly encourages the Lebanese
people to find consensual solutions to the other
problems that remain unresolved. We take note of the
developments related to the work of the International
Independent Investigation Commission. We welcome
the cooperation between the Commission and the
Lebanese authorities, as well as the easing of tension in
the relations between the Commission and the Syrian
authorities.

My delegation supports the plan to establish an
international tribunal to prosecute those responsible for
the bomb attack that took the lives of Lebanese Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 other persons on
14 February 2005.

Finally, we express our deep concern at the tense
situation that continues in southern Lebanon, marked
by repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement by
various actors and violations of Lebanese airspace. At
the same time, we welcome the commendable efforts
carried out in that area by the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.

I cannot conclude without thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General for the quality of his briefing, which
has helped to update us on the item under
consideration.

