We welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica Da¢ic, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We share the profound concerns he expressed about the situation in Kosovo, which remains unstable and needs the attention of the international community. We also listened carefully to Ms. Haradinaj-Stublla. We thank Special Representative Zahir Tanin for a very informative briefing on the situation in the province. We believe that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo continues to be the major international presence acting on the basis of resolution 1244 (1999). We thank him for the unbiased assessment of the situation in the province and the information on the progress of the settlement of the Kosovo issue. We fully support his work and are convinced that he should always have enough material and staff resources to proceed with effective action. Pursuant to a General Assembly decision, the European Union (EU) is an authorized mediator in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. The EU should ensure that both sides meet their obligations unconditionally, especially with regard to implementing previous agreements. At the same time, there are few tangible results. Here is a vivid example of Pristina's intractability - for seven and a half years it has been sabotaging the process of creating a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. On 14 October, when meeting with EU Special Representative Miroslav Lajeak, Avdullah Hoti again precluded the possibility of endowing the community with executive authorities, even though that derives directly from the Brussels Agreement of April 2013. We hope that under the leadership of Mr. Lajeak, who was appointed this April, European mediation will gain momentum and translate into progress towards resolving Kosovo's problems. Our American colleagues also boosted mediation activities. We have taken note of the documents that the sides signed in Washington, D.C., on 4 September. We assume their implementation will be in line with efforts to help Belgrade and Pristina find mutually acceptable solutions. Besides, we should not forget that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the international legal framework for a Kosovo settlement. It is also important to be mindful of what has not yet been implemented, despite many pledges. Indeed, ever since the release of Dick Marty's 2010 Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe report, we have been waiting for a fair international investigation of grave crimes committed on Kosovar territory. In 2020, there was a positive development in this regard: the Kosovo Specialist Chambers has started the real work of investigating crimes committed by the so- called Kosovo Liberation Army. At the same time, we are concerned by scandals circulating around this body, document leaks, reports of witness elimination and use of the case materials for internal political purposes. We insist that all the guilty parties be held accountable and subject to the due penalty, regardless of the offices they currently hold. We see no improvement of the situation in the province in terms of security and upholding the rights of non-Albanian communities. This is seen through recurrent cases of intimidation, seizures and vandalism of property, cemeteries and facilities belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church. Obviously, in this situation we can hardly speak of any return of internally displaced persons and refugees. We need to specifically focus on the task of ensuring the reliable protection of Orthodox sites in Kosovo. On 16 June 2020, the first segment of a highway linking Kosovo and Montenegro and running through the protected area of the Visoki Deeani monastery started its operation, contrary to a ruling of the Kosovo Court, which has international judges among its members. We emphasize that this is not an internal Kosovar issue, because the monastery is on the list of UNESCO World Heritage sites. We believe that the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo should play the leading role in influencing Kosovar authorities, pursuant to their respective mandates. Against this backdrop, we believe it imprudent and groundless to consider the question of Kosovo's accession to such international organizations as UNESCO. The province remains a comfort zone for recruitment of all sorts of terrorists. The return to Kosovo of former militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is working like a time bomb, posing a threat to peace and stability in the region. Let me refer to one more troublesome aspect that needs our continued attention. It is outrageous that the Security Council has still received no information concerning the punishment of those guilty of detaining and beating by the Kosovo Albanian special forces of UNMIK personnel, among whom there was a Russian national - Mr. Krasnoshchekov - on 28 May 2019, in the municipality of Zubin Potok. This issue must not be snuffed out or overlooked. To ignore a blatant attack on United Nations personnel means to undermine the safety and security of Organization staff in all countries of the globe. In this case we are dealing with the obvious desire of the Kosovo Albanian authorities to oust the United Nations Mission from the province. The Mission has to operate in precarious circumstances, which amounts to a de facto boycott by the Pristina authorities. It is also a serious problem that steps have been taken to establish a Kosovo army and that they are supported by a number of States. This contradicts resolution 1244 (1999), in the first place, but it also escalates tensions; indeed, it may destabilize not just Kosovo but the Balkans region at large. We are concerned about the reports of yet another joint session of the Government of Albania and the so-called Minister Cabinet of Kosovo, which took place on 2 October in Tirana. It is inevitable that we would be bothered by one of the meeting's points: the need to erase the border between Albania and Kosovo. Such gatherings are interference in the domestic affairs of sovereign Serbia, of which Kosovo is a constituent part. All of the foregoing shows that the problems of the province are growing rather than getting resolved. Russia's position on Kosovo is very coherent: we advocate Belgrade and Pristina achieving a viable and mutually acceptable solution on the basis of resolution 1244 (1999). This solution must abide by the international law and be endorsed by the Security Council. Advancing or imposing other scenarios will not lead to the desired result.
