Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
for his very informative briefing on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) as well as on current developments in
the region.

Allow me to share a few observations.

Significant security challenges, including an
increase in the cross-border activities of terrorist
groups and a retreat of State authorities from peripheral
zones, continues to affect a number of countries in
the region. The deteriorating security situation in
Burkina Faso requires a strong reaction on the part
of the international community and the provision of
support to the local authorities in combating terrorist
groups, whose activities in the Sahel region continue
to increase.

We strongly condemn the Violent terrorist attacks
as well as the intercommunal clashes in northern
regions of Burkina Faso. We also call on all inhabitants
of the region to makejoint efforts to fight terrorism and
to promote national reconciliation. We encourage the
local authorities to sustain its security-sector reforms
consistently and to create conditions conducive to
sustainable peace and development.

We commend the generally peaceful elections
conducted in the region. However, pre- and post-
electoral periods are often characterized by antagonistic
contestations and disputes. Therefore, we call on the
authorities and national stakeholders to work together
to create an environment conducive to the holding of
peaceful, inclusive and credible elections in 2019 in
Benin, Chad, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania,
Nigeria and Senegal.

The continuing underrepresentation of women
in senior Government positions in West Africa and
the Sahel is a matter of concern. We therefore call on
Governments in the region to redouble their efforts, in
accordance with national and regional commitments,
to enhance the empowerment and political inclusion of
women in decision-making and leadership roles, and to
promote inclusive, gender-responsive development.

Poland supports countries in the Sahel region in
their efforts to address security challenges. Last month
my country therefore handed over its first batch of
ammunition to the Chadian armed forces as a support
to Chad's contribution to the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

As the Special Representative mentioned, climate
change has had a serious impact on the dynamics
of conflict in the Lake Chad basin and parts of the
Sahel. In that regard, we call on national, regional and
international partners to develop a regional framework,
in line with the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, to respond proactively to the current
and projected threats posed by climate change. Poland
would also like to express its deep appreciation for all
parties' engagement both in the run-up to and during
the twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Katowice. We believe that multilateralism
and cooperation will enable us to address problems
together, find solutions and build consensus for the
common good.

The challenges in West Africa and the Sahel are
complex and multidimensional and require a sustained
and holistic approach on the part of all stakeholders.
In that regard, we commend the engagement of the
Governments of West Africa and the Sahel, the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the G-5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, in cooperation with UNOWAS. We also
commend the efforts of Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, the Special
Adviser for the Sahel, to foster the implementation of
United Nations Integrated Strategy through the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. Last but not least,
I want to express my gratitude to Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as the staff of UNOWAS, for their
continued efforts to advance peace and security in West
Africa and the Sahel.

