Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for presenting her
nineteenth report on the situation in Darfur and the
Court's ongoing judicial activities.

The Council is meeting again at a time when the
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court against four individuals indicted for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, for one of them, genocide
have not yet been executed. The Government of the
Sudan has the primary responsibility to comply with
resolution 1593 (2005) and to fully implement the
arrest warrants. It continues to refuse to do so. At the
same time, as the Prosector just recalled, the Sudanese
Government has failed to implement measures to
effectively fight impunity at the national level. More
generally, the report of the ICC Prosecutor reminds us
that, despite the 55 resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the Sudan since 2004, almost none of
the requests contained in those resolutions has been
implemented. That is unacceptable.

It is with great concern that we note the cases of
non-cooperation with the Court. We are particularly
dismayed that the President of the Sudan, Omer
Al-Bashir, continues to make trips in the region,
including to States parties to the Rome Statute.

Since our last meeting with the Prosecutor, in
December(seeS/PV.7080),thesecurityandhumanitarian
situation in Darfur has seriously deteriorated. That is
the result of an increase in conflicts between tribes
and communities, the deployment by the Sudanese
Government of Rapid Support Forces, attacks by rebel
groups and indiscriminate shelling by the Sudanese
Armed Forces. What is particularly worrying are the
serious abuses against civilians, particularly sexual
violence against women and violence against children.

The clashes are becoming more frequent and
increasingly deadly in many parts of Darfur. An
additional 320,000 people have been displaced in
Darfur since 1 January, bringing the total number of
internally displaced persons to over 2 million. We call
on all parties to ensure free and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian actors throughout
Darfur. Serious threats continue to affect the safety
and security of humanitarian workers and UNAMID
personnel. Attacks that target them are unacceptable.
However, to date, none of the investigations by the
Sudanese authorities on attacks against Blue Helmets
has led to any convictions.

The report of Ms. Bensouda outlines the crimes
currently being perpetrated in Darfur that are likely to
fall under the Rome Statute. We encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor the situation in
Darfur, to gather information on alleged crimes and to
consider opening new investigations into the situation
in Darfur. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
request to all Member States, whether they are parties
to the Rome Statute or not, and all regional and
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
ICC, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).

For its part, the Security Council should ensure
effective monitoring of cases referred to the ICC. It is
a question of credibility and efficiency. In that regard,
we strongly hope that the ongoing efforts aimed at
leading the Security Council to respond to the eight
formal communications that the Court has conveyed
to it to report cases of non-cooperation will soon bear
fruit. While the Security Council must be consistent,
Member States and the Secretariat should be likewise.
That applies in particular with regard to the elimination
of non-essential contacts with those accused. The
directives of the Secretary-General regarding contacts
between United Nations officials and those subject to
an arrest warrant or a summons issued by the Court
must be strictly observed.

We express our support for Ms. Bensouda's
proposal that the Secretary-General initiate an
in-depth, independent and public investigation into
the allegations of information manipulation contained
in UNAMID reports, following the revelations made
recently by a former spokesperson of the Mission. It
is essential that the Security Council have the most
complete and reliable information possible on what is
happening in Darfur.

To conclude, I would like to assure the ICC
Prosecutor of Luxembourg's complete support the
resolute work that her Office continues to carry out in the
fight against impunity for crimes committed in Darfur.
We join the call that Ms. Bensouda has launched today

for stronger action by the Security Council and States
parties to the Rome Statute so thatjustice can finally be
rendered to the victims of the Darfur conflict. Indeed, a
lasting peace in Darfur will remain out of reach as long
as the persons accused ofhaving committed war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Darfur do not
have to answer for their actions.

