The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Finland, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand and
Portugal, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alatas
(Indonesia) and Mr. Gama (Portugal) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Downer (Australia), Ms. Rasi
(Finland), Mr. Satoh (Japan) and Mr. Powles (New Zealand) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Security Council mission to Jakarta and Dili,
contained in document 5/1999/976. Members of the Council
also have before them document S/1999/977, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course
of the Council's prior consultations. Members of the
Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 14
September 1999 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia addressed to the Secretary-General, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/ 1999/975.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/ 1999/977) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1264 (1999).

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Portugal, His Excellency Mr. Jaime
Gama, whom I welcome and on whom I now call.


