Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
should like to thank the President Bachelet of Chile for
her presence at this important meeting. We congratulate
Chile on acceding to the presidency of the Council for
this month. We would also like to wish for all Member
States a good year full of peace and security for
everyone.

We thank you, Sir, for holding this important open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance of
international peace and security. We also congratulate
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela,
the new members of the Council, and wish them a
successful and fruitful mandate within the Council. I
must also congratulate Chad on the excellent way in
which it conducted the work of the Council last month.

We thank Chile for its efforts in preparing
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, adopted today.
There is no doubt that all peoples of the world aspire
to the best possible development so that they can
benefit from welfare and prosperity. However, without
security there will be no development. Although it has
considerable human potential and resources, Iraq is
faced with conflicts and danger that threaten its national
project, which is to build a democratic political regime
representative of all elements of Iraqi society and seeks
to guarantee the participation of all Iraqis in the choice
of their leaders through a transparent and fair electoral
process. We are of the firm conviction that this will
be the first step on the right path to build a stable and
safe future for Iraq and all Iraqis so that they can have
inclusive development as they wish.

Threats caused by terrorist activities are one of the
greatest dangers faced in Iraq. Iraq is at the head of the
list of those States most affected by the various forms
and manifestations of terrorism for 2014. Terrorism
has affected infrastructures and cities in Iraq and
thereby impacted economic activities. That in turn
has had a negative impact on sustainable development
and economic progress in all of its aspects, including
socioeconomic and environmental. Iraq is in great
need of development, good governance and sustainable
democracy. It also is in need of a favourable environment
for foreign investment as it needs stability at the level
of macroeconomic policy.

It is comforting to note that the international
community is currently more aware and more coherent
in combating the various facets of the threat posed by
terrorism, which has expanded beyond local areas and
is becoming a transnational and even a transcontinental
problem, and thus a threat to international peace and
security. Building on international efforts meant to
assist Iraq in its efforts, and with a sense of collective
responsibility to combat international terrorism, we
urge the international community, which has made
additional efforts in this regard, to combat terrorism,
which through its actions exploits resources and
engages in organ-trafficking in order to finance its
terrorist activities. The international community must
focus its activities to guard against collaboration with
the Islamic State. We would like to recall here that
the commitment of Member States to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions is the best way to
combat the effects of terrorism on the global population.

In conclusion, peoples suffering from a lack
of security are unable to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, which indicates an overall failure
of the current sustainable development framework,
and is the result of the organized Violence of terrorism
and a lack of overall security. We hope for a post-2015
development agenda that would be more effective in
order to limit and put an end to the impact of terrorism
in the region.

