Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. The report provides an
excellent summary of some of the most critical problems
faced by the multilateral community today. We would also
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General for her
introductory remarks this morning.

The culture of impunity, which permits attacks on both
defenceless refugees and the humanitarian personnel who
provide relief, must end. The United States believes the
Council could be most effective in dealing with the
protection of refugees and the safety of humanitarian
personnel separately.

The United States is working with other Security
Council members in a working group which is considering
ways to maintain the security and neutrality of refugee
camps, one of the Council's six working groups on Africa.
Although the focus of this Group is on refugee camp
security in Africa, the recommendations that will eventually
come from this group will doubtless be applicable
elsewhere.

While the working group's discussion will include
protection of humanitarian workers, security of
humanitarian personnel is not its focus. The United States
believes it an excellent proposal for members to begin
separate consideration of practical measures for improving
the security of humanitarian workers.

The nature of the threat to humanitarian personnel has
changed. Humanitarian workers are not only being killed in
the crossfire - they are now often specifically targeted for
both political and economic gain, as the Deputy Secretary-
General has noted. The nature of conflicts has also changed
- they are often internal and chaotic, with host
Governments no longer capable of assuring the security of
humanitarian workers.

For the international community to deal effectively
with situations of great humanitarian need, including
situations that may pose a threat to international peace and
security, we must improve the security of humanitarian
personnel. We therefore believe that Members should begin,
as a matter of priority, the development of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at enhancing the safety and protection of
humanitarian workers. As part of this effort, we should
explore, inter alia: first, asking the Secretary-General to
appoint a high-level personality to investigate and report
on cases of violence against humanitarian workers such as
those identified in the Secretary-General's report, with a
View to identifying those responsible for these attacks
where possible; secondly, encouraging strengthened
enforcement of existing criminal and humanitarian law
prohibiting such attacks through vigorous and effective
action by national authorities; thirdly, developing concrete
incentives to encourage States and non-State actors not to
engage in or to tolerate such attacks; fourthly, examining
the value and feasibility of a possible protocol to the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel aimed at increasing the protection
of humanitarian workers; and, fifthly, we should consider
means to ensure that relief workers receive adequate
training in personal security.

Today's debate sheds light on one of the most urgent
and troublesome issues facing the international
community today. The ideas we put forward today will
serve as the basis for the work we must undertake right
away to help ensure the safety of refugees and the
humanitarian workers who provide them aid.

