Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing.

The United States is pleased that the agreement
to establish a demilitarized zone in and around Idlib
continues to hold. We again note that any military
offensive in Idlib would be a reckless escalation that
would bring further instability.

The United States is standing with Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura to support his effort to make
progress towards a durable political solution as the
best chance of forestalling additional episodes in
which the Al-Assad regime might again consider
using chemical weapons. The Al-Assad regime's use
of chemical weapons, independently confirmed by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, is a clear demonstration
of why the United Nations-led political process must
move, make progress and succeed without further
delay. The regime used deadly chemical weapons on
its own people. There must be accountability for that,
and there must be a political transition, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), that ensures justice and
prevents anyone, particularly the Al-Assad regime,
from using chemical weapons again.

There must be an end to the provocations and
disinformation from the Al-Assad regime and Russia,
including their continued attempts to falsely accuse
humanitarian first responders and heroes - the White
Helmets - of planning chemical-weapon attacks
in Idlib or elsewhere. This is especially ridiculous
considering that independent mechanisms created by
this very Council have found the Syrian regime to be
the party responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

The United States once again expresses its strong
support for the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in its work of investigating
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
strongly support the implementation of the OPCW's
attribution arrangements for cases where the Fact-
finding Mission has determined that use or likely
use has occurred. Attribution for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is one of the steps necessary for
accountability and preventing future use. The United
States continues to hope that the Council will unite
around the notion, which was thought to have been well
established and accepted for 100 years, that chemical
weapons have no place in our world. All of us, and
particularly the Syrian people, deserve to live without
fear of those horrific weapons.

