Ms. Stener (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries, Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. Today
is Norway's national day. We are celebrating more than
200 years of our Constitution, adopted in 1814, which
is why my colleagues and I are wearing our national
costumes.

We welcome this timely initiative by Poland,
because respect for and the promotion of international
law are crucial to preserving peace, human rights,
sustainable development and lasting access to the
global commons.

Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and the
continued conflict in eastern Ukraine underline
the importance of today's debate. So do the blatant
violations of international humanitarian law and the
widespread abuses of human rights law in some current
armed conflicts, including the horrific use of chemical
weapons in Syria. There can be no impunity for such
acts. Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. With that
come vast responsibilities.

First, the Charter sets out an obligation to resolve
disputes by peaceful means. The Council should use
the full potential of Chapter VI, which contains rules
for the peaceful settlement of disputes. The early and
swift Council response to the crisis in the Gambia last
year helped to prevent a potential outbreak of violence.
The collective security system worked, and the rules-
based international order was upheld.

Secondly, the Council should show unity in giving
full support to mediation efforts and good offices.
We welcome the Secretary-General's initiatives for
strengthening conflict prevention and mediation.
We also urge the Council to make consistent efforts
to implement the women and peace and security
agenda, which has the potential to help restore peace
and security in conflicts and prevent violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Thirdly, the Council acts on behalf of all Member
States, and must do so in accordance with the Charter.
The use of the veto to protect narrow national interests
in situations of mass atrocities is not in line with the
spirit of the Charter. We urge all Governments to join
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, as well as the Political Declaration launched
by France and Mexico on the suspension of veto powers
in cases of mass atrocity.

Fourthly, regional organizations have a key role
to play in preventing conflict and settling disputes
at a regional level. The Council should make full use
of Chapter VIII of the Charter and encourage the
settlement of disputes through regional arrangements.
In that context, we welcome the regular meetings
between the Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

Fifthly, judicial bodies such as international courts
help to resolve disputes and uphold international law.
The International Court of Justice continues to play
a important role in this area as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. In addition, all States
have a duty to investigate and prosecute the alleged
perpetrators of atrocity crimes. Situations where States
are unable or unwilling to prosecute should be referred
to the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
commitment to the Human Rights Up Front initiative
and to making use of the early-warning tools at his
disposal.

