Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I congratulate the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September and thank it, on behalf of Cote
d'Ivoire, for agreeing to co-organize, with the African
members of the Security Council, this briefing on the
subject of "Peace and security in Africa: Partnership
for strengthening regional peace and security". This
choice of theme is of highly significant and reflects
our common concern regarding the need to identify
the ways and means to forge sustainable responses on
matters of peace and security in Africa.

The enlightening briefings by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Chef de
Cabinet of the Secretary-General lead us towards the
same alarming conclusion that there is a disturbing
deterioration in the security situation in Africa in
general, and in the West African subregion in particular.
This situation calls for urgent and concerted responses
from regional organizations, focused on strong and
mutually beneficial strategic partnerships with all
bilateral and multilateral actors. Such partnerships,
however, will allow us to our objectives only if based
on a common understanding of the local and regional
dynamics that fuel insecurity and instability. To citejust
few, these include poverty and unemployment, which
serve as incubators for the expansion of cross-border
criminal networks, violent extremism and terrorist
armed groups; vulnerabilities related to political
and institutional governance; and weak regional and
subregional peacekeeping capacities.

Before they spill over and generate regional
repercussions, crises originate within States. If it is
to be effective, our partnership actions must therefore
focus first and foremost on supporting national
strategies to fight poverty and unemployment, thereby
strengthening States' resilience to crises.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore welcomes the consensus
among the international community on this essential
requirement, as reflected by the launch in 2018 of the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, covering
the period 2018-2030, in order to step up efforts and
accelerate the growth of prosperity in the Sahel; the
launch of the Sahel Alliance, with commitments
totalling approximately €7.5 billion; and the adoption
by the Group of Five for the Sahel of a priority
investment programme with a portfolio of 40 core
projects targeted at ensuring better balance and strong
links between development and security. In our view, all
these initiatives would benefit from better coordination
under the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, so as to avoid duplication of effort and make the
best use of resources.

Building the capacities of regional institutions
and subregional mechanisms in the areas of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding is equally essential. In
that regard, the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security is a model of cooperation for peace and
security, in keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

As for the West African subregion, Cote d'Ivoire
wishes to highlight the high-quality cooperation
between the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, which facilitates
preventive diplomacy, builds State resilience and
supports peacebuilding.

I would also like to express my country's support
for the productive partnership between the pan-African
organization and the European Union. We take note of
the European Union's important role in financing the
African Peace and Security Architecture - a structural,
long-term response mechanism for addressing threats
to peace and security on the continent.

Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire urgently calls for improving
the early warning capacities and the proactive crisis
response of the African Union and ECOWAS, as a core
pillar of partnerships for regional peace and security.
My country sees the ECOWAS Early Warning and
Response Network and AU Continental Early Warning
System as relevant tools for strategic monitoring,
identifying nascent conflicts and formulating rapid
responses at the local, national and subregional levels.

In the ECOWAS region - which, in the past
four years, has seen more than 2,200 attacks that
have killed an estimated 11,500 people and displaced
thousands - that commitment has taken on a new
dimension, as reflected in the Extraordinary Summit
of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held
in Ouagadougou on 14 September. Without prejudice
to existing security initiatives that have experienced
funding difficulties, ECOWAS Heads of State and
Government decided to pool their resources and
coordinate their efforts to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The Ouagadougou
Summit adopted an action plan that will be financed by
internal resources of up to $1 billion.

While insecurity and instability in Africa in general,
and West Africa in particular, are exacerbated by local
dynamics, we must recognize that external shocks such
as the Libyan conflict have, since 2011, contributed to
the proliferation of weapons, transnational criminal
networks and terrorist armed groups. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore calls for a strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, which will
undoubtedly contribute to identifying a lasting solution
to the Libyan crisis through an inclusive and credible
political process.

Threats to peace and security are a regional security
issue, with repercussions that extend far beyond African
borders. In our regions, one facet of international peace
and security is undoubtedly at stake, and it can only
be bolstered through long-term, multifaceted responses
forged in the spirit of an invigorated partnership
between the United Nations, bilateral and multilateral
partners and regional organizations.

