Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), with
the support of the United Nations Kosovo team and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, as well as the Secretary-General,
whose efforts are playing a significant role towards
creating an environment conducive to compromise,
reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in
the most recent report of the Secretary-General, up to
14 May (S/2019/46l). We also welcome the briefing
by Mr. De Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, and
the legal clarity and opinions provided concerning the
two United Nations staff members in Kosovo. We stand
in support of his unbiased legal view on the issue. We
would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Daeic',
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, to this meeting and note the presence
of the representative of Kosovo.

We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United
Nations in Kosovo is critical to reaching a peaceful and
sustainable solution and to encouraging cooperation
among all parties and stakeholders in this situation,
which has been ongoing for 20 years. In that regard,
we wish to express our regret and concern about the
developments in northern Kosovo last week, including
the detention of two United Nations staff members by
the Kosovo police during the course of their duties. We
wish both staff members a speedy recovery as they are
treated for their injuries. We reiterate the importance
of all United Nations personnel across the world being
able to do their work in a safe environment and in
accordance with international law.

South Africa encourages Belgrade and Pristina to
continue their efforts towards normalizing relations
despite the challenges faced in finding a sustainable
and peaceful political solution. We wish to reiterate the
importance of the resumption of peace talks between
the parties in a spirit of cooperation and compromise
under the auspices of the European Union. Allow me to
make three brief points with regard to the peace process
in Kosovo in View of the persistent challenges to the
resumption of talks between the two parties.

First, the escalated tensions between the parties
and their differences regarding preconditions for
the resumption of dialogue risk undermining any
meaningful prospects for a successful dialogue and
reconciliation. Those factors also deepen the divide
and exacerbate the feelings of mistrust regarding the
political will to engage in good faith. In that regard, we
urge all parties to refrain from actions that further delay
the peace process and to allow for the normalization of
relations between them.
Secondly, South Africa wishes to echo the
sentiments of the Secretary-General in his report
regarding continued engagement with all stakeholders,
such as the relevant authorities, civil society and bilateral
and international partners. The peace process should
not only be led by the political leaders but be informed
by the local communities in Serbia and Kosovo, as both
parties represent a diverse people in language, culture,
heritage and history. That will play an important role
in ensuring active support for peacebuilding and
intercommunity trust-building efforts in Kosovo.

That brings me to my third and final point. The
conflict between the parties has a significant impact
on women and youth. We join the Secretary-General in
welcoming the efforts of the United Nations in Pristina,
in close cooperation with the European Union, to
emphasize the involvement of women across all levels
of political and decision-making processes during
the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and Security.
As indicated by Ulrika Richardson, United Nations
Development Coordinator for Kosovo, "[g]ender
equality is not only a fundamental human right; it is also
a necessary foundation for a just and peaceful world."

It is also our considered view that responses to
address sexual violence in conflict situations must
include survivors in order for them to share their
experiences and possible solutions. In that respect,
we welcome the active involvement of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence in finding solutions
towards addressing their legal, social and institutional
challenges, as reflected in the Pristina communique.

We also welcome the role of young people, whose
efforts illustrate the importance of an inclusive peace
process. The third annual Kosovo Youth Assembly,
in collaboration with the United Nations country
team in Kosovo, identified ways of empowering
youth leadership across Kosovo. Those much-needed
initiatives can contribute to long-term solutions for
peace for all.

In conclusion, we hope that a spirit of compromise
will be the foundation for negotiations towards an
inclusive and fair settlement that is acceptable to
both parties.

