Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Let
me convey my warm thanks to the Pakistan presidency
for choosing this subject for the wrap-up session at a
very opportune moment, just before the two Council
missions to Africa, when we need to reflect on their
role as a major instrument of the Council and how they
help achieve our wider objectives. I am very grateful to
the Special Adviser for his address to us this morning.
Liaising with the Secretariat and using the full range of
the United Nations expertise on our business is
absolutely essential.

Council members will recall that we restarted the
practice of Council missions on the ground in 1999,
with the dramatic visit made by five of us to Jakarta
and East Timor, and our regular travels since then have,
I think, enhanced the image of the Council as an
operational and not just a remote legislative body.

In my experience over four years of participation,
Security Council missions add an extra dimension to
the Council's work on peacekeeping, peace-building
and conflict resolution. They demonstrate in a graphic
way the importance which the Council attaches to
particular regions or conflict situations, and they can
put the spotlight on crisis situations such as the
fighting and the blockage in the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in a way which
Governments concerned cannot ignore. They give
Council ambassadors the chance to speak frankly and
personally to heads of State to explain the Council's
objectives more fully than can be done in Council
resolutions and to secure the personal commitments
from key players which are vital in finding lasting
solutions to conflict.

They also bring home to Council members
themselves the stark realities of what conflict brings
upon the people involved. Council missions bring us
face to face with more than just political and military
leaders. We have made a point of meeting civil society
and non-governmental organization representatives,
and sometimes ordinary people on the ground. It is
difficult for me to forget a side trip that I made with my
colleagues from the Netherlands and Namibia to
Kananga, in the dead centre of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We were met by the dignitaries
of the town, and, as we drove into this wholly trashed
city, out of the damaged buildings all the children of
the town poured out, crying out in French, "Paix! Paix!
Paix! Paix!" and ran alongside the convoy as we went
through. They thought that just our visit to the town,
the three of us, was going to bring peace to the central
Congo and allow them to restore a city of three
quarters of a million people.

We had to recognize also as we left, with the sun
going down, to catch the plane before it was dark, that
the same children were standing silently at the side of
the road, wondering why we were leaving before we
had restored a normal life to them and to their families.
We have to recognize that we are welcome in these
places, but that we create expectations which are
visible on the faces of the children as we come and go.

I think, therefore, that all our meetings with
people on the ground in these missions have been
extremely useful in broadening Council understanding
of the impact of conflict and in helping us make the
connection between big military and political events
and the individuals they affect. We also help to ensure
that civil society voices are heard by their own leaders,
which is not always the case.

I hope that the Council's mission to West Africa
will put those ideals into practice. We know how
closely intertwined the conflicts in West Africa have
become. The civil war in Sierra Leone was encouraged

and exacerbated by President Taylor; Liberians have
been fighting in C6te d'Ivoire. All these conflicts have
produced a pool of displaced and dispossessed young
people who will fight anywhere as long as they are
paid. The instability unleashed has returned to roost in
no uncertain manner in Liberia itself. It is now clear to
us that lasting stability in the subregion depends on
sustainable peace in every country of the region.

In C6te d'Ivoire, we shall insist to all players that
there is no alternative to Linas-Marcoussis. In Liberia,
we aim to build on progress at the peace talks next
week in Ghana and to secure President Taylor's
personal commitment to a ceasefire and a
comprehensive peace plan. Having heard Mr. Gambari
this morning, I am very grateful to him for his
recommendations for our mission. I think that they
accord with our intentions in taking on this task next
month.

On the Council's Africa business, it is important
for the United Kingdom that we have been able to work
closely and will continue to work closely with the
Government and the delegation of France. I am pleased
that Ambassador De La Sabliere is leading the mission
to the Great Lakes next month. I hope that he will
allow me also to comment on the Great Lakes area.

With that mission, which is about to happen, the
Council will have visited the Great Lakes for four
successive years. This sustained engagement has led to
some real progress in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We often talk about the move from war to post-
conflict reconstruction, and we have seen it happen in
Sierra Leone. But in Central Africa, the challenge is
huge. It needs unremitting effort over a long period to
persuade warring parties truly to commit to peace and
to leave the military path behind. That requires the
parties to take risks, to put national reconstruction
ahead of personal and political ambition, to share
power and to compete fairly for popular support.
Above all, it requires courageous leadership. That is
the message that we must get across in our face-to-face
meetings with the leaders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours later this month. The
Burundi leg of the mission will allow us to demonstrate
our support for the second phase of the Transitional
Government, the new President and Vice-President and
the African Union peacekeeping mission.

Coming back to West Africa, I am glad that we
have been able to include Guinea-Bissau in our West
Africa mission, on a joint visit with colleagues from
the Economic and Social Council. This is more than
just a cosmetic demonstration of cooperation between
our two Councils. It is essential that in a case such as
Guinea-Bissau, where economic and social
mismanagement is at the heart of the country's
instability, both Councils should be actively engaged in
working together for a solution. I am glad to have been
part of this enlarged collective process during my time
on the Council, and I entirely agree with Ambassador
Gambari's recommendations in that respect.

Early on in the West Africa mission, we shall
visit Nigeria and Ghana. This reflects the importance
we all attach to working closely with the regional
structures. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) sent troops to Cote d'Ivoire to
monitor the ceasefire, and they are now helping to
implement the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. ECOWAS
has appointed a mediator, the former Nigerian
President, General Abubakar, to facilitate peace talks
between the Government of Liberia and the rebels. The
Security Council has to back up those regional
initiatives with both political and financial support so
that in cote d'Ivoire and Liberia we can deliver a
united message that carries maximum weight.

But this sort of cooperation has to be a
partnership. Members of the Council can provide
resources for regional peacekeeping - for example, as
France has done for Cote d'Ivoire - or funds for
reintegration and development. France, the United
States and the United Kingdom have for some time
been developing a peacekeeping training programme
for African States. But we are serving a process that
must be owned by Africans. The countries concerned
have to take responsibility and demand accountability
for the implementation of peace agreements and the
establishment of effective peacekeeping measures.

We as outsiders can help, but we cannot achieve
much without the total commitment of those most
directly affected. The way in which the Council
conducts its business on Africa must reflect this
fundamental requirement of partnership, in full
recognition of the political, economic, cultural and
financial aspects and sensitivities of every issue. Then,
we may start to consolidate the process of bringing
peace and security to Africa, which we all want to see.

