Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the briefings by Ambassadors
Verbeke, Arias and Burian, Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), respectively.

On the subject of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we hope to
continue improving processes so as ensure that the
implementation of sanctions regimes is effective, that
they genuinely fulfil their purposes and that they fully
respect international law and human rights, utilizing
clear and fair procedures in all areas.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is
focusing on the application of a new tool, the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA). The appropriate use of
this tool should enable the Committee to acquire more
comprehensive and in-depth knowledge of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States. This will lay a firm foundation for better
understanding of national realities, for improved dialogue
between the Committee and Member States and for
determining the most appropriate approach to be taken in
each case. In this regard, Council resolutions should be
properly followed without extensive interpretation. The
CTC should therefore focus on the central elements of
cooperation in counter-terrorism, which are precisely
those set out in resolution 1373 (2001) and subsequent
Council resolutions. We should ensure that States have
laws that allow them to extradite alleged terrorists,
prevent them from providing safe haven for such
individuals, address the financing of terrorism and
enhance operational and intelligence cooperation.

In carrying out a review of security aspects
relating to counter-terrorism activities in each Member
State, the CTC should not involve itself with issues
having nothing to do with this struggle - issues that
should be dealt with by other forums. Linking
problems relating to illegal immigration with counter-
terrorism measures, for example, would prejudge the
nature of such migration and risk discrimination. That
would have human rights implications and divert
attention from the very real problem of effective border
control. Furthermore - and this is of equal concern -
it would represent a particular approach to the problem
of terrorism reflecting a doctrine that is not one that the
United Nations should promote.

In this regard, the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs) should lead to genuine dialogue
among States and the CTC, based on a shared
understanding of the true situation, in a context that
gives pride of place to confidence and cooperation and
allows States that require it to receive assistance for
achieving their common objectives in counter-terrorism
activities. The main purpose of the Committee should
be to ensure that States have the necessary tools to
combat that scourge.

With regard to the work carried out by the 1540
Committee, we believe that it should continue its
efforts to assist States, particularly those that have not
yet submitted their first reports. We should
acknowledge the reasons for such delays, taking into
account, for instance, lack of resources and of technical
and legislative guidelines, given that the large majority
of States that have not yet met the requirement are
developing countries.

The Committee has also drawn attention to the
usefulness of the dissemination activities for promoting
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Peru has
demonstrated its commitment to non-proliferation,
hosting, in November last year, a regional seminar on
the implementation of the resolution. In that context,
ways of providing assistance to Latin America and the
Caribbean were considered. We also welcome the fact
that the Committee's programme of work continues to
promote and consider efforts to match those countries
and organizations that request assistance and
cooperation with those that are offering it.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Peru
vigorously and unreservedly condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, wherever and by
whomever committed. There can be no ideological,
political or religious justification for the commission or
financing of, or collaboration with, acts of terrorism.

In combating terrorism, the consolidation of
structures for cooperation among States is absolutely
essential. The General Assembly took a very important
step by adopting the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. My delegation hopes that the
implementation of that consensus at all levels will
bolster international cooperation in all aspects of the
struggle against the scourge of terrorism. It is precisely
by strengthening such cooperation that the Security
Council can make an important contribution to
combating terrorism.

