Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking the Permanent Representative of Mali,
Ambassador Konfourou, for joining the discussions
today, and let me also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his informative briefing.

We recognize recent progress in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and particularly welcome the signing ofthe pact forpeace
in Bamako earlier this week. It is now important that the
parties redouble their efforts to carry out key reforms,
as outlined by the pact and resolution 2423 (2018).
The reforms relating to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, as well as to decentralization and
security-sector reform, the rule of law, social cohesion
and socioeconomic development, should now be taken
forward without any delay. It is also important that
the mixed patrols of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism be able to begin patrolling and that regional
and local interim authorities be made fully operational.
The Council and other partners should continue to
support the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation through established mechanisms.
We call on all parties to take full advantage of that
support, including the independent observer and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. As Chair of that Committee,
Ambassador Skoog plans to visit Mali later this year.

Inclusivity is essential for long-term stability. We
therefore welcome the commitment in the Pact for Peace
to seeking an inclusive approach to the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation.
We hope that the Government will translate that
commitment into further action without delay. As
underlined by the Council in resolution 2423 (2018), the
parties should ensure the full and equal participation
of women in the peace process, including through the
greater representation of women in the mechanisms
established by the Agreement to support and monitor its
implementation, as well as in the upcoming elections.

The continued deterioration in the security
situation, in particular in central Mali, remains of
great concern. We are particularly alarmed by the
increasing number of civilian casualties, now the
highest number during any reporting period since the
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We are also deeply concerned by the spillover of
insecurity into Burkina Faso and the wider region.
The targeted attacks on civilians and intercommunal
clashes, limited access to humanitarian support and
inadequate access to basic social services and justice
are deeply concerning. Allegations of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law,
reports of widespread conflict-related sexual violence
and grave Violations against children further add to
those concerns. We call on the Malian Government to
increase efforts to prevent and investigate human rights
violations and abuses, including those committed by
the Malian armed forces.

It is now urgent to stem the tide of violence and
carefully assess our joint approach to the protection of
civilians in the central regions. That includes assessing
the approach of the Government, the United Nations
and other actors. Addressing the root causes of the
situation must also be part of that analysis. We welcome
further information on the ongoing efforts in that
regard, including in relation to resolution 2423 (2018)
and the Government's integrated security plan. We also
commend the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, and we continue to advocate for
sustained support.

Sweden remains a committed partner to Mali
and the entire Sahel region in their efforts to enhance
security and development and build sustainable peace.
Our broader commitment includes support through the
United Nations and the European Union, and through
bilateral and regional development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance. It also includes a substantial
troop contribution to MINUSMA, where Swedish
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre took up his
functions as Force Commander of MINUSMA on
2 October. We will continue to strongly support the
Mission, including through continuous engagement
on the commitments made within the framework of
the Action for Peacekeeping agenda. The decline
in the number of peacekeeper fatalities in Mali is
encouraging. It is important, however, that measures
be taken to enhance the mobility of troops, with the
aim of achieving greater operational effect in parallel
with the efforts to strengthen the safety and security
of peacekeepers.

Long-term stability and prosperity in Mali can be
achieved only through a combination of security and
development support. Strategic coordination must
continue to be strengthened within MINUSMA and
the United Nations, as well as coordination with the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other partners. It is also important
that cooperation be further enhanced between the
countries in the Sahel region and the United Nations,
including the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, so as to further advance the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The Peacebuilding
Commission offers an important forum for continuing
discussions in that regard, including as steps are taken
to transfer certain tasks to the United Nations country
team and other development partners.

During the three years since the signing of the
peace agreement for Mali, important progress has
been made, but much still needs to be done to advance
its effective implementation. We commend all of the
efforts made and continue to urge all parties to take
further steps without delay. Sweden will continue to
offer its full support.

