Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We listened with to
Mr. Carlsson with great interest, and I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to him and to the other
participants in the Independent Inquiry for their great
work done in the study and analysis of the tragic events
that took place six years ago. The report, with its
conclusions and recommendations, is indeed an
outstanding contribution to the work of the Organization
as a whole and of the Security Council in particular in the
fulfilment of their primary task: maintaining and
strengthening international peace and security.

We would also like to commend the delegation of
Canada for bringing this issue to an open briefing. We
hope that our in-depth analysis of the steps and actions
taken by the United Nations, by individual Member States
and officials and by participants in the events will be
correctly interpreted and accepted by the international
community. Honest and frank discussion of the failures,
faults and mistakes of the Organization - a critical look
at ourselves - could to a great extent rehabilitate and
strengthen the credibility of the United Nations.

I would like to emphasize another important point.
The report straightforwardly describes the events, gives
specific names and refers to particular actions and
decisions. We should certainly should give credit to the
Secretary-General for appointing an independent inquiry.
That required great courage and self-criticism on the part
of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat. Their
readiness to assume their part of the responsibility and to
take on heavy and fair criticism undoubtedly deserves
respect.

It would not be erroneous to say that this report also
makes a valuable contribution to enhancing the openness,
transparency and democratization of the United Nations.
The appointment of the Independent Inquiry and the
subsequent release of its report also constituted a lesson
and a warning to all of us - first and foremost to the
Security Council. It proves that no steps and decisions -
or the lack of these - can be concealed from succeeding
generations.

For Ukraine, genocide is not just a term. We
experienced difficult times in our own history: this
century alone witnessed an unspeakable tragedy, when
more than 7 million people were exterminated within two
years by a well-planned famine. These events took place
in the country once called the breadbasket of Europe.
Today's meeting provides an opportunity for me to
extend, on behalf of my country, deep condolences to the

 

people of Rwanda, who have gone through this deadly
machine of genocide, a tragedy that deeply scarred the
history of that country.

In both cases the international community was aware
of the developments, but did nothing to prevent or
ultimately to stop the tragedy. Therefore, I entirely share
the view expressed by Mr. Carlsson that no consideration
of a political, organizational or financial nature should
prevent the international community, and the Security
Council on its behalf, from taking decisive and
uncompromising measures in the face of similar
catastrophes.

It is not my intention to make a detailed analysis of
the report. In the light of the remarks made by
Mr. Carlsson and by the previous speaker, I will refrain
from commenting on its specific conclusions and
recommendations.

The major point, in our view, is that the report has
become the subject of multifaceted and diverse work. Let
us hope that this will bear fruit with regard to the work of
the United Nations and its bodies, as well as to the
commitment of individual Member States to their
responsibilities stemming from the United Nations Charter.

We shall also refrain from remarks analysing the
causes of events in Rwanda. Genocide is a tragedy of such
immense scale that its causes and consequences have
individual distinctions, and they are unlikely to be repeated
with the same dynamics in other cases - and may God
forbid such repetitions. However, the report and the work
done in that direction are extremely important in our View.
With its factual accuracy, it not only made us look at
ourselves, but also made us see in that mirror all the
shortcomings, mistakes and failures of the United Nations
and the whole international community.

Before concluding, I wish to note that a few days ago
we learned about the early retirement of Lieutenant General
Romeo Dallaire. Members may be aware of the reasons for
the retirement of that 53-year old career officer. We would
like to pay tribute to the courage of that man, regretting
that his honest and dedicated stance did not receive an
adequate response from New York, and that all his efforts
to prevent the tragedy ended in failure.

