Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-Generals DiCarlo and Lacroix and for their briefings. Let me also reiterate the United Kingdom's condemnation of the attack and the attempted assassination of Prime Minister Hamdok. Regrettably, the Sudan, like many parts of the world, is experiencing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which compounds an already difficult socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to send today a message of solidarity and support to the Government and the people of the Sudan in their efforts to respond to COVID-19 and mitigate its effects. As part of the United Kingdom's $1 billion commitment since the COVID-19 outbreak began, we have given $6 million to the United Nations COVID-19 response plan for the Sudan. One of the brightest spots on the Council's agenda has been the beginning of the Sudan's transition to a democratic and peaceful nation. There has been much progress in the years since the removal of former President Al-Bashir. We encourage all Sudanese parties, as well as the international community, to remain fully committed behind the Sudan to ensure the successful implementation of the Constitutional Declaration, even during the challenges presented by COVID-19. In that connection, I commend in particular the positive role that the African Union continues to play in the Sudan's political transition. The Government of the Sudan and a number of armed movements have been engaging in talks for comprehensive peace across the Sudan. That commitment to peace is promising, as is the positive response to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire by the parties to the Juba peace talks. But we now need to see that all sides, especially the armed movements, engage constructively, immediately and without preconditions to conclude swiftly the negotiations on a comprehensive peace agreement. We call on them to do so. Despite the positive progress that has been made in the Sudan, we remain concerned about the security situation in Darfur, which continues to be undermined by ongoing conflict in Jebel Marra that increases intercommunal violence and civilian displacement. Just this week, there were reports of an attack on a village in central Darfur, in which civilians were apparently killed and wounded, 70 homes burned down and approximately 155 households displaced. The approximately 1.8 million internally displaced persons in Darfur remain particularly vulnerable to human rights violations and abuses. We cannot ignore the considerable and ongoing challenges in Darfur relating to the protection of civilians. The United Kingdom fully supports the Sudanese Government's request for a new, whole-of-Sudan United Nations mission that can provide support across the full range of issues related to the transition. We believe that the Council should support that request and back a relationship between the Sudan and the United Nations that is underpinned by national ownership, partnership and collaboration. We should be ready to move quickly in response to the Sudan's declared needs. As Rosemary DiCarlo said today, the situation is dire. We understand that the Government of the Sudan would like the United Nations to support capacity-building. The United Kingdom believes that there should also be a role for the capacity-building, training and mentoring of police forces. In the time it takes to implement such capacity-building, we must ensure that a security vacuum does not undermine efforts to achieve comprehensive peace in Darfur and facilititate the overall political transition in the Sudan. And, in a spirit of the new relationship between the Sudan and the United Nations, we firmly believe that the new mission can and should be a partner to the Government of Sudan in responding to the ongoing challenges in Darfur related to the protection of civilians, particularly in the internally displaced persons camps. I would therefore like to ask Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his assessment of the protection-of-civilians needs and risks in Darfur and the current capacity of the Government of the Sudan to assume full responsibility for such protection. I would also be grateful if he could provide information on the type of deployment that would be required for the new mission to support the Sudanese Government in protecting its civilians. Let me also say that we have noted the measures taken by the United Nations concerning peacekeeping, in particular the pause on rotations. We understand the impact that this could have, depending on climatic conditions, as Under-Secretary- General Lacroix mentioned. We also understand the impact that said measures will have on the timing of the planned drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Let me conclude by once again reaffirming the United Kingdom's support for the Government and the people of the Sudan in their endeavours to bring about a peaceful, stable, prosperous and democratic future. We look forward to working with our colleagues in the Council to play our part in supporting those efforts.
