Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland
for his briefing on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. The historic general election in the
Democratic Republic has become the most important
event in the political life of that country. Thanks to the
considerable efforts by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the International Committee
in Support of the Transition (CIAT), as well as all
parties in the Democratic Republic, the election is
progressing smoothly.

At the same time, we have also noticed that in the
eastern part of the country there are still some issues in
the humanitarian and human rights fields. We believe
the political and security situation is interdependent
with the humanitarian situation. On the one hand, a
sound political and security situation would aid in
ameliorating the humanitarian crisis. On the other
hand, improvement of the humanitarian situation would
promote further progress in the political and security
situation.

In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in North and South Kivu, improvement of
the humanitarian situation would impact positively on
the general election, which must be conducted in an
environment of peace, security and stability. It is hoped
that before the new Government comes into force, the
transitional Government will remain unified in
discharging its responsibilities to manage the country,
and that it will find a politically practical solution to
the humanitarian problem prevailing in the eastern part
of the country.

With regard to Uganda, for a long time that
Government has been making unremitting efforts to
find a solution to the situation in the northern part of
the country and calm the tensions existing there. We
are heartened to notice that important breakthroughs
have been made in the negotiations between the
Government and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
The LRA has agreed to lay down its weapons,
repatriate the kidnapped women and children, assemble
at designated points and implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. It is
believed that such an important development will have
an important bearing on the situation in the northern
part of Uganda as well as on the stability of the country
as a whole.

It is hoped that the international community can
find an early solution to the issue of the indictment by
the International Criminal Court of Kony, the head of
the LRA, as that would pave the way for an early
solution to the issue of the LRA.

