Mr. Kim Won-soo: At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council today and to congratulate
Malaysia for hosting this timely debate. Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon just provided us with a strategic
overview of the global challenges posed by weapons
of mass destruction (WMD). I would like to add a
few words about the challenges posed by chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) materials
and on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).

The international community has made sound
progress in trying to prevent, investigate and respond
to CBRN threats and risks. Resolution 1540 (2004) has
enabled the international community to make advances
in addressing the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors. That includes through better reporting, adding
or reinforcing legislation, assistance benefits, regional
cooperation and national action plans.

Similarly, the Secretary-General's mechanism for
investigation of alleged use of chemical and biological
weapons has demonstrated its utility in responding to
allegations of chemical-weapon use. I hope that when
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism submits its
report to the Council tomorrow it will fulfil its mandate
to identify the perpetrators of such horrific acts. The
Nuclear Security Summit process has contributed to
raising awareness of, and preparedness against. the
dangers posed by nuclear and radiological terrorism.
But much more still needs to be done. This is a long
journey. In this journey, today's debate and the ongoing
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2014) are
important landmarks. If we ask ourselves whether the
international community is prepared to address the full
scope of CBRN threats and risks, unfortunately the
answer is not yet. We have significant gaps in a number
of areas. The Joint Investigative Mechanism is one
example ofa body that needs to fill the gap in identifying
the perpetrators of chemical-weapon attacks. I want to
highlight two points that the international community
must examine in the international architecture.

The first point relates to biological threats and
risks. With the increasing reports of terrorist groups
seeking to acquire biological materials, we need to
ensure that the investment in preventing biological
incidents is commensurate to the threat and risk. Both
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction to be held
in November are opportunities to consider how those
instruments can be strengthened and enhanced to
provide crucial prevention and preparedness.
The second issue is how the international
community should respond if prevention fails. Despite
our concerted prevention efforts, a CBRN attack may
happen - with repercussions that are likely to go
beyond the remit of a concerned international agency.
or the capacity of the attacked country. As Mr. Koblentz
indicated, the repercussions of such an attack would be
multiplied by exploiting new technological advances,
such as genetic engineering and unmanned aerial
vehicles, just to name two. Subsequently, it would
almost certainly become a complex international health
and humanitarian emergency, disrupting law and order.
It would require the coordination and deployment of
a wide array of agencies at the national, regional and
multilateral levels. In such an event, the international
community would likely turn to the United Nations, as
was the case in the recent response to the Ebola virus.
We have made some progress in developing investigative
mechanisms, but any international response will go
beyond an investigation. The international community
needs to think hard about what to do in advance of such
an eventuality.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate the Secretary-
General's key point, namely, the need for accelerated
action in disarmament and non-proliferation of all
weapons of mass destruction. The ultimate way to
reduce the risk of a non-State actor using a WMD is
through their complete and irreversible elimination.
Achieving a world free of weapons of mass destruction
is the collective responsibility of all States. Overcoming
divisions in approaches requires inclusive dialogue,
commitment, flexibility and creativity by all States.

Today's debate is a demonstration of Security
Council members' commitment to pursuing the crucial
challenge of preventing WMD proliferation. We hope
that Council members will continue to show such
leadership until we have achieved our shared goal
of a world free of weapons of mass destruction. The
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs is at
the disposal of Council members to provide whatever
assistance is required.

