Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Amos for the briefings they have given us. I also
wish to thank the representative of Haiti for the
statement he has made.

The earthquake of 12 January 2010 produced
unprecedented devastation in Haiti. The United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) also
suffered heavy losses. Eight Chinese peacekeeping
police officers were killed. China would again like to
extend its deep condolences to the families of the
victims of the earthquake in Haiti. We hope that, with
the support of the international community, the people
of Haiti will come together and rebuild their homes at
an early date.

The current situation in Haiti is serious and
fragile. The process of consolidating security and
achieving sustainable peace and stability faces many
challenges. We believe that the United Nations and the
international community should focus in the short term
on providing support and assistance in the following
three aspects.

First, they should promote an appropriate solution
to Haiti's presidential election crisis. Holding free, fair
and credible elections in Haiti will be of great
significance to lasting peace and stability and post-
disaster reconstruction in the country. We call on all
sides in Haiti to focus on the peace and stability of the
country and the well-being of the people; uphold unity,
renounce violence, avoid provocations; resolve
disputes through consultations within the framework of
Haiti's Constitution and laws; and ensure that the
elections truly reflect the will of the Haitian people.
We appreciate the active role played by the
Organization of American States in this regard.

Secondly, support to Haiti's post-disaster
reconstruction efforts should be stepped up. Rebuilding
Haiti will take years of hard work, there will be many
challenges, and the long-term support and assistance of
the international community will be needed. We call on
all relevant actors to provide the assistance they
committed to Haiti as soon as possible.

United Nations agencies, international financial
instructions and regional organizations should further
enhance coordination, clarify the division of labour,
improve aid effectiveness, and avoid duplication and
the wasting of resources. We support the United
Nations in playing a more effective coordinating role
in the process of Haiti's post-disaster reconstruction.

Thirdly, we must help Haiti to deal with the
cholera epidemic, which has brought further suffering
to its people. The international community should
continue to provide assistance to Haiti in preventing
and controlling the cholera epidemic so as to prevent
any further spread.

MINUSTAH has played an important role in
maintaining security and stability in Haiti. We
appreciate the contributions made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
MINUSTAH under difficult conditions. In the current
situation, MINUSTAH should concentrate on helping
Haiti maintain security and stability, promote the
political process and support Haiti's capacity-building
in the security and judicial sectors. We also hope that
the United Nations will enhance its comprehensive
evaluation of the situation in Haiti, improve its
security, early warning and crisis management
capacities, and effectively respond to various security
threats and challenges.

