Mr. Martins (Angola): Allow me to first
congratulate Senegal on assuming the presidency of the
Council and to commend the Senegalese delegation for
organizing this very timely debate on asymmetric threats
faced by United Nations peacekeeping or peacebuilding
operations - an issue of crucial importance to the
performance and future of peacekeeping missions. I
welcome and thank you, Minister Mankeur Ndiaye, for
presiding over this important debate, and the briefers
for their very insightful remarks.

We acknowledge with great concern the increased
targeting of peacekeeping missions amid asymmetric
conflicts involving Government forces and non-State
armed groups, in particular extremists and terrorist
organizations, and tactics used by them, often in the
form of hostage-taking, suicide bombings and the use
of improvised explosives devices, which are fuelled by
radical extremism, intolerance, hatred or sheer lack
of respect for fundamental human rights. This leads
to an extremely complex and unsafe environment for
United Nations peacekeeping missions to effectively
and successfully implement their mandates in the
protection of civilians and the mission's integrity, the
promotion of peace solutions and political processes.

The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations made clear reference to the inability of
United Nations peacekeeping missions to engage in
military counter-terrorism operations due to their
inadequacy in responding to this type of assignment.
However, peace missions and operations, which are
usually working in hostile environments, are required
to deliver results, which is why there is the need to
urgently review their capacity to operate safely and
effectively while adjusting their postures to changing
needs. This implies adopting policies dealing with
political challenges arising from complex environments
and preventive efforts to deal with perceived threats.

First and foremost, the preventive efforts to be
adopted by peacekeeping operations should target
violent extremism. Peacekeeping and special political
missions must find political solutions to Violent
extremism, be able to talk to all actors and try to identify
the more moderate voices among them on which to rely
in order to eventually move political processes forward.

In his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
the Secretary-General recommends to Member States
that they integrate preventing violent extremism into
relevant activities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in accordance
with their mandates, which calls for troop-contributing
countries to train their personnel to deal with these
issues. Despite the principal fact that confrontation is
outside the scope of peace operations, military tools
must not be discarded. Indeed, they must be used if
necessary to counter violent extremism, particularly in
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates.

Anothercrucialaspectofpreventiontouchesuponthe
provision of assistance to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes and security and defence
sector reform in case the peace missions have to develop
exit strategies. Such strategies are possible only when
consistent programmes empowering national armed
defence and security forces are effectively in place
and ready to deliver. In fact, we consider it crucial to
make redoubled efforts and assign adequate resources
to defence and security sector reform, which must be
the object of major attention in peacekeeping mandates.
The countries receiving peacekeeping missions must
gradually adjust their own armed forces' and security
forces' capacity to enable them to address the threat of
terrorists and extremists and permit peace missions to
formulate exit strategies.

By 2015, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations had already concluded that the deteriorating
security environment in which peace operations are
deployed, characterized by high-intensity conflict, and
the use of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) - the
terrorist weapon of choice - could discourage Member
States from contributing to peace operations due to the
growing risks and threats of the use of such devices. In
the deadly events that we have recently seen in Mali and
in Somalia, such devices have become a major hindrance
to the implementation of peacekeeping mandates and a
major safety issue in the protection of civilians. Angola
supports the establishment of a comprehensive counter-
IED/asymmetrical-threat approach as a strategy
framework to respond to this deadly threat as such an
approach might help prevent vehicle-borne IED suicide
attacks against United Nations personnel and civilians.

Although United Nations peace missions are not
suited to engage in counter-terrorism, the United Nations
cannot turn its back when faced with asymmetric
threats. It is entitled to respond in order to fulfil its
core mandates of protecting civilians and facilitating
political processes. Some areas for strategic and
operational improvements have been identified, such as
better understanding of the context and the planning
of missions, including through operations with regional
organizations; clear mandates, appropriate postures,
adequate resourcing and capacity to operate in hostile
environments, all of which can be achieved through
better cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- contributing countries; special
emphasis on troop-contributing forces and countries and
host nations; appropriate support and predeployment
training; greater and innovative cooperation among
peacekeeping operations and counter-terrorism bodies;
developing intelligence-gathering capacities and
integrating them into mission structures as a crucial
component for the safety of peacekeepers and overall
success of peace operations; and, finally, establishing
an effective connection and relationship with local
populations as a central feature of missions' mandates.

Angola believes that such a concerted effort
and holistic approach by peacekeeping missions and
peacebuilding agencies, coupled with the support
from host nations, civil society and the international
community at large and by shifting the focus from
military solutions to national political dialogue will
gradually generate solutions to asymmetrical threats.

In conclusion, we insist on the absolute need
to strengthen the capacities of national defence and
security forces as a prerequisite for a sustained and
sustainable solution to the security threats facing these
nations.

