Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I too would like to thank Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their briefings.

In Belgium's view it is essential that the Stockholm
Agreement be respected and implemented in a
realistic space of time. In view of the urgency of the
humanitarian situation, the agreement on the port of
Al-Hudaydah is especially important. We welcome the
agreement reached on the first phase of redeployment
at the last meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, and we hope that implementing it according
to the agreed timetable will help build trust between
the parties and enable them to advance the political
process. It should also finally allow humanitarian
actors access to the Red Sea Mills. The situation is still
fragile, however, and we once again urge all the parties
to show restraint, refrain from inflammatory rhetoric
in the media and from mutual accusations of ceasefire
violations and focus on implementing the Agreement in
good faith. In that regard, we welcome the initiatives
that the parties have taken regarding the exchange of
prisoners. The implementation of the redeployment
plan will make it even more important to ensure the
safety of United Nations personnel. We are ready to
support the measures necessary for that.

Besides this, the efforts to improve the disastrous
humanitarian situation remain crucial. We note that
the financial needs are estimated at around $4 billion,
half of it for food aid, and we hope to see strong
commitments at next week's donor conference in
Geneva. We also urge the parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance.

The reports of the Group of Independent
Eminent International and Regional Experts on the
recruitment of children in conflict (A/HRC/39/43) are
particularly worrying. Children are the primary victims
of the conflict in Yemen. Their recruitment must stop.
We call on all the parties to respect international
humanitarian law and take effective and urgent
measures to end the recruitment and use of children in
the conflict. We ask Mr. Griffiths to ensure that the
protection of children is central to the peace process,
and that is something that we must also address in the
framework of the sanctions regime.

