Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his particularly enlightening
briefing on the latest developments in Libya and for his
tireless work. I also thank the Ambassador of Sweden for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and his visit there in early November.

The security situation in Libya, as described by
Mr. Ghassan Salame, is a source of concern. Struggles
for influence among the militias continue on the ground.
After clashes in Tripoli, several attacks took place
in late October and early November against Libyan
financial institutions, two schools and a hospital. The
situation is also deteriorating in the south of the country,
with the intrusion of foreign groups on Libyan soil. A
terrorist attack claimed by Da'esh was perpetrated, as
has already been mentioned, on 28 October in Central
Libya after a first attack in early October, which is
again extremely worrying.

In this context, I would like to once again welcome,
on behalf of France, the efforts and commitment of
Special Representative Ghassan Salame and his robust
mobilization on security developments. We remain
engaged alongside him to achieve a lasting return to
calm and the effective implementation of security
arrangements in Tripoli. Faced with this unstable
situation, the unification of the Libyan armed forces
under civil authority remains a priority. I welcome the
military dialogue sponsored by Egypt in this regard.

In this context, I wish to reiterate our concern about
continuing economic predation and various attempts
to destabilize the fragile equilibrium in Libya. As
underscored by Mr. Ghassan Salame on 5 September
before the Council (see S/PV.8341), the predation
economy lies at the heart of the Libyan challenge, as
it encourages many actors to perpetuate the status
quo rather than support the political transition. I want
to make it very clear here that all those who threaten
the peace, security and stability of Libya are liable to
international sanctions. The renewal of the sanctions
regime early this week (see S/PV.8389) allowed us
to recall this, as did the recent designation by the
Council of Ibrahim Jadhran, who stands accused of
trafficking in persons. Other designations should also
be considered, especially in view of the violence in
Tripoli in recent months.

In this context, the pursuit of economic reforms
is also a priority, particularly in terms of the collegial
functioning of the Libyan Central Bank and the
transparent management of Libya's resources to
the benefit of all Libyans. I encourage the Special
Representative to pursue his efforts in this regard, in
conjunction with all relevant actors and in support
of the Prime Minister's request to the Council. The
conference to be held next week in Palermo, at
the invitation of the Italian authorities, must be an
opportunity to launch resolute action by the Libyan
people and the international community against the
predation economy.

The humanitarian situation also continues to
deteriorate dramatically, particularly the situation of
migrants and refugees, who face daily human rights
violations. France reiterates its appeals to the Libyan
authorities to spare no effort to ensure that migrants
and refugees are treated with dignity. This is a top
priority, both in terms of human rights protection and in
the fight against organized crime. It is therefore urgent
to progress on the path towards a political settlement,
which brings me to my last point.

The Palermo conference, which the Italian
authorities have undertaken to host in the wake of
the Paris meeting on 29 May, gives the international
community the opportunity to mobilize and
demonstrate its unity in support of the efforts of the
Special Representative and Libyans themselves.
France welcomes this initiative, which should enable
us to advance on all matters - including security, the
economy and the political process - and in which our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, will participate. It is essential to maintain
our full support for the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the Special
Representative to break the institutional stalemate and
advance the transition in Libya.

I thank the Special Representative for providing us
with more detail on his framework for action through
the National Conference, which we fully support.
Libyans have demonstrated their peaceful aspirations
for change by registering in their masses on electoral
lists; their voices must be heard. The alternative to
elections is the perpetuation of the predation economy
and the rule of militias. This would allow free rein for
those tempted to take the fate of Libya hostage. Only
elections with a precise, rapid and ambitious calendar
can anchor stability in Libya.

The status quo is our common enemy because it
mechanically prolongs instability. However, there is
a window of opportunity for a political dynamic. The
Libyan actors must honour the commitments they made
in Paris in May in order to break with the status quo
and encourage this dynamic. The Palermo conference
organized by Italy must be part ofthis framework, in the
presence of the relevant actors, and reiterate the support
of the international community for the UNSMIL action
plan. It is fundamental that we support all these efforts
and show real unity in encouraging Libyans to maintain
the course set by the Special Representative. France

will continue to work in this direction with all members
of the Council.

