Mr. Selakovie (Serbia): Let me begin by expressing
my satisfaction over this opportunity to participate in
the proceedings of this body.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals and of the

International Residual Mechanism for presenting their
reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/310, S/2013/309).

The Republic of Serbia has accorded continued
and undivided importance to its cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). As confirmed in the most recent
report (S/2013/308) of the President and the Chief
Prosecutor of the ICTY, that cooperation has yielded
significant results. In July 2011, my country completed
its cooperation with respect to all indictees whose
transfer had been requested by the Tribunal.

We note that the Prosecutor and the President of
the ICTY have positively assessed the results that the
Republic of Serbia has achieved in its cooperation
with the ICTY. They pointed out that there were no
outstanding or unmet assistance requests, that all
summonses had been served on time, that ICTY orders
had been carried out in a timely fashion and that
witnesses had attended the Tribunal without delay or
difficulties.

The Republic of Serbia has also shown its full
commitment to cooperation with respect to access to
documentation, archives and witnesses. Further, it
refused no access request by either the ICTY Prosecutor
or defence teams. Waivers were granted to all witnesses
for whom they had been requested, which made it
possible for them to testify before the Tribunal.

At the same time, 398 persons have so far been
tried in the courts of the Republic of Serbia for criminal
offences committed against international humanitarian
law. Consequently, the Republic of Serbia showed
a firm commitment not only to complying with its
international obligations, including punishing those
responsible for committing crimes, irrespective of their
ethnicity, but also to establishing the whole truth about
crimes committed during the armed conflicts in the
territory of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The Republic of Serbia is convinced that
it is thereby contributing to the establishment of justice
and the process of regional reconciliation.

This meeting is being held 20 years after the

establishment of the ICTY under resolution 827 (1993).

The painful memories of the tragic events of the 19905
still gnaw at the sensitivities of many in the countries
of our region. Yet time and again those countries have
demonstrated their resolve to proceed along the road of
good-neighbourliness, cooperation and reconciliation.
Therefore, I must point out that the Republic of Serbia
places great importance on the initiative that would
enable persons sentenced by the ICTY to serve their
sentences in the countries that emerged on the territory
of the former Yugoslavia whose nationality they hold.
The basic motivation for that initiative is my country's
determination to assume responsibility for overseeing
prison sentences handed down to its nationals by The
Hague Tribunal.

On a number of occasions, the Republic of Serbia
has shown its readiness to allow its own nationals, as
well as other willing persons tried by the ICTY, to
serve their sentences in Serbia. It is also prepared to
provide full security guarantees regarding the locations
in which those sentences would be served.

1 would like to emphasize that on 20 January 2011,
the Republic of Serbia signed an agreement with the
International Criminal Court on the enforcement of its
sentences. Under that agreement, persons sentenced by
the Court for the commission of war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide may serve their prison
sentences in the Republic of Serbia. I would also like to
stress that Serbia is the first country in Eastern Europe
to have signed such an agreement with the International
Criminal Court; the only other countries to have done
so before Serbia are the United Kingdom, Austria,
Belgium, Denmark and Finland.

Bearing in mind that punishment is also intended
to encourage resocialization of the persons sentenced,
my country believes that that goal becomes more
elusive if prisoners serve their sentences in countries
whose languages they do not speak or understand,
which further hampers their ability to communicate
with their surroundings. Furthermore, it should not be
forgotten that most of the countries in which sentences
are being served are geographically far from Serbia,
which makes family and relatives' visits much more
difficult and, in some cases, impossible. That is the
main cause of complaints addressed to the Government
of the Republic of Serbia by prisoner families.

Let me also point out that all the results of my
country's years of cooperation with the Tribunal
indicate, writ large, the seriousness of the Republic
of Serbia and its readiness to accept international
supervision of sentences being served and to provide
firm guarantees that sentenced persons will not be
paroled without the requisite decisions of the ICTY, the
International Residual Mechanism or some other organ
or body of the United Nations to be charged with those
issues in future.

The countries that emerged on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, including the Republic of Serbia,
are not in a position to conclude agreements with the
Tribunal on the enforcement of sentences, even though
ICTY President Theodor Meron said in his report
that the Tribunal had signed such agreements with
17 countries and emphasized the need for continued
efforts towards signing a number of new agreements
sufficient to enable successful completion of the
Tribunal's mandate. President Meron also noted in
his report that those States that had concluded such
agreements were praised in resolution 1993 (2011) and
urged those that had not done so to conclude them.

Since 2009, the Republic of Serbia has insisted on
signing an agreement on the enforcement of sentences
and is actively working on the initiative to have those
sentenced by the Tribunal serve their sentences in
their own country. Serbian officials of the highest
rank have repeatedly appealed to United Nations and
ICTY officials, but there has , regrettably, been no
breakthrough of scope or significance in that regard.

The Republic of Serbia believes that the main
reason for the stalemate is the Secretary-General's
May 1993 recommendation to the Council to the
effect that "the enforcement of sentences should take
place outside the territory of the former Yugoslavia"
(S/25704, para. 121). Even if that position could have
been considered justified in 1993, when the winds of
war ripped through the former Yugoslavia, it is clear
that it long ago lost its validity.

Today the Republic of Serbia is a democratic
country. It has on numerous occasions demonstrated
its commitment to, and capacity to comply with, its
international obligations, including the punishment of
those responsible for crimes as well as the enforcement
of sentences in accordance with European standards.
I wish to point out that, as it has done in the past, the
Republic of Serbia will continue to comply with its
obligations, both in its cooperation with the ICTY and
with the International Residual Mechanism, the ICTY
branch that is expected to begin its work on 1 July 2013.

To conclude, let me say that the Republic of Serbia

would be grateful if the members of the Council would
re-examine the recommendation made by the then
Secretary-General 20 years ago and would allow Serbia
to be placed on the list of countries that have indicated
to the Council their willingness to accept convicted
persons under the full supervision of the Tribunal.

