Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and I would like to thank our briefers from yesterday - Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs - for their statements (see S/PV.8706). On Monday, we celebrated Martin Luther King Jr. Day. It is so fitting to celebrate his birthday the same week of the debate on the situation in the Middle East. Everything that Martin Luther King Jr. believed in and fought for - civil rights, human rights, justice, non-violence, inequality and non-discrimination - is on display in the Middle East today. All of those issues present the most difficult challenges that exist across the Middle East and are devolving into violence and conflict with dire consequences. The region is currently home to the largest humanitarian crises and refugee influx in its history, and yet also to the smallest chance of peace and security for its peoples. The situation in the Middle East presents a difficult challenge to the international community and to the United Nations. The conflicts are many and multiplying but, most importantly, violations of the Charter of the United Nations and its principles are being committed in total disregard of international law, especially international humanitarian law. For instance, turning to the Palestinian issue, as we heard yesterday from the briefers and other Member States, the situation is dark and worsening by the day. I am sure that we all heard about the total despair of the Palestinian people in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs' briefing to the Council. What can one expect from a people who have been living under occupation for seven decades and whose human rights, legal rights, civil rights and rights to their land, water, and dignity have been taken away from them? What kind of lives can people lead when their cities are described as large prisons? The United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, recently said that we are always no more than two to three days away from another war in Gaza. What kind of future do the Palestinians have when youth unemployment is at 60 per cent and, as Ms. Mueller said, one in every two Palestinians is in need of humanitarian aid? These are desperate people and desperate people do desperate things. At the political level, they have no horizon and no hope for a peaceful settlement. The two-State solution has been emptied of every element essential for a Palestinian State and all final-status issues - the basis of an equitable solution to the conflict - have been dismantled by unilateral Israeli actions such as annexation, which will render the two-State solution an impossibility. The expansion of settlements, the confiscation of land and Israel's actions in Jerusalemare making it impossible for East Jerusalem to be the future capital of a Palestinian State. The situation is leading not only to despair but also to a loss of faith in the international community and in peace. The pessimism of the Palestinians was captured in a survey conducted by the International Committee of the Red Cross when it found that 52 per cent of Palestinian millennials believe that the conflict will never end. There is an urgent need for a different path, a different construct and a new page in the Middle East. The status quo is not tenable anymore. In Lebanon, a new Government headed by Prime Minister Hassan Diab was formed last night after three months of political crisis and a wave of demonstrations never seen before in the history of the country. The new Government, dubbed the "salvation Government", is facing a major challenge to get Lebanon out of the current crisis. We are counting on the support of all Lebanon's friends in the international community, because Lebanon's stability is important for the entire region. The new Prime Minister promised _ the demonstrators that he will work to fulfil their demands. The new Government has formed a committee to draft its policy statement in order to win the confidence vote in Parliament. The situation in the south of the country is calm, as the United Nations has reiterated, but Israeli violations of resolution 1701 (2006), as well as of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity, continue unabated. The Lebanese defence forces recorded 2,620 violations, including land, sea and air violations, in 2019. Those violations run counter international legality and are fuelling tensions in the south of Lebanon. Air violations in particular terrorize the Lebanese population on daily basis. The situation in the Middle East requires the Council and the international community to unite around the idea that, as my German colleague said yesterday, international law is not an d /a carte menu. The Council needs to implement its resolutions - whether on Palestine, Lebanon, the Golan Heights or other parts of the region - in order for justice and peace and security to be restored to the Middle East.
