Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The Ivorian delegation thanks Mr. De Mistura
and Mr. Markram for their respective briefings on the
latest developments in Syria, after the resumption of
fighting in Douma and eastern Ghouta and the bombing
of the city of Damascus, following the relative calm of
recent weeks. My delegation would like to focus its
statement on three main points.

First, we remain deeply concerned about recent
reports of chemical-weapons attacks against innocent
civilian populations, which have reportedly resulted
in numerous casualties who have shown symptoms of
exposure to a chemical agent. While reaffirming its
categorical rejection of any use or resort to chemical
weapons, be it in times ofpeace or in times ofwar, Cote
d'Ivoire strongly condemns such acts and calls for these
events to be placed under an intense spotlight, with the
contribution of all stakeholders.

In the face of allegations of recurrent use of
chemical weapons by the warring parties in the Syrian
conflict, the Ivorian delegation stresses that it is more
important than ever that the international community
send a strong signal to show, beyond the usual principled
condemnations, its determination to put a definitive
end to this infernal cycle.

The use of chemical weapons violates the most
fundamental norms of international law and poses
threats to our collective security. That is why we must
engage in a unflagging fight against impunity in the use
of chemical weapons and preserving the international
chemical non-proliferation regime, which is one of the
fundamental pillars of our common security.

My second point concerns the need for the
international community to put in place a mechanism
for accountability and for the fight against impunity for
those who use chemical weapons, in order to put an end
to the repeated use of these weapons. In that regard,
the Ivorian delegation expresses its readiness to work
towards the establishment of such a mechanism and
calls on the Council to return to the unity it had when
it established the Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose
mandate unfortunately could not be renewed despite
our common efforts.

Thirdly, Cote d'Ivoire notes with regret that
resolution 2401 (2018), which remains the framework
for our joint action, has not been implemented and
that the humanitarian situation in Syria has further
deteriorated. In the light of the distress of the civilian
populations trapped in the fighting, the urgency for
a cessation of hostilities remains more relevant than
ever. In the face of the deteriorating situation, my
country would like once again to call on all parties
to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities and
to respect international humanitarian law, including
unhindered humanitarian access to persons in distress,
in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction
that the solution to the crisis in Syria cannot be
military. Only an inclusive political process can put a
definitive end to this conflict. Such a political solution
must be in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and
imbued with the results of the Geneva negotiations.
My country believes that the Geneva talks remain the
right framework for achieving a lasting solution to the
Syrian conflict.

