The President (spoke in French): I warmly thank
Dr. Bernard Kouchner for his comprehensive briefing,
which was delivered with the talent, brilliance and
lofty insight with which we are all familiar.

In my capacity as President of the Council, let me
say that yesterday I received a delegation of Serbs from
Kosovo, headed by Madame Rada Trajkovic, and I am
to report to you on that meeting. Madame Trajkovic
and her delegation shared with me the difficulties that
Serbs in Kosovo were encountering. She described acts
of violence that the community had experienced in the
course of recent months. In the view of the delegation,
those acts had been systematic in nature. The decision
taken by some Serbs in Kosovo to participate in the
joint administration structures had entailed personal
risks to them. They needed to be protected in order to
participate in meetings. The courageous decision that
they had taken was fraught with considerable
sacrifices.

According to the delegation, those sacrifices had
not been rewarded by improvement in the fate of the
Serb community. Because of that situation, the Serbs
who had participated in joint administration structures
found themselves in a sensitive situation vis-a-vis their
own communities. Their participation in the joint
administration structures had become difficult to
justify.

The delegation wished the international
community to indicate clearly that it would no longer
tolerate such acts of violence and that the perpetrators
of such acts should be brought to justice. According to
the delegation, specific measures were necessary.
Specific requests were put forward at yesterday's
meeting. Additional forces should be deployed to
ensure the security of Serb enclaves. The Serb
community should be able to have its own information
media. The border with Albania should be better
controlled. And, finally, the voter registration should
be carried out on a stricter basis.

I did respond to Madame Trajkovic's delegation
that these points would be brought before the Security
Council members. I have just done so, and I now call
upon the Permanent Representative of the United
States.

