The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Panama.

At the outset, allow me to welcome the President
of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadic', and his Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Vuk Jeremie. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence at this most
important meeting of the Security Council.

Regarding the topic before us, which focuses on
Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence, we
reiterate that Panama would always have preferred for
the parties to reach a negotiated way to resolve their
differences. Such outcomes are of particular value if
we compare what has taken place with the
requirements of the times we live in. The time for
thinking about secession is behind us, and the emphasis
is now on finding options involving multi-ethnic and
regional integration. We regret that that did not take
place, but we accept that events have created a new
reality, which several States, in particular in Europe,
accept as valid.
Looking at this socio-political reality, we must all
give priority to developing peaceful coexistence among
human beings, over and above geo-political interests.

Such peaceful coexistence is particularly
important in a globalized world where traditional
physical borders are increasingly less important; a
world where the circulation of goods, ideas and people
is more intense every day; a world in which, although
some still try to deny it, we cannot live without each
other. This is why the United Nations now promotes
important initiatives to bring about understanding,
rapprochement and cooperation among diverse
cultures, ethnic groups and religions.

This is why we appeal to the leadership in Serbia
and in Kosovo to rise above past conflicts, to recognize
reality and to seek, however difficult this may be, the
necessary mechanisms to bring about peaceful
coexistence among their inhabitants and with their
neighbouring countries. In this context, we have taken
note of the declarations of the parties about not using
violence as a way to defend interests or resolve
differences.

At another level, Panama has always been
concerned, and has stated this before, that what
occurred in Kosovo should not be used as an example
in other situations that appear to be similar.
Nevertheless, we must not and we cannot forget that
Kosovo enjoyed an autonomy very much like the
autonomy of the old republics of greater Yugoslavia,
and an attempt was made to deprive it of that
autonomy; that Kosovo has been administered for over
eight years by the United Nations under a regime of
growing self-government; and that a significant
majority of the Governments in the region have
expressed the intention to recognize Kosovo's
declaration of independence.

This being so, we appeal to the European Union,
and particularly to the countries that have supported
the declaration of independence of Kosovo, to make
sure that today's political secession is soon resolved
within that Union through the prompt incorporation of
both Serbia and Kosovo within that regional
organization.

We feel compelled to refer to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). However much we attempt to
gloss over the fact, its mandate has been overtaken by
the realities that we see today. This is undeniable, as is
the fact that when it was adopted, unlike other
mandates of the Security Council, no deadline was set.
That, to a considerable degree, was the reason why
Council members were not able to agree on how to
adjust the mandate as circumstances required.

Let this be a lesson to us so that in the future all
Council resolutions will have a clear deadline, so that
the deadlines, instead of simply being extended, will be
modified and readjusted to bring them into consistency
with the realities they are trying to affect.

I now resume my duties as President.

I now give the floor to the President of Serbia,
Mr. Tadie, at his request.

