Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the President for
Argentina's initiative in convening today's important
debate and for her presence here today. I also thank the
Secretary-General and today's briefers and welcome
Ambassador Power.

To understand the importance of the partnership
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, we need only look to situations currently
on the Council's agenda - Somalia, Mali and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - all of which
involve essential cooperation between the United
Nations and such organizations.

From Australia's experience in our own
region - the Asia-Pacific - we understand implicitly
the comparative advantage that regional organizations
can bring to conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and we fully subscribe to the
complementarity of the roles that regional organizations
and the United Nations play in addressing threats to
peace and security. In 2011, we saw the successful
response on the part of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations to tensions on the Thailand-Cambodia
border, a commendable regional approach designed to
de-escalate a potentially serious dispute. Last month,
we in Pacific celebrated the tenth anniversary of the
successful regional assistance mission to Solomon
Islands, to which each of the 16 members of the Pacific
Islands Forum contributed and which has been decisive
in the recovery of Solomon Islands from conflict.

The role of regional organizations was of course
set out 68 years ago in Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, but they are playing an increasingly
instrumental role in a much more complex environment
and have enhanced their engagement with the United
Nations by necessity. We have seen this most clearly
with the African Union (AU) and African subregional
organizations. The United Nations retains primacy,
but, as Ambassador Tekeda Alemu said this morning,
speaking for the AU, the United Nations needs a strong
AU and the AU needs a strong United Nations. The
trajectory of cooperation will only continue.

I would like to briefly focus on three issues that we
believe are central to this partnership.

First is the need for respective roles to be based on
comparative advantages that are distinct and understood.
The Council will have its most fruitful engagement
with organizations that have the mandate and capacity
to work on international peace and security issues.
For example, as the Pacific responded to the crisis
in Solomon Islands, the fact that the Pacific Islands
Forum already had in place the Biketawa Declaration of
2000, which set out a clear framework for a collective
response to regional crises, was instrumental.

The comparative advantages of regional and
subregional organizations are clear, and others have
already mentioned them this morning. They include
deeper knowledge of context, cultural understanding,
an inherent political interest in staying the course, and
geographic proximity. These factors all contributed to
success in Solomon Islands.

The benefit of playing to comparative advantage
is clearly applicable to some current major challenges.
In Somalia, the AU has a comparative advantage in
peace operations, while the United Nations, through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
brings critical skills to post-conflict stabilization and
governance. In the Sudans, the AU plays a central
mediation role, seeking to de-escalate tensions and
keeping the parties talking, which the United Nations
peacekeeping operations support in various ways. The
important point is that each organization plays to its
relative strengths.

The second area to focus on is in strengthening
dialogue, exchange and capacity-building. This is
obviously vital to enhancing coordination and ensuring
that organizations at all levels benefit from best
practices. The United Nations has extensive experience
in peacekeeping best practices; as these evolve, they
should be conveyed to relevant regional organizations.
Again, the United Nations dialogue, exchange and
capacity-building are most structured and advanced
with the AU as its own architecture has evolved to meet
the peace and security challenges on the continent.
This cooperation can point us to practices that may be
relevant to other regional organizations - recognizing,
of course, that one size does not fit all. This exchange
must be a two-way street; there is much the United
Nations can learn from regional and subregional
organizations.

The third area is partnerships on thematic,
human rights and humanitarian issues. The Council
has recognized the key role regional and subregional
organizations play in affirming the role of women in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
humanitarian response; ensuring the protection of
children affected by armed conflict; and ensuring that
the protection of civilians is central to peacekeeping
efforts. The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) embraces, as it must, close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations on these three thematic issues.

We also welcome the Council's recognition in the
statement that regional organizations have a crucial role
in addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. This is an issue on which many regions have
pressed for collective action. It is important to see the
Council encouraging, in return, regional organizations
to strengthen their collective response.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is, as we know, complex and
evolving. There will be ongoing challenges. In his
Supplement to An Agenda for Peace 20 years ago,
Boutros Boutros-Ghali recognized that the political,
operational and financial aspects of cooperation
"gives rise to questions of some delicacy" (S/1995/I, para. 86 (00). That is usually the case, but it must never,
ever deter us.

Resourcing is one such issue. When the Council
authorizes regional organizations to undertake
peacekeeping operations, we must do all we can to
ensure that they are appropriately resourced for the jobs
we are asking them to do. The Council must continue to
develop the framework to ensure that the United Nations
partnerships with regional organisations are effective,
and we believe that the presidential statement adopted
today is an important contribution in that regard.

In concluding, I would like to thank the regional and
subregional organizations, including those represented
here, for their growing and valuable work towards
international peace and security and our shared goals,
as enunciated in the United Nations Charter. As the
Secretary-General said this morning, it is the combined
value of our efforts that can be decisive.

