Mr. RuziEka (Slovakia): If this glass contained
all the water on Earth and I drank it in one gulp, it
would disappear. I would like to thank the Senegalese
presidency for focusing in particular on the issue
of water and the nexus between water and security.
We thank the Chair of the Global High-Level Panel
on Water and Peace, Mr. Danilo Tiirk, and the other
briefers for their valuable insights.

My Armenian colleague cited a wise phrase from
Chinese philosophy, and for my own statement I have
also included a quote from Lao Tzu:

"Nothing is softer or more flexible than water. Yet

nothing can resist it."

We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has increasingly recognized the importance of
natural resource management in connection with
conflict prevention and peacebuilding since the
1990s. As an example - although not singling
out water specifically - in presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/15, the Council expressed concern that
the possible adverse effects of climate change may
in the long-term aggravate certain existing threats to
international peace and security.

Ensuring water security for the world's population
by 2030 is one of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Over 2 billion people face a daily struggle to
find clean water to drink. That statistic is expected
to rise in the coming decades owing to the growing
demands on water supplies and the increasing effects
of climate change. There are real links between water
and all phases of conflict. Although water resources
have rarely been the sole cause of armed conflict or
war, there is a long history ofwater-related tensions and
violence over access to water in the context of economic
and social development. Water resources have been
used as a political, economic or military tool, including
by non-State actors. On the other hand, conflicts often
have a devastating impact on water management,
infrastructure, quality and access. Populations in
conflict-affected countries are twice as likely to lack
clean water as people in other developing countries.

In that context, we welcome the focus that the
Secretary-General-elect has placed on prevention and
mediation. He wrote in his vision statement addressed
to the President of the General Assembly,

"The world spends much more energy and
resources managing crises than preventing them.
Thus the United Nations must uphold a strategic
commitment to a culture of prevention".

In that context, Natural Resources and Conflict:
A Guide for Mediation Practitioners, produced by the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Environment Programme, provides an excellent tool to
be used exhaustively in our work. The United Nations
should continue and improve the practice of mediating
disputes over natural resources, including water-related
conflicts, as was highlighted at the Aria Formula
meeting on water, peace and security held at Senegal's
initiative on 22 April.

We are convinced that the work of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace, which was launched
on 16 November in Geneva, aimed at developing
by autumn 2017 a set of proposals geared towards
preventing and resolving water-related conflicts, will
be a crucial contribution in that respect. The work
of United Nations regional centres could also be
accordingly strengthened in this area. In that regard,
a positive example is the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,
which plays an important mediation role in promoting
the responsible sharing and management of the region's
water supply among the five Central Asian States.

One third of world's population depends entirely
on groundwater. There is broad recognition that
transboundary aquifers are a critical and inseparable
component of the global water resource system. They
are crucial for food production and account for 43 per
cent of the total amount of water used for irrigation.
The UNESCO inventory of 2015 has identified 592
transboundary aquifers in the world. Transboundary
aquifers can be a further source of water-related
tensions. Moreover, in 2008, the International Law
Commission adopted 19 draft articles on the law of
transboundary aquifers to be considered by Member
States when negotiating future arrangements for the
management of their transboundary aquifers. To
promote the issue of groundwater governance, my
delegation organized a seminar with the cooperation of
UNESCO on 17 October, highlighting the importance
of groundwater resources and transboundary aquifers
in the framework of SDG 6.

Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of regional cooperation in transboundary water
management, which can help build mutual respect,
understanding and trust among countries and promote
peace, security and sustainable economic growth.
My country holds the presidency in the European
Union Danube River Strategy, which provides a basis
for improved cooperation among 14 countries along
Europe's second-longest river. The goal of the Strategy
is to stimulate regional and cross-border cooperation
in numerous areas, including the management of
water resources and a shared procedure for identifying
water deficiencies.

Mikhail Gorbachev once said,

"Water has the power to move millions of
people. Let it move us in the direction ofpeace".
Our rivers and groundwater are the life blood of the
planet and must be shared and protected from the

effects of conflict and exploitation.

