Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United States for having convened this
meeting. We also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, and Ambassador
Ciss for their briefings.

At present, the situation in South Sudan remains
very complex. President Kiir has made an appeal for
peace through dialogue. At the same time, the political,
security, development and humanitarian sectors in
South Sudan continue to face numerous challenges. In
particular, the severity of the ongoing famine is making
it increasingly difficult for achieving sustained peace.
China proposes that international community provide
assistance in the following three areas.

First, we must continue to advance the political
settlement in South Sudan. Achieving peace and
stability is a shared aspiration of all parties in South
Sudan. A political settlement is the only way out for
South Sudan. What is at stake is for the international
community to convince all parties in South Sudan
to abandon military means, cease hostilities and
immediately get back to the political-settlement track
so as to implement the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in earnest.

China welcomes President Kiir's initiative in
hosting a national dialogue. We look forward to seeing
an early start of such a dialogue, which should have
the extensive and active participation of all parties in
South Sudan. China hails and supports the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union (AU) and all other parties aimed at
contributing actively to South Sudan's political process.
We hope that IGAD, the AU and the United Nations can
achieve enhanced coordination and emit a joint signal
in favour of finding synergies for the achievement of
a solution.

Secondly, we must assist the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) in better
fulfilling its mandate. Secretary-General Guterres
recently submitted a report on the restructuring of
UNMISS (S/2017/224). It is our hope that the Secretariat
can use this as a good opportunity to press ahead with
the reform of the peacekeeping system to make the
Mission better perform its mandate and increase its
operational effectiveness so as to ensure greater safety
for peacekeepers and better respond to the complex
situation. China hopes that the Secretariat can improve
its coordination with South Sudan's Transitional
Government of National Unity and IGAD to promote
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
to properly address any issues that might arise in
cooperation. We hope that the Government of South
Sudan can actively implement the Security Council's
resolutions and presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4,
and support the better fulfilment of UNMISS mandates
and the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

Thirdly, it is important for the Security Council
to send out more positive and supportive messages. At
present, under the current circumstances, the Security
Council must encourage all parties in South Sudan
to actively engage in the dialogue process and stay
jointly committed to peace, stability and development.
The international community must provide timely and
effective assistance to help the South Sudanese people
to overcome their current difficulties.

China notes that the Panel of Experts of the South
Sudan Sanctions Committee recently submitted its final
report (S/2017/326). China believes that any actions
taken by the Security Council must be cautious ones,
lead to promoting the process of a political settlement
and support the mediation efforts of IGAD and the AU.

Given the severity of famine that South Sudan is
facing and as a response to the United Nations appeal,
the Chinese Government has decided, with the help
of the World Food Programme to provide $5 million
in contingency food aid to South Sudan and through
bilateral channels to provide 8,750 tons of food to
assist South Sudan in better responding to famine.
China is ready to continue to play its constructive
part in restoring peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.

