President Kabila (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to speak here for the first time before
the Security Council. The Government and the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would like to
thank the President, as well as the Council as a whole,
for having involved us in today's discussion of the
situation in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Before continuing, I should like to extend my
warmest congratulations to the President on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. My delegation is pleased to
see the Security Council being led this month by the
representative of a friendly country, Tunisia, as this
principal organ of the United Nations responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security
once again addresses the situation in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

I should also like to offer my thanks to the
Permanent Representative of Singapore for the new
dynamism he was able to bring to the Security Council
during his presidency ofthe Council last month.

Lastly, I would like to pay genuine tribute to a
man who spares no effort in order to give significant
impetus to our worldwide Organization and who
deserves our greatest respect: Mr. Kofi Annan, the
Secretary-General. My country owes him a great deal
for the persistent and intensive efforts that he has made
to promote the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and, in particular, to bring peace
to the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

As I take the floor here for the first time in the
Security Council, I remember the historic day, 24
January 2000, when President Laurent-De'sire' Kabila,
in this same Chamber, called for a withdrawal from our
national territory of the armies of aggression of
Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, on the basis of Security
Council resolution 1234 (1999) of9 April 1999. A year
after his speech, the situation has not changed despite
the many efforts made. Indeed, on the contrary, the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
lasted for almost three years now, and the casualties
have been extremely heavy. Some 1.7 million people
died in 22 months in the occupied territory in the
eastern part of our country, according to a report from
the International Rescue Committee issued in May
2000. Today, that figure is clearly low, because it does
not take into account the additional casualties that have
occurred since May 2000 due to the continuing war of
aggression since then.

The illegal exploitation ofthe natural resources of
our country - primarily tantalite, coltan, timber, gold
and diamonds - that finance the war effort of the
aggressor countries is a devastating phenomenon, and
it will have serious consequences for present and future
generations in my country. An end must be put to this
illegal exploitation.

My Government would like to assure the Security
Council that it will do its utmost to cooperate fully
with the Ad Hoc Expert Group, made up of eminent
internationally recognized individuals of proven
competence. We reiterate to them our fullest
confidence and support.

It is our ardent hope that the panel of experts will
submit to the Security Council in March a full report
on the situation, which will enable the Council to take
decisions on the basis of complete information. We
would like the report to be a fair and equitable one that
can establish the truth about the tragic plundering of
the natural resources of our country.

My Government has often spoken to the Security
Council of the very deep-seated yearning for peace felt
by all sectors of the population of my country. This is
why, given the challenges involved in the restoration of
peace and the strengthening of national harmony in a
country that has been torn apart, I have decided on
behalf of my people to work towards a policy that
fosters dialogue and reconciliation.

I invite the authorities in Rwanda, Uganda and
Burundi to return to a better sense of good-
neighbourliness, with a view to achieving a peaceful
settlement of differences and to cooperating fruitfully
for progress in Africa.

Therefore, in accord with and in consultation with
the allied countries that support us in facing the
aggression, we are going to examine ways and means
of relaunching the Lusaka Agreement so that it will not
only lead to an effective ceasefire but will also restore
peace to the Great Lakes region, while at the same time
preserving the fundamental attributes of our Republic:
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity, which the Council has continuously reconfirmed.

To be effective, the Lusaka Agreement must be
reinforced by a binding mechanism that could set an
example by punishing the parties that violate the
ceasefire and do not respect the measures taken for
deployment and disengagement. We ask the Security
Council to consider during this month of February a
new and precise timetable that would cover four points:
the disengagement provided for in the Harare
agreement, the deployment of United Nations troops,
the unconditional withdrawal of uninvited forces and,
finally, the withdrawal of troops from countries that
were invited. To confirm the commitment of the
Congolese Government to take an active part in this
process, I would like to point out to the Council that
my Minister for Foreign Affairs is present at this
meeting.

As I said in my address to my nation on 26
January 2001, the problems linked to democratization
must be resolved within the framework of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. Accordingly, we reiterate our
urgent appeal to all political players and members of
civil society to join unreservedly in preparatory efforts
to ensure the success of the dialogue, notably the
continuing efforts to complete the Libreville process.

In my capacity as the person responsible for my
country, I urge all of my Congolese brothers, regardless
of their social origins, regardless of their views, and
including those who have taken up arms, to come and
sit down with us around a table to talk of peace and of
how to organize the future political landscape in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to talk of the
urgent need for our country to rebuild and to lay the
foundations of sustainable development for the well-
being ofthe Congolese people.

This is why, once again, I launch an urgent appeal
to the international community to support the
Congolese people as they move towards this dialogue,
which must be among the Congolese people without
any interference. For how can we not accept for
ourselves what we undertook in support of our
neighbour, Burundi, and what was unanimously
supported in this Council? In that way, we
demonstrated our nation's strong resolve to contribute
not only to the return of peace to our own country but
also to the peace of our neighbouring countries, and
even more particularly of those that are occupying a
large part of our national territory.

If a solution to the crisis in Burundi is indeed an
indispensable and inseparable element of the crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, because of the
consequences for our own territory of inter-ethnic
conflict in that country, the same also applies to the
need for democratization in Uganda and Rwanda.
National consensus in all of our countries is a
prerequisite for stabilization in the Great Lakes region.

In the course of this month, this Security Council
is certainly going to take a decision on the possibility
of phase II deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). We reiterate to the Council and
to the entire world the commitment of my country to
cooperate closely with MONUC so that it can
effectively discharge its mandate, in particular as
regards the urgent deployment of forces to Congolese
territory in order to restore peace.

We would venture to believe that the Security
Council will stand by its commitments, inter alia, by
swiftly deploying its forces in accordance with the
resolution I mentioned earlier and the subsidiary
disengagement plan adopted recently at Harare, which
provides for an initial deployment along the line of
demarcation, followed by another deployment along
the adjacent borders with Uganda and Rwanda, in order
to provide security along our common borders.

We welcome the mutual understanding and close
collaboration between MONUC and our Government,
and we would like to convey to you our great
appreciation for the quality of work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, who has enhanced the
prestige of United Nations diplomacy. We encourage
him to continue along the road that he has considered
useful and necessary to restore lasting peace to our
country. We are grateful to him, and we are sure that
the Congolese people as a whole are also grateful to
him.

By way of conclusion, may I say that my
Government and I have given ourselves the task of
continuing to rebuild our devastated country and to
meet the expectations of our people. We want to bring
together all Congolese, while respecting their
differences, because it is the Congolese people as a
whole we must serve in its diversity, as well as in its
common love for the country. We must also respond to
the people's deepest aspirations for a better quality of
life.

Once peace has been regained and territorial
integrity restored, our work will involve, with your
assistance and that of the international community,
preparing free and transparent elections so that the
people can choose the person who will preside over the
future ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

We are also among those who believe that the
peaceful settlement of disputes and recognition of the
inherent dignity of every member of the human family
and of their equal rights are the basis of freedom,
justice and peace in the world. This is the Congolese
approach, which must, in my view, lead us to the
restoration of peace in the Great Lakes region.

