Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Council. I
congratulate you on reassuming the presidency in
this very difficult and challenging month. I welcome
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix's challenging and
far-reaching observations this morning that invited
the Security Council and all Member States to
reflect deeply.

United Nations peace operations are always about
people and communities in the end. One year has passed
since we began to implement the Secretary-General's
reforms to make the United Nations more effective by
focussing more on delivering peace and promoting the
protection and development of communities in conflict.
Today, over 100,000 military, police and civilian staff
serve in missions across the world to deliver on this
ambition. When we fail them, we fail the communities
and the people living in those regions.

Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General's reforms to
make the United Nations more effective. Doing so means
that development and human rights must be central
elements of the peace and security perspectives that
frame United Nations peace operations. Fragmented
approaches to peacebuilding come at a great cost to the
United Nations. Without inclusive political processes,
peacekeeping is ineffective; without development,
peace cannot sustain itself. We know these interlinkages
only too well. We know that the costs to the people
and communities living in conflict is too high when
United Nations peacekeeping fails to undertake a
cohesive approach.

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) list the
interconnected development goals that Member States
have signed up to. These apply equally to people and
communities that live in regions where United Nations
peace operations are deployed. We often overlook
that simple fact. When the United Nations does
peacekeeping well, we save lives, we promote cohesion
in communities, which is so necessary for development
to take place, and we are able to demonstrate progress
across the SDGs as a result. When we do peacekeeping
poorly, politics and development are unable to help
communities transition themselves out of conflict,
making the SDGs even more distant for those who live
in conflict-affected areas.

Fiji wholeheartedly supports the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Today,
United Nations peacekeepers face far more complex
and asymmetric conflicts. This often calls for new
training, better force protection and new and highly
specialized skills. Peacekeepers need to be able to
better protect themselves due to the higher number
of actors in conflict zones. They need to have the
skills to identify and respond to the special needs of
many groups and communities. The rise of an era of
asymmetric conflicts, in which groups increasingly and
systematically abuse women, children and vulnerable
groups to influence power dynamics, calls for a step
change in peacekeeping capabilities. Many of these
capabilities are essentially soft in nature. Peacekeepers
need to be able to interact with people and communities
better; they need to be able to identify systemic
exploitation early and not late; and they need to be able
to build positive rapports with communities. Fiji pays
extensive attention to bringing these soft skills into its
preparedness for peace operations.

Expecting peacekeeping missions to do more with
less is a mistake. Conflicts are not static; they shift and,
more often than not, intensify. One day, a land dispute
may be the main driver of increased fighting and,
another day, water shortages may become that driver in
the same conflict area. This requires agility, flexibility
and capabilities across peace missions.

We are working with all permanent members of
the Security Council - Russia, China, France, the
United Kingdom and the United States ~ to enhance
our capabilities, increase our agility and better prepare
ourselves for peace operations. and be able to meet the
new requirements. We look forward to this continuing
partnership with all five permanent members of the
Council as we build and enhance our capabilities.

Peacekeeping missions need financing that is both
predictable and sustainable to meet the requirements of
their mandates in an era where conflicts very quickly
become very complex. The design of peace operations
in ways that combine development and political
processes can only be done credibly if financial support
for missions are predictable over the medium term.
We have some distance to go still. We understand the
need to improve the level of participation of women
in all peace operations. This is significant in terms
of reducing fatalities, as numbers have shown, as
well as broadening opportunities for peacebuilding
and overall success. Women peacekeepers also bring
skills that enable missions to build positive rapports
with communities that are useful in identifying, for
example, sexual exploitation, abuse and other human
rights violations early. This is where interventions are
most effective.

I take this opportunity to thank the Governments
of the United States, China, the United Kingdom,
Australia and New Zealand, which are assisting Fiji
in increasing the numbers of senior women officers
in our peace engagements and developing specialized
capabilities for their participation in such operations.
We are also working with Australia to improve force
protection capabilities.

Fiji has taken a far-reaching and innovative
approach to developing new partnerships. We are
working with Australia and New Zealand, our regional
partners, to combine our expertise in training and
preparation for peace missions. This is proving to have
significant benefits not only for us, as a small troop-
contributing country (TCC), but also for our partners.
Australia and New Zealand are developing even greater
levels of interoperability in peace operations. As a
small country, we have limited resources, but Fiji is
offering its support to other Pacific Island small States
so that they can participate in our police and military
training programmes for their future opportunities to
be involved in United Nations missions.

Finally, I must yet again draw the Council's
attention to the climate crisis, peace operations and the
link between them. More and more drivers of conflict
are climate induced, such as water scarcity and control
by armed groups of humanitarian access following
climate-induced catastrophes. Fiji has developed a
World Health Organization-certified medical unit that
can be co-deployed in climate change-induced and
other humanitarian disasters in peace operations in
conflict settings, if needed.

Peace operations are by far the most important
intervention that the United Nations as a system makes
across the world. It is through peace operations that
multilateralism can best demonstrate its power and
its force for good. It is critical, therefore, that United
Nations operations be well supported and that financial
support be predictable over the medium term.

The Secretary-General's efforts to reform peace
operations need to be fully supported. No element of
this can be held hostage to financial and administrative
constraints. The lives of peacekeepers, as well as
the lives of people living in conflict zones where
peacekeepers are deployed, are dependent on this.

In conclusion, peace operations give space to
small TCCs to make their contributions to the global
efforts of the United Nations. Small States like Fiji also
sometimes bring highly valued expertise and unique
soft skills that are increasingly necessary in peace
operations. I hope that peace operations will continue
to welcome the participation of small States and value
the contributions and the expertise that they bring to
our global efforts.

