Mr. Roed-Larsen: Recognizing the urgency of
the Security Council's concerns with regard to Iraq, I
am grateful for the opportunity to brief the Council on
the situation in a different part of the Middle East. This
month marks two and-a-half years of crisis in Israel
and in the West Bank and Gaza Strip - two and-a-half
years of mourning and insecurity, of political stalemate
and economic ruin. Although this crisis is not new, the
need to resolve it is as critical as ever, for it is also
unpredictable and has the potential to destabilize the
Middle East.

At the same time, a door of new opportunity has
opened. With the front lines of war rapidly appearing
before us, it provides us with the possibility of a front
line for peace. But to reinforce that front line requires
Visible and Vigorous actions.

For the first time in two and-a-half years, I
believe we have a real opportunity not only to begin
rebuilding the shattered Israeli and Palestinian
relationship, but also to finally start implementing a
process that can lead to the realization of our shared
vision and goals for peace and security in the region.
But first, we need to get the parties back to the table.
And that requires three critical decisions, taken in
parallel by the key actors in this process. I am
heartened to say that some of those decisions are, in
fact, already on their way to being realized.

First, the Palestinian Authority must make
fundamental decisions on reform in order to re-
establish itself as a credible partner for Israel and the
international community. Notably, the completion
yesterday of the appointment of a credible and
empowered Prime Minister was a major step. Now we
must see immediate efforts on the part of the new
Palestinian Government to do everything within its
power to curb terrorism and all forms of Violence and
threats.

Secondly, the international community, through
the Quartet - that is, Russia, the United States, the
European Union and the United Nations - must
introduce the road map, as agreed in its final draft in
Washington, DC, on 20 December. That should be an
agreed starting point. The parties will be asked to make
contributions on how best to proceed with its
implementation.

Thirdly, the Government of Israel must sit down
at the negotiating table on this basis. The Government
of Israel must also take immediate and serious steps to
prevent harm to innocent Palestinian civilians and to
alleviate the widespread suffering caused by its
security measures.

In order to move forward, however, we must have
no illusions about where we stand.

Since our last briefing to the Council, 162 people
have lost their lives to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict:
135 Palestinians and 27 Israelis. That raises the total
death toll since September 2000 to 2,502 Palestinians
and 724 Israelis.

The Palestinian Authority must do everything in
its power to prevent the killing of innocents. On 3
March, the murderous suicide bombing of a bus in the
Carmeliya neighbourhood of Haifa killed 17 people, in
addition to the bomber, and injured more than 30, half
of them seriously. As we have stated many times in the
past, such mass murder - such outrageous waste of
life - cannot be justified on any grounds or by any
cause. I call on the Palestinian Authority to bring to
justice those involved in planning such attacks, and I
call on the groups responsible to end their use of terror
once and for all.
If not, what is left of the Palestinian Authority
security forces will have to confront those who murder
civilians in acts that cannot be seen as political or
justified by any means. Although the Palestinian
Authority's circumstances are extremely difficult, it is
the legitimate authority within agreed Palestinian
Authority areas. Unless it exercises - with all means
available - its monopoly on the use of force in those
limited areas, it will have failed in its authority and
leadership.

During the past month, Israeli military forces
conducted intensive operations in a number of
Palestinian cities and refugee camps throughout the
West Bank and Gaza Strip. Those operations caused
intolerably high numbers of civilian casualties -
particularly in the Gaza Strip, where the Israeli
Defence Forces (IDF) conducted its largest incursions
since the beginning of the crisis.

There are disturbing reports that the force used by
Israel was excessive and at times indiscriminate. On a
number of occasions, the Israeli military used powerful
explosives to demolish the family homes of persons
accused of attacks against Israeli targets, often causing
substantial damage to adjacent buildings. In one such
operation in a refugee camp in Gaza, a woman who
was almost nine months pregnant died when her house
collapsed on her, and medical personnel were
prevented from reaching her. Just this week, the
American peace activist Rachel Corrie died after an
IDF bulldozer ran her over. Perhaps the saddest and
most telling statistic of the trauma being inflicted on
Gaza: at least 22 children younger than 18 have been
killed there in the past two months alone.

As all four members of the Quartet have
stressed - and stressed repeatedly - over the course
of this crisis, Israel has an absolute obligation under
international law to minimize harm to innocent
civilians. I call once again on the Government of Israel
to take more proactive steps to ensure that its military
forces abide scrupulously by those principles, to re-
examine their rules of engagement and to conduct a
robust investigation of each and every civilian death
caused by Israeli military activity. Like every other
State, Israel has a right to self-defence. But that right
must be exercised with caution, using reasonable
means.

The ongoing physical insecurity so acutely felt by
Palestinians and Israelis alike is also creating serious
economic insecurity. A massive infusion of foreign
assistance has helped to prevent a total collapse of the
Palestinian economy. Stark evidence of this crisis was
presented last month in London to the primary forum
for donors to the Palestinians, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee.

The World Bank and my office, the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied
Territories (UNSCO), presented our latest detailed
assessment of Palestinian economic life. The findings
are alarming. In just 27 months, closure and other
movement restrictions reduced Palestinian gross
national income by approximately $5.4 billion - the
entire year's worth of income. Poverty, defined as less
than $2 consumption per day, has increased from 21
per cent on the eve of the crisis, to 60 per cent today -
and 75 per cent in the Gaza Strip. In addition, real per
capita food consumption has dropped by up to 30 per
cent since September 2000.

The Palestinian private sector has been hit
particularly hard in the last two years. Well over 50 per
cent of the private workforce has been laid off; and,
according to UNSCO figures, unemployment now
stands at 45 per cent. Bank credit to the private sector
is drying up, and the Palestinian Authority currently
owes private suppliers approximately $370 million in
unpaid bills.

Many Palestinians have turned to the agricultural
sector as a coping mechanism. However, construction
by Israel of the separation wall in the West Bank,
coupled with severe movement restrictions, have
denied many communities access to their land and
sources of livelihood. This has the potential of creating
communities wholly dependent on aid. The town of
Qalqilya is a case in point, where some 32,000
Palestinians are virtually surrounded by the separation
wall, and access to and from town is limited to an
eight-metre gate supervised by Israeli soldiers. In such
circumstances, it is difficult to see how the minimum
social, economic and humanitarian needs of the local
population can be met.

The aggregate social costs of these conditions are
staggering - and very difficult to reverse. Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip face near-total
insecurity; they lack any avenue for improving their
circumstances or addressing violations of their basic
rights. In view of the prevailing circumstances, many
adolescents see no reason to continue their education;
school drop-out rates have risen markedly. In addition,
teachers are reporting an increase in violent behaviour
at school. And as the crisis persists, social and human
rights organizations have noted growing Violence
against women.

I would like to emphasize that international aid
alone cannot respond adequately to these problems. Its
continuation is critical to avoid total collapse. But even
if annual donor aid were to double from its current $1
billion, which is now poured in on an annual basis, it
would have only a marginal effect on alleviating
poverty rates.

At last month's Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting of all major donors, the multilateral
institutions and the parties, donors expressed their
conviction that support to the Palestinian Authority
remains the best short-term vehicle for addressing the
dire economic and humanitarian situation. They also
stressed that Israel must do more to reduce the burden
of security restrictions on innocent civilians and
facilitate the provision of international assistance to
communities in need. In this regard, I note with
concern that the World Food Programme (WFP) and
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have
had to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars in storage
and other costs due to security clearance delays at
Israeli ports and border crossings, some of which have
lasted as long as 40 days.

More broadly, donors stressed the urgent need to
re-establish a tripartite effort involving Palestinians,
Israelis and the international community, working in
partnership to address these problems, along with the
security and political issues that have spawned them. I
suggested at the London meetings that donors
regularize weekly meetings with the parties at
ministerial level as soon as a Palestinian Prime
Minister and his cabinet are formed.

The point to come out of this is that, if the current
Israeli security regime remains, the Palestinian
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate at
alarming speed. And this brings us to the only way out
of this crisis - namely, a negotiated political solution.

Sir, let me turn to the three key decisions that the

key actors must take. I believe that the Palestinian
Authority's progress in implementing reforms,
particularly the establishment of a credible and
empowered office of the Prime Minister, provides an
opportunity to begin rebuilding a peaceful partnership
of negotiations.

Yesterday, after a near-unanimous decision by the
Palestinian Legislative Council, President Arafat
approved a bill of amendments to the Palestinian
Authority Basic Law that creates the post of Prime
Minister and defines his powers.

The amendments to the Basic Law give the Prime
Minister a number of powers currently held by the
Palestinian Authority President, including appointing
or removing cabinet ministers and other senior
officials; convening and presiding over cabinet
meetings; and supervising the work of Palestinian
Authority ministries and other institutions, including
the Ministry of Interior, which is responsible for public
order and internal security.

With the political blessing of the Palestine
Liberation Organization's Central Council, he
nominated Mahmoud Abbas - Abu Mazen - to the
post of Prime Minister. Abu Mazen, a credible and
well-respected leader, now has up to five weeks to
present a new government to the Palestinian
Legislative Council for approval. Hopefully his
Government will be in place long before that.

I believe that President Arafat, the Palestinian
leadership and the Palestinian Legislative Council
deserve to be commended for this courageous and
Visionary step, and for the other reforms they have
undertaken, with full transparency and in close
cooperation and coordination with the international
community and the Quartet, which has kept in
particularly close contact with the Governments of
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan during this process.

Other key areas of reform were discussed in
London on 19 and 20 February at the Quartet's Task
Force on Palestinian Reform, which met at the capital
level, with the participation of the Quartet envoys. Its
overall assessment was that the Palestinian Authority
has made impressive progress in implementing reforms
under exceptionally difficult circumstances. Although
the Task Force remained very critical of the lack of
progress in the judicial sector, there was general
consensus that financial accountability and market
economy reforms continue to progress at a rapid pace.
Task Force members also commended the Palestinian
Authority for adopting a detailed and ambitious action
plan for public administration and civil service reform.

The Task Force noted that the reform process was
seriously hampered by Israeli mobility restrictions in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which both stymied its
progress and undermined its credibility. Task Force
members urged the Government of Israel to help
facilitate the reform process, while also reiterating that
it must minimize the impact of its security measures on
the civilian population.
The Palestinian Authority has started taking
important decisions to restart negotiations. Now it is
the turn of both Israel and the international community.
Quite simply, Israel and the Palestinian Authority must
return to the table in a negotiating framework with the
Quartet road map as its starting point. Israel must also
look at ways to ease the massive burden on the
Palestinian civilian population in the West Bank and
Gaza.

As members of the Council are aware, Prime
Minister Sharon's Government was sworn in on 27
February. The Prime Minister's new coalition brings
together the Likud, Shinui, National Union and
National Religious parties.

No one underestimates the challenges facing
Israel at this juncture in its history. Terrorism is still
murdering innocent men, women and children in
Israel's streets. Against the backdrop of violence and
instability, the Israeli economy is in distress, with
rising unemployment and increasing social problems,
particularly for the poor.

I commend the Prime Minister for standing by his
stated commitment to the Vision of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security,
as outlined in President Bush's statement of 24 June
2002. It is towards achieving that Vision that we now
must turn. Recent conversations I have had with senior
Israeli interlocutors clearly show that there is now a
will to go back to the table.

With war in Iraq even more likely - perhaps
almost here - it is imperative that the members of this
Council demonstrate to the peoples of the region and of
the world that their ultimate goal in the Middle East is
peace. In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict we must not be
blind to or underestimate the challenges that lie ahead,

particularly on the security front. But a door has
opened, and we must now walk through it.

I believe that President Bush's announcement last
Friday that the Quartet will present the road map to the
parties as soon as a credible and empowered Prime
Minister is confirmed is an important step on which we
must build. The development of the road map has been
a lengthy and meticulous process. It began with the
Quartet Principals' meeting in New York last
September at the Secretary-General's initiative and in
his office.

In that meeting, we decided that we should, in
operational terms, spell out reciprocal steps to be taken
by the parties in each of its phases. A key guiding
principle was the Secretary-General's conceptual
distinction between parallelism and sequentialism. No
longer could we move through a process based on
sequentialism. We had to pursue progress across the
board and in parallel on all issues - security,
economic and political. Critically, as we have seen so
many times, no ceasefire can take hold if political
progress and economic suffering are not
simultaneously addressed.

Under the road map and under the auspices of the
Quartet, progress would be monitored and assessed on
the basis of the parties' compliance with specific
performance benchmarks. For more than a year, the
Quartet has engaged in extensive consultations on
developing the road map. Most of this has been
internal, but the Quartet has also engaged the
Government of Israel, the Palestinian Authority, other
Governments in the region and key international
players. I believe that the text that ultimately emerged
from the Quartet's meetings in December 2002 in
Washington, DC, represents a finely tuned balance
between the interests and capacities of all concerned
parties.

A number of features of the road map are
essential to its successful implementation. As the
Secretary-General has repeatedly observed, every
attempt to implement a sequential approach over the
past two years has failed. So, first and foremost, the
road map sets out reciprocal obligations for Israelis and
Palestinians that they must implement in parallel.

The road map requires immediate action by both
sides. The Palestinian Authority must not only declare
an unequivocal end to violence and terrorism, but also
undertake visible efforts on the ground to prevent
violent attacks on Israelis anywhere. At the same time,
the Government of Israel must end actions that
undermine trust, such as proactive security operations,
attacks on civilians, confiscation and demolition of
Palestinian homes and property, and other measures
specified in the Tenet plan. Israel must also
immediately dismantle settlement outposts erected
since March 2001 and, consistent with the Mitchell
report, freeze all settlement activity, including natural
growth.

A second new and critical feature of the road map
is that it clearly defines our final destination. In
accordance with Security Council resolution 1397
(2002), the final negotiated settlement will result in the
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours. The
settlement will resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
and end the occupation that began in 1967 - a vital
element of international efforts to promote
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. In addition,
because only a comprehensive peace can bring
stability, security and prosperity to the region, the other
tracks of the Middle East peace process will be
revived. This will also been done in parallel, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

Despite the continued distrust between the two
sides, I am confident that there is now mutual
recognition of the many imperatives that compel them
to embrace a peace process once again. I strongly
believe that it is in their mutual self-interest never to
lose sight of the need to forge a common vision of their
future. The road map defines that Vision and the steps
needed to achieve it.

To be sure, many details still need to be worked
out. We welcome the parties' ideas about how best to
implement their obligations and how the Quartet and
others can assist them. But first we must begin. And
the only way to begin, as President Bush and Prime
Minister Blair emphasized last Friday, is for the parties
to move beyond entrenched positions and to take
concrete actions to achieve peace.

Despite a number of concerns, the Palestinians
have accepted the road map without reservations. I
trust that, faced with this extraordinary opportunity to
put an end to the misery and insecurity of the past two
years, the Government of Israel will shortly do the
same. This would allow the parties to move forward in
a dialogue that would produce consensus on how to
implement the Quartet's road map. The Quartet stands
ready to support such a development with all necessary
measures.

Let me move now to developments on the Israeli-
Lebanese front. Since our last briefing to the Security
Council, the situation along the Blue Line has remained
tense but stable. However, I note with concern recent
Israeli air Violations and Hizbullah anti-aircraft fire
directed across the Blue Line. The Government of
Lebanon continued to strengthen its presence in the
south, with increased patrolling by the Lebanese armed
forces and the joint security forces in southern Lebanon
and in areas close to the Blue Line. I choose to
interpret this as a reflection of a commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to ensuring a calm
environment in the south.
Given the high level of tension in the region, any
provocative action along or across the Blue Line at this
time, such as air violations and anti-aircraft fire, could
rapidly deteriorate into a destabilizing dynamic. I call
on all parties concerned to maintain maximum restraint
and avoid any action that could be interpreted by other
parties as hostile. This is of particular concern and
importance at a time when the region might go into a
period of further instability and unpredictability.

The situation on the Golan Heights has remained
calm since our last briefing. The importance of
continued respect for the terms and spirit of the
Disengagement Agreement cannot be overstated. Both
Israel and Syria have proven, over more than two
decades, their ability and their desire to respect their
mutual commitments. Although the Disengagement
Agreement is limited in scope, full respect for its terms
stands as proof that agreements can be, and indeed are,
respected in the Middle East. This lesson should
contribute to building trust between the two parties
when, in accordance with the road map, they resume
negotiations to implement resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and to build a comprehensive peace in the
region.

I hope the Council will forgive me for taking so
much of its time, while other issues loom so large on
its agenda. It is the nature of politics - particularly, I
fear, in the Middle East - that fires break out all at
once. As we move towards war in one part of the
region, I trust we will not miss this opportunity to
move towards peace in another.

In closing, I reiterate that for the first time in two
and-a-half years, I see a small window of opportunity
to get back to the table, and out of the abyss of
terrorism, violence, economic misery and general
human suffering. To seize that opportunity, three
critical steps are nearing completion.

The Palestinian step has been to appoint a
credible and empowered Prime Minister, which once
again can make the Palestinian Authority a partner for
peace at the negotiating table. The international step
has been buoyed by the decision of the United States to
join the three other Quartet partners in agreeing to
present the road map to the parties and to call for its
implementation. The third and equally important step is
the Government of Israel's return to the negotiating
table. It has already reaffirmed its commitment to the
two-State solution, which is embedded in the road map,
and has expressed willingness to go back to the table to
seek a peaceful solution based on those goals.
Without a political, negotiated settlement based
on the road map and the two-State solution there will
be neither security nor stability in the Middle East. We
have a historic opportunity to establish a vigorous and
determined front of peace when elsewhere in the region
we are at the brink of war. That front of peace can be a
source of long-term stability in the region. However,
that requires dedicated attention and action from all of
us. Without that, I fear, this opportunity will be lost.

