Mr. Polyanskiy (The Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Jiirg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their detailed briefings.
I want to begin with a few words about the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837) presented to the
meeting today. I have to admit that we were stunned
at the conspicuous speed with which it was prepared.
The Secretariat's willingness to incur extra costs is
particularly striking in the light of the current financial
difficulties of the United Nations, which the Secretary-
General has been anxiously pointing out to us. In future
we urge the Secretariat to adhere firmly to the Council's
resolutions and not to permit this type of extravagance.

Turning to the substance of the report, we were
pleased that the security situation in Burundi has
essentially remained unchanged since the holding of the
informal interactive dialogue on Burundi at the end of
August. The situation has continued relatively calm and
is showing signs of stabilizing. The voluntary return
of refugees continues. In that regard, we welcomed the
signing in August of an intergovernmental agreement
with Tanzania on repatriating Burundian citizens
from there.

We note that the Burundian authorities are
continuing to take steps to prepare for the country's
central political event, the forthcoming presidential,
parliamentary and regional elections to be held in
May 2020. The electoral timetable has been agreed
on and is being respected, funds for the elections have
been allocated from the national budget and the list of
political parties registered to participate is growing.
We welcomed the August and September meetings held
by Burundi's First Vice-President and Minister of the
Interior with political-party and regional leaders on
the preparation for the elections. We were especially
pleased with the participation in the meetings of
representatives of opposition parties, including the
Congres national pour la liberte'. We also think that the
public awareness campaign being conducted by the Chair
of the Independent National Electoral Commission is
helpful, and we urge Burundi's leadership to continue
such efforts.

With respect to the incidents of violence detailed in
the report, I would like to point out that in the interests
of a more object portrayal of the situation, it would be
appropriate to cite and consider the relevant statistics
in the context of the situation rather than describing
individual violations of human rights, an approach that
would make the current trends seem less gloomy.

The primary reason for the dispute between
Burundi's political forces long ago ceased to be an issue
with President Nkurunziza's repeated announcements
that he will not stand as a candidate in the forthcoming
elections, while the ruling party, the Conseil national
pour la defense de la democratie-Forces pour la defense
de la democratie, intends to announce its candidate
early in 2020. We are pleased that the Burundian
Government has taken steps to establish a dialogue
with the opposition, and in that regard we welcome
the meetings held in Nairobi and Bujumbura with
representatives of the exiled opposition platform, the
Conseil national pour le respect de l'Accord d'Arusha
pour la paix et la reconciliation au Burundi et la
restauration de l'etat de droit.

We once again call for respect for Burundi's
sovereignty. The Russian Federation is categorically
opposed to interference in its domestic affairs and
especially in the context of elections. It is our belief
that what the Government of Burundi needs most right
now is support for its efforts on the socioeconomic
front. In that regard, we welcome the steps taken
based on the approach of the country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
implementation of Bujumbura's 2018-2027 national
development plan. In our view, further progress in that
direction could help to restore economic assistance
to Burundi in full accord with the calls made at the
African Union Summits in Nouakchott in July 2018
and in Addis Ababa in February of this year, especially
given that our African colleagues consider the measures
taken to exert economic influence on Bujumbura to be
equivalent to sanctions.

In general, we continue to believe that the Security
Council's continued intense focus on Burundi is
counterproductive and that it is high time it was taken
off the Council's already overburdened agenda.

