Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain, and the
Spanish presidency for organizing today's important
open debate. We would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Jan
Eliasson; the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Kim Won-soo; and Mr. Brian Finlay and
Mr. James Min for their statements. We would also
like to congratulate the delegation of Spain and its
team, and specifically Ambassador Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi, for the excellent work they have done at the
healm of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Over the past two
years, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi has shown
incredible leadership in moving forward the work of
that Committee. We also want to congratulate Spain for
the successful and transparent negotiation proces that
led to the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) today, of
which we are a co-sponsor.

The threat ofthe use ofweapons ofmass destruction
by non-State actors is a source of deep concern to the
international community, in particular given the use
of chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria by Da'esh.
Those risks are increasing, given the fact that over
the past 12 years there have been rapid developments
in new technologies. While such new technologies
may improve the quality of life of the world's
population and generate prosperity and well-being, it
is worth noting the extent to which they can be used
by non-State actors, including terrorists, to maximize
their capacity to produce, acquire, transfer, transport
and use weapons of mass destruction. All those new
technologies share a series of characteristics that
make them particularly dangerous. They are dual-use
technologies and can be used for non-war purposes, but
also for perverse purposes.

It is also worth noting that, thanks to the growth
of international trade and digitalization, such new
technologies are becoming more widely disseminated.
The risk is greater when Governments, intelligence
services and large technology corporations allow
the flow or transfer of such technologies to violent
non-State actors. That is why the adoption of resolution
2325 (2016) is so important to reducing that risk.

Drones are among the technologies that have seen
significant development in recent years. The drone
industry has developed at such a rapid rate that the
old regulations restricting the proliferation of such
devices have become obsolete. Even in their military
applications, they have become an instrument making
it possible to Violate the sovereignty of countries and to
secretly carry out military operations and select attacks.

In addition, the drones that are currently being used
for civilian purposes can also be used to disperse deadly
chemical and biological agents. With the development
of new drones that have the capacity to carry more
weight, we can imagine the increased use of drones
as improvised aerial explosive devices by non-State
actors. In fact, we know that the Islamic State already
has drones, and it is using them to carry out sporadic
attacks on the ground.

Among those technologies, there is also the so-
called dark web, with hundreds of millions ofweb pages
that are beyond the reach of common citizens and are
being used by big corporations, intelligence services and
State actors, among others. The information available
in that network, which is used to host multiple markets
for illegal goods, including weapons and chemical
and biological substances, includes information that
violates countries' security.

Moreover, in taking into account that the deep
Web allows for a variety of non-State actors, including
terrorists, to communicate among themselves securely
and exchange goods and services, we realize that we
are facing a dangerous vehicle for the use of weapons
of mass destruction. Unfortunately, non-State actors,
as well as certain Powers and intelligence services,
continue to use information and communications
technologies to promote the destabilization and
overthrow of Governments through the Internet,
which is conducive to the proliferation and expansion
of terrorist groups, such as Da'esh and others. The
international community must therefore strengthen
measures to prevent information and communication
technologies from being used for purposes contrary to
international peace and security and development, in
the understanding that this effort would not impinge in
any way on right to freedom of expression and opinion
in a responsible manner and in accordance with relevant
international legal instruments.

We are convinced that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) can be
truly effective only to the extent that it contributes to
the development and strengthening of the capacities of
all States rather than only those of a privileged few,
and to the strengthening of mechanisms of interaction
and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. Technical and financial assistance
that has been requested by States is the main pillar of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we must work together to
ensure that it is truly in sync with the needs of countries,
particularly those of developing countries.

However, it is important to bear in mind that
resolution 1540 (2004) is only one element of the
architecture of the non-proliferation regime and the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction that
complements the legal framework in the area originating
from the relevant conventions such as the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction.

Despite such progress in that area, further
efforts are needed to strengthen the agenda of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
in order to prevent terrorist groups from using those
systems. The development, stockpiling, production
and use of chemical and biological weapons were
banned by the international community many years
ago. Nevertheless, to date we do not have a similar
convention in the nuclear domain. In that regard, it is
necessary to point out that the most effective measure
to prevent nuclear weapons from reaching the hands of
Violent non-State actors, including terrorist groups, is
through the complete elimination of such nuclear arms.

Latin America and the Caribbean have championed
the cause of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament, as attested to by their status as the first
nuclear-weapon-free zone in a populated part of the
world, as stipulated in the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean,
known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco, ratified in 1967, as
well as its declaration as a zone of peace made during
the second Summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States in Havana in 2014.

All ofthat underscores the firm commitment ofLatin
American and Caribbean countries to disarmament
with the goal of contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore believe
that this debate is of particular importance in moving
forward the work in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation wherein multilateral diplomacy has
been affected by the lack of concrete progress. In
that regard, we hope that in the near future a nuclear-
weapon-fee zone can be established in the Middle East
given the political and military complexity of that
region in particular.

In conclusion, we point out that, as we have
been able to ban chemical and biological weapons,
and as we continue to work together to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction never fall into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, we must
not let up in our efforts to achieve the prohibition of
nuclear weapons. We - and, in particular, nuclear-
weapon States and those who have not acceded to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty - must all commit
to adopting a convention that prohibits, once and for
all, the development, stockpiling, production and use of
these weapons of mass destruction.

