Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative Brahimi for his detailed briefing. We
are very happy to welcome him today, as we look to the
next phase of the international community's
involvement in Afghanistan. My delegation thanks
him, and through him the United Nations staff in
Afghanistan, for the immense sustained contribution
that the United Nations has made in helping to restore
hope and confidence in Afghanistan. There is now a
hardening foundation on which we will all continue to
build.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the situation
(S/2002/737), in which he lays out very clearly the
challenges we now face. My delegation associates
itself fully with the statement to be made shortly by the
Permanent Representative of Denmark on behalf of the
European Union.

The Bonn Agreement achieved by Afghan
representatives just last December crossed a critical
threshold at a time when Afghanistan approached
collapsing into total chaos. Chairman, now President,
Karzai, and the Interim Authority then began the very
difficult work of coordinating the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, including the establishment of political
institutions and the creation of a process designed,
historically, to allow ordinary Afghans to express their
views. These are serious achievements, when we recall
where we were in Afghanistan last autumn.

While there may have been some imperfections in
the Loya Jirga process, imperfections from which we
must all learn, the simple fact that the Loya Jirga took
place at all, and that it produced a clear outcome, is a
testament to the will of the overwhelming majority in
Afghanistan to break with the past and to begin the
development of a political framework for an inclusive
and multi-ethnic society.

It is essential now that the Transitional
Administration extend its authority throughout
Afghanistan, enhancing its legitimacy and
demonstrating to people throughout Afghanistan the
dividend for all that peace can bring.

Notwithstanding the positive outcome of the
Emergency Loya Jirga, there are watchful elements in
Afghanistan who may still retain calculations of
personal advantage in their favour from their various
angles, but with the collective effect of sustaining
disruptive action against the building of a real and
lasting peace in the country. We must ensure that such
calculations have no prospect of success.

We condemn unreservedly the assassination of
Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir. That brutal tragedy
marked a palpable spasm in Afghanistan's evolving
political process. But we are very encouraged by the
tenacious calm among a people who have refused to
play into the calculating hands of the assassins. The
Transitional Administration must now conduct a full
and transparent inquiry into the assassination. The
bringing to justice of the perpetrators, if it can be done,
would calm the concerns of ordinary Afghans who
continue to worry more broadly that their country may
slip back into the pattern of violence that has proved so
destructive over several decades.

Other high-profile acts of political violence must
also be fully investigated, including the death of the
Minister for Civil Aviation and Tourism last February.
In Afghanistan, as elsewhere, violence and impunity
must be faced head-on by the weight of international
legal, moral and political standards and authority. The
Transitional Administration marks an extremely
important step on the road to a more representative
form of government for Afghanistan. The Afghan
people have been given a political voice again, after
too long a silence. It is vital that their views and ideas
be listened to and absorbed as we move toward the
preparation of the elections to be held in 18 months.

The Loya Jirga gave a particular opportunity to
women to participate in the political process again.
While this may have been a small step forward, it is,
nonetheless, a measurable and significant one. We look
forward to substantive participation by women in the
consultation process leading to elections.

Now that the Loya Jirga process has reached a
successful conclusion, it is crucial that donors fulfil
their commitment to Afghanistan, particularly through
the early disbursement of pledges made at the Tokyo
Conference. Afghanistan's ongoing needs remain
acute, and disbursements now lag well behind pledges,
as Mr. Brahimi has pointed out. Ireland has already
disbursed nearly half of its Tokyo Conference pledge
of 12 million euros, a commitment spread over a
number of years, in addition to over 2 million euros in
emergency assistance so far this year. The
disbursement of reconstruction assistance in a timely
manner is essential if the people of Afghanistan are to
see the dividend of peace. As Lakhdar Brahimi has said
on many previous occasions, if the international
community does not now disburse promptly the
millions already committed, the billions for the future
will not come into meaningful play.

Beyond the massive project of reconstructing
Afghanistan, there are also continuing acute
humanitarian needs in the country, which must remain
a donor priority. Funding shortfalls have had a real
impact on the work of the United Nations and other
agencies, such as the World Food Programme, and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, whose exceptional achievements thus far
will count for little in the future without sustained
funding.

There are continued and very heartening reports
regarding the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes, with more than 1.2
million refugees returning to Afghanistan this year.
However, funding shortfalls are jeopardizing assistance
for those who are now returning, and who, on current
projections, will continue to return in very large
numbers in the coming months.

Ireland has now made a contribution to the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). The
deployment of ISAF has had a profound impact on
security in Kabul and its surroundings, an impact that
was seen even before the force was fully deployed. The
presence of ISAF has been an important pillar in the
commencement of the reconstruction enterprise.
However, the security situation, as Special
Representative Brahimi made clear this morning,
remains much more fragile in other parts of
Afghanistan, and in particular in the north of the
country. The wider insecurity is placing the relief and
reconstruction effort in real jeopardy, in the considered
judgement of Mr. Brahimi.

We condemn unreservedly attacks committed
against international aid organizations in recent weeks,
including the horrific attack on a female aid worker.
We call on the Transitional Administration and the
local leadership to take concrete measures now to
combat such attacks.

On a more general note, it is important that the
benefits of stability, including reconstruction, be
experienced throughout Afghanistan. We are grateful to
the United Kingdom for leading as the lead nation in
ISAF over the first six months of its life. We are very
grateful also to Turkey for assuming the role of lead
nation in ISAF. We look forward to continued
cooperation with Turkey and with the other ISAF
participants that have ensured the success of the force
to date.

We welcome the meeting which took place in
Paris last week, in the G-8-plus format, which provided
a valuable opportunity to assess the state of play in a
number of key security sectors. We are very grateful to
the lead nations, as well as to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for their
work across a wide variety of areas. Like many others,
we remain concerned at the low level of participation
in some army training programmes, which pushes
further back the point at which an inclusive Afghan
national army can begin to take responsibility for the
country's security needs.

We look forward to further details arising from
sector-specific meetings in Kabul, and we welcome the
United Kingdom's initiative in convening a meeting on
drug control next week in Kabul. As Special
Representative Brahimi has made abundantly clear this
morning, there are great challenges ahead, as the
transitional Government embarks on its work, and as
the reconstruction of Afghanistan begins in earnest.
None of us underestimate these challenges; nor do we
underestimate the continued danger of possible reversal
of Afghanistan's present course. We must continue to
reassert our continued commitment to Afghanistan,
with the shared objective of together breaking with the
past, and together building a peaceful, stable
Afghanistan to the benefit of its people and the other
peoples of the region.

