Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Mr. President, let me thank
your delegation, and you personally, for the efforts you
have put into this exercise to complete the resolution which
we have adopted today.

As I have stated an previous occasions, my delegation
would have preferred a unanimous Council decision on the
important, complex and politically charged issue of Iraq.
Our main concern remains the implementability of a
resolution passed by a divided Council. There was indeed
an excellent opportunity to achieve consensus, since we
were privileged to have the recommendations in the panel
reports which were prepared by Ambassador Amorim of
Brazil. However, as has been proved today, there still
remain some unsurmountable differences among Council
members. These, in the view of my delegation, could also
have been resolved had the necessary political will existed
among the permanent five.

Of equal concern to my delegation was the fact that
the Council, for close to a year now, has not been able to
assert itself on the Iraqi problem, with the result that some
crucial issues were not attended to. Henceforth, we prefer
that the issue of Iraq be taken care of in the Council, and
by all Council members, in terms of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Having said that, my delegation voted in favour of
today's resolution because it represents a vast improvement
over the situation from where the Council started nearly a
year ago, and it addresses most of the outstanding issues on
Iraq in a comprehensive manner while taking into account
a large percentage of the panel recommendations.

The resolution furthermore provides, with regard to
disarmament issues, a road map which can ensure the total
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction and the
suspension and eventual lifting of sanctions. The resolution
also takes care of the most essential humanitarian concerns
to my delegation, such as the Kuwaiti issues in section B,
and especially the issue of the missing persons and
prisoners of war, whose family members are eagerly
waiting for justice to be done. Furthermore, the provisions
of section C will go a long way towards addressing the
material needs of the Iraqi people, since the oil-for-food
programme could not, on its own, address all essential
needs.

Finally, my delegation sincerely hopes that this
resolution will allow the Council to re-establish a
relationship of cooperation and engagement with Iraq and
to discourage any possible unilateral action by Member
States against it. The resolution should allow us to close
this unfortunate chapter for good, so that Iraq can
eventually take its rightful place in the international
community.

