Ms. Pierce (United States of America): We thank
President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
briefings. We appreciate the work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
tireless dedication of its judges, attorneys and staff.

We also thank President Agius for his leadership
over the last six months. His stated priorities of ensuring
timely and efficient proceedings, while ensuring
fair trials for defendants, harmonizing operations at
the Arusha and The Hague branches and fostering
a positive work environment are very welcome. We
particularly commend President Agius' commitment
to taking action on allegations of sexual harassment
and discrimination at the Mechanism. We are also
encouraged by the announcement of a new approach to
early releases, which will allow for consultation with
stakeholders to increase transparency and allow for
the consideration of the full impact of a decision on
early releases.

The ongoing work of the mechanism includes very
important cases, including the appellate proceedings
in the Mladie case, the ongoing Stanisie and Simatovic'
trial, and pre-trial proceedings for Turinabo et al. We
should also take a moment to highlight the ruling of
the Appeals Chamber regarding Radovan Karadzic'
in March, upholding his convictions for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, because we
are just one week past the anniversary of the genocide
in Srebrenica.

Twenty-four years ago, after 30,000 Bosnian
Muslim women, children and elderly men were forcibly
removed from Srebrenica, more than 8,000 men and
boys were murdered. The Appeals Chamber upheld the
Trial Chamber's determination that these murders - the
largest mass killing in Europe since the Second World
War - were the direct result of the decision made by
Karadzie and his accomplices to destroy the Bosnian
Muslims of Srebrenica. To accomplish these evil ends,
Karadzie and others first engaged in a propaganda
campaign to depict Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian
Croats as enemies of the Serbs, exploiting distrust
and suspicion to create the kind of climate in which
genocide became possible.

It is because we continue to live in the shadow ofthat
crime that we are deeply alarmed when we see convicted
war criminals being glorified and unscrupulous leaders
rewriting historical events. Those who deny the truth,
manufacture distrust in the institutions of justice, deny
the common humanity of their neighbours and exploit
the pain of victims for their own purposes must be
condemned. We do a grave injustice to those who lost
their lives when we are silent in the face of the politics
of division and hatred. Although Karadzie hid for over
a decade, the fact that he was found and prosecuted is
a powerful testament to the courage of the victims who
testified and their devotion to justice.

But the burden is not on victims to bring justice to
those who perpetrated crimes against them, but rather
on States. We applaud the Mechanism's continued
search for the eight Rwandans still wanted for their
roles in the 1994 genocide, twenty-five years ago.
These individuals are accused of being responsible for
some of the most appalling acts of our time: Felicien
Kabuga, who allegedly financed the genocide; Protais
Mpiranya, who led the Presidential Guard battalion and
is accused of being responsible for the killing of many
moderate politicians and United Nations peacekeepers;
and Augustin Bizimana, who led the Ministry of
Defence. These men and five others remain at large and
it is all of our responsibility to bring them to justice.

Since 1998, the United States has offered financial

rewards for information leading to the arrests of
Rwandan indictees and fugitives from the former
Yugoslavia. We continue to offer up to $5 million for
any information leading to the arrests of these eight
individuals. Let this and the Karadzic' case be a message
to them. We will not stop looking.

If there is anything all States need to stand behind,
it is justice for Victims of genocide. We welcome South
Africa's stated commitment to cooperating fully with
the Mechanism, but we were disappointed to hear that
it had not yet taken action on the Mechanism's requests.
We urge the Government to coordinate closely with the
Mechanism in the search for fugitives.

Finally, this is a transition phase for the Mechanism
as its role ensuring accountability winds down.
The responsibility increasingly lies with national
authorities to finish the task of prosecuting remaining
cases. Just as the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda were pioneers in international criminal
law, the Mechanism is a trailblazer now, showing how
knowledge and skills can be transferred to national
jurisdictions. We also commend the Mechanism's work
to build capacity in national judiciaries in Africa and in
the former Yugoslavia in order to build new generations
of attorneys able to prosecute atrocity crimes in their
own systems.

As the Prosecutor reported, the Mechanism
has received an unprecedented number of requests
for assistance. This demonstrates its immense and
ongoing value in national systems. The United States
would like to emphasize its continued commitment to
accountability for perpetrators and justice for victims.
We will continue to remember those who lost their
lives in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia and stand
with their families and communities in their efforts to
attain justice.

