Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate your having organized this session,
Madam President, and we thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his opening remarks. We also thank the representative
of Israel and the observer of Palestine for their
statements.

Given that the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, is a topic on our
agenda each month, one could argue that it is becoming
increasingly difficult to say something original by
comparison to what was said in the preceding meeting
or the one before that. On the other hand, the landscape
has evolved so rapidly in the past few years and with
such conflicting trends and manifestations that we have
come to accept that we are justified in frequently
revisiting this topic. The fact that we have met on two
occasions over the weekend in the past 10 days to
consider the case of Syria is proof of that.

Indeed, Syria is very much on our minds when
we consider the Middle East today. But of course, we
cannot consider that country in an isolated manner. The
so-called Arab Spring, which is looking ever less like
the image of spring, has revealed the tendency for
events in any single country to rapidly spill over to its
neighbours. It has also shown its capacity to divide the
international community and even the League of Arab
States, not only on the interpretation of events, but also
on how to react to situations that clearly threaten to
spin out of control.

In a way, the reality in the Middle East today
surpasses any possible attempt at fiction. It includes
several ingredients: grassroots movements rebelling
against authoritarian Governments in the old mold,
while the latter use methods of repression that are
vestiges of the past; the threat of ancestral rivalries of
an ethnic or religious nature that not only run counter
to contemporary values such as tolerance, coexistence
and solidarity, but also have the potential to rapidly
spread throughout the region; and, on the positive side,
the awakening of the League of Arab States, which
assessed early on the importance of what was at stake
and found in its movement the capacity to respond -
albeit weakly - to the challenge. When we add to
these elements the often sidelined demand of the
Palestinian people for a homeland and the spectre of a
new danger in the region in the near future with the
possible introduction of weapons of mass destruction,
the potentially explosive nature of events in that part of
the world can be clearly understood.

Who could doubt that these are tangible threats to
international peace and security? Who could doubt that
this matter falls under the mandate of the Council? And
who could doubt that the complex landscape also offers
multiple opportunities for the Council to exercise that
mandate in a positive manner, contributing, together
with the stakeholders in the region, to finding ways to
overcome the crises - including through the two-State
solution, leading to the creation of the State of
Palestine - and achieving the vision of a more
prosperous, more democratic and more inclusive
region, free of the current serious tensions that afflict
it?

Naturally, neither my delegation nor, I suspect,
any delegation sitting around this table has holistic
solutions to address such deeply rooted tensions in a
highly heterogeneous region where each country is a
special case. However, united, and in particular by
partnering with the League of Arab States, we can
make our small contribution to, first, ensuring that the
existing crises do not blow up in our faces, and,
secondly, offering ideas and perhaps concrete
mechanisms that will assist the countries directly
involved in finding their own way.

Guatemala has presented its detailed position on
the various subjects related to the Middle East: the
situation between Israel and Palestine, the situation
between Israel and its other neighbours, the situation in
Lebanon, and the situation in half a dozen other
sovereign States. It is unnecessary to repeat our
specific position on each of these matters on every
occasion. That is why we have focused our remarks
today along more general lines. However, I conclude
by reaffirming what I said at the beginning. We accept
that the agenda item of the situation in the Middle East
clearly justifies our constant follow-up.

