Mr. Aman (Malaysia): Mr. President, through you,
I wish to express my delegation's appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Somalia, for his
presence and for his briefing, which we heard with great
interest. I also wish to thank Ms. Susanna Malcorra,
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas Kay
and Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union, for their respective briefings, which
were informative and helpful.

I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
tireless dedication and efforts of the men and women
serving in Somalia under the United Nations banner and
in the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
We honour their bravery, sacrifice and selfless service
as we do the bravery, sacrifice and selfless service of
the Somali national security forces. The unflagging
commitment to and sacrifices made in providing
support and assistance to the Government and the
people of Somalia are a shining example of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
fully in line with the highest ideals of the United
Nations as enshrined in the Charter.

Your presence here today, Mr. President,
demonstrates the United Kingdom's commitment to
Somalia, particularly in its development and transition
towards political and economic stability and to lasting
peace and security in the country and in the region as a
whole. Taking into account Somalia's troubled history,
its achievement to date of many significant milestones
in building a democratic and politically inclusive State
bodes well for the future. We are pleased to note and
commend the strong commitment and ongoing support
provided by a multitude of international partners and
stakeholders towards entrenching democratic norms,
good governance, including management of public
finances, justice and rule of law, and respect for human
rights as well as in addressing the acute humanitarian
and development needs of the country.

As a current member of the Council, Malaysia
has participated actively in ongoing deliberations on
how best we could collectively provide the necessary
assistance and support needed by Somalia, while being
fully mindful of the need to ensure that such efforts
remain fully Somali-owned and Somali-led. In addition
to resolution 2245 (2015) just adopted, the Security
Council has adopted this year alone resolutions 2244
(2015), 2232 (2015) and 2221 (2015), which attests to
the comprehensive and high level of Council's attention
on Somalia.

Such attention is not only appropriate, but also
absolutely critical to ensuring Somalia's continued
upward trajectory and in maintaining international
peace and security, particularly in the region of the
Horn of Africa. In this regard, we are heartened that
Somalia's State-formation processes, including the
establishment and operationalization of state and
regional administrations, could be concluded in 2015,
paving the way for the realization of Vision 2016.
Accordingly, we would urge all parties to conclude the
necessary arrangements for an inclusive, transparent
and credible electoral process.

We are also pleased to note that notable progress
has also been made on women's political participation
and leadership at national and local levels. We hope
that efforts to redress gender imbalance in political
representation are sustained. We are confident that,
with the full commitment and determination of all
leaders and relevant actors at the national level, coupled
with support from international and regional partners,
further key political and developmental milestones
could be achieved. Looking ahead, Malaysia believes
that future United Nations engagement with Somalia
should more closely involve the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. With the support of the
United Kingdom, we were pleased to have convened
an informal interactive dialogue of the Council with
Somali Government representatives, the Peacebuilding
Council (PBC) and United Nations system actors
during Malaysia's presidency in June 2015. We are
convinced that there is much scope for enhancing
complementarity between the Council and the PBC,
including on Somalia.

While noting the many significant and positive
gains made thus far, one key challenge which threatens
to derail the progress achieved to date is the prevailing
security threat. At the forefront of such threat is, of
course, Al-Shabaab. While significant headway has
been made in degrading Al-Shabaab's capabilities,
it retains a significant ability to inflict death and
destruction, as was seen in its recent attack on the
Sahafi Hotel earlier this month.

We wish to stress that the fight against terrorism
cannot be won through the force of arms alone. We
therefore continue to advocate a comprehensive strategy
of winning hearts and minds, not only of perpetrators
but perhaps more critically, of their support bases
within the civilian population. At this delicate stage
of transition, it is important that public trust and
confidence in national security institutions and actors
be maintained. Malaysia believes that political leaders
at the national and local levels, working in close
coordination and collaboration with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), AMISOM
and the Somali national security forces, are best placed
to take the lead in this regard.

A related area ofworry is the protection of civilians.
We remain concerned by reports of allegations of
continuing human rights violations and abuses,
particularly against women and children. We urge the
relevant authorities to investigate such allegations and
ensure that perpetrators are held to account. At the
same time, we greatly appreciate the ongoing efforts
by United Nations actors on the ground, particularly
UNICEF and UNSOM, in promoting awareness and
mainstreaming the issue of child protection in the
policies and activities of the Somali National Army. We
commend the Federal Government's commitment and
determination to end and prevent recruitment and use
of children by national security forces.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
fragile, due in part to the volatile security situation
and domestic economic challenges that exacerbate
the difficulties observed in delivering humanitarian
assistance across large parts of the country. The
conflict in Yemen has also placed additional stresses
on the humanitarian infrastructure in Somalia.

Despite having only modest resources and
capabilities, since the early 19905, when we first
contributed troops to the United Nations Operation
in Somalia 11, Malaysia has supported and assisted
Somalia; it continues to do so today. To date, Malaysia
has undertaken a number of development initiatives in
Somalia, including projects to refurbish and upgrade
existing wells as well as to install water pumps in remote
areas in order to supply clean water to approximately
20,000 people. We have also disbursed financial and
in-kind contributions to schools for disabled children,
internally displaced persons, orphanages and the
Somali National Eye Centre.

Recently, the Malaysian non-governmental
organization, Perdana Global Peace Foundation,
initiated a microcredit project aimed at empowering
women and single mothers to start their own small
businesses. In line with our commitment to South-South
cooperation, Malaysia continues to offer technical
assistance, including higher education scholarships,
to Somali nationals under the Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme. We stand ready to consider
providing tailored courses if so requested.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Malaysia's commitment to
working closely with all Council members, the Federal
Government of Somalia, the United Nations, the African
Union and the international community towards lasting
peace, security and development for Somalia.

