Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Speaking for
the first time in a formal meeting of the Security Council,
may I begin by joining others in welcoming you, Sir, to
your duties as President of the Council and expressing my
delegation's readiness to work closely with you during
your period in office. May I also take the opportunity to
express the thanks of my delegation to Ambassador
Martinez Blanco for his very effective conduct of
business during the month of July. May I also, on my
own personal account, express thanks to all the colleagues
around the table who have been good enough to express
words of personal welcome to me.

In voting in favour of this resolution, my delegation
warmly welcomes the progress which has been made so
far in consolidation of the cease-fire in Angola and
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. Much remains to
be done, but Angola is now closer to peace than seemed
possible even a short time ago. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the achievements of the
Secretary-General, whose useful visit to Angola last
month helped take the peace process forward, to his
Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, to the
personnel of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) and to those in the Government
of Angola and UNITA who are actively involved in
carrying forward the peace process.

The meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi on 6 May 1995 was a milestone in this process.
It is essential that the momentum generated by that
meeting be maintained at all levels. The parties need to
demonstrate their commitment both in high-level talks and
in action on the ground. We attach the greatest
importance to the avoidance of delays in the crucial areas
of troop disengagement, demining and the quartering of
former combatants. These are the essential, practical bases

 

for a lasting peace, and it is vital that work on them now be
carried forward promptly.

It is a source of satisfaction to my delegation that the
British logistics battalion with UNAVEM. III has been able
to play its part in establishing the infrastructure for the
Mission's deployment. Within UNAVEM. III, the battalion
and the civilian contractors who are to replace it are
working together to ensure a smooth hand-over. The first
infantry battalions are in place. It is important that
conditions be established as soon as possible for the full
deployment of the remaining infantry battalions. Further
delays would carry with them risks, and everything possible
must be done to avoid these.

I should like to make two further points. First, the
British Government has played a major part in humanitarian
relief in Angola. I should like to stress the importance we
attach to UNITA and the Government of Angola continuing
to cooperate fully with the international humanitarian relief
effort. Secondly, I should like to take this opportunity to
welcome the Secretary-General's proposal for an expansion
in the human rights component of UNAVEM. III. The
additional human rights observers will have an important
role to play in helping to ensure that basic rights are
respected. Their presence will underline our common goal
of achieving a stable, prosperous and democratic future for
the people of Angola.

