Mr. Griffiths: I accepted my assignment as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
began on 11 March. I approached it with gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his trust and a sense of privilege
that I might get the chance to do something to bring that
great tragedy to a belated end - a privilege coupled, I
hope, with due humility in the face of the complexity
and urgency of the challenge.

In the days since, those original feelings have, if
anything, become stronger. I have been privileged to
meet and to be guided by a wealth of Yemenis from all
the parties and many civic organizations. I have taken
up the time of leaders and listened just as eagerly to the
views of the less fortunate. As is always the case, from
my own experience, it has been the women whom I have
met who have often spoken with the greatest clarity, as
well as with the generosity that is necessary about those
they fear, as well as those they support.

Public comment on Yemen, like on any other
international tragedy, is copious and, sadly, often
vituperative. The rhetoric on Yemen is, perhaps
understandably, unforgiving and unsparing. I know, as
those present do, that peace becomes possible when we
see the good in our foes, even though we can see the
cruelties ofwar Clearly. My emphasis on listening to and
engaging Yemenis above all other priorities is not an
idle decision. We know that resolving Yemen's conflict
may come only from an agreement among its leaders to
put aside their differences and agree to deal with them
not through battle but through dialogue and debate. To
put Yemenis first, therefore, is not merely proper and
right; it is also the only way we will find peace.

In my experience of trying to resolve conflicts, I
have learned to take people at their word - to trust,
yes, but also to verify. We should take on trust the
assurances we hear, even as we know that the ultimate
test is what they will deliver in practice. So when I hear
positive words from one leader or another - which
are often instantly the cause of derision or scepticism
from the other side - my line is: let us take those good
words and put them to good use.

My report today is a preliminary one. I will
share what I know, and also what I fear. I will also
try to identify signs of hope. My plan is to put to the
Council within the next two months a framework
for negotiations. There is good news and bad news. I
apologize for that cliche, but it is the truth.

The good news - and it is my principal message to
the members of the Council today - is that a political
solution to bring an end to the war is indeed available. Its
outlines are no secret. They include the end of fighting,
the withdrawal of forces and the handover of heavy
weapons in key locations, along with an agreement
on the establishment of an inclusive Government that
brings the parties together in a consensus to build peace.
That can be done. All those with whom I spoke, from
the widest range of the Yemeni political spectrum, have
told me that they want that, that they want it quickly,
that they will work with the United Nations to achieve it
and that they are conscious ofthe consequence, as in all
agreements between enemies, that mutual concessions
will be required. Let me emphasize, however, that
a successful outcome of negotiations, which is never
to be guaranteed, will require patience, diligence and
good faith between the parties.

I have come to that general conclusion by listening
to the leaders of the parties. I have assured them that
what the Secretary-General wishes and what the Council
requires is also what all Yemenis want i a stable and
secure Yemen with a Government accountable to its
citizens. I am grateful to President Hadi for his time,
patience and willingness to put the concerns of his
people first. His Government has spared no effort to
ensure that I understand their positions, needs and
willingness to engage. I count on their support, which
is essential to the success of that endeavour.

I was also encouraged by my meeting with the
leadership of the Ansar Allah movement in Sana'a.
They assured me that their movement wants an end to
the war and will cooperate with the United Nations to
make that happen. That message was repeated to me in
several other encounters that I was privileged to have
with other senior Ansar Allah leaders. I am greatly
encouraged by that constructive attitude. I have heard
similar views from the leaders of an exceptionally wide
variety of Yemeni political parties, and I am grateful to
them, too.

I have not yet visited the south, but I have started to
meet with southern groups. The conflict, as members
of the Council can imagine, has brought about major
changes on the ground in the southern governorates,
and has made the long-standing frustrations and
aspirations of southerners more prominent. There will
be no peace in Yemen if we do not also listen to the
voices of the south and make sure that they are included
in the political arrangements that end the war.

It is no surprise that stopping a war is not at all the
same as building peace, and so it goes in Yemen. We
must first turn our energies to the business of stopping
the war. The parties necessary for that specific task are
those whose decisions can contribute to bringing an end
to the war. I have been consistent in delivering the same
message to them that that is the first task. A negotiated
political settlement through inclusive intra-Yemeni
dialogue is the only way to end the Yemeni conflict
and address the ongoing humanitarian crisis in an
ultimate form. To that end, all parties to the conflict
need to abandon preconditions to talks and grant my
Office unhindered, unconditional access to all relevant
stakeholders, as indeed the Council asserted in its latest
presidential statement on this subject, adopted in March
(S/PRST/ZOl8/5).

Building peace, however, will as always be
a larger task, based on different precedents and
broader participation. The national dialogue, with its
impressive record of inclusion and civic participation,
will be a decisive precedent. That will be the agenda
of transition - to include reconciliation, which is the
first item that requires our attention at the end of a
conflict, constitutional review, reconstruction and the
rebuilding of State institutions. It is therefore about
transforming the State. Making that work will require
the full involvement of civil society to ensure that the
process goes beyond politics and reflects the aspirations
of all Yemenis.

I said there was good news, but also bad news.
There is a saying that the darkest hour is the one that
comes before dawn. Let us hope that this is the case.
It will not be news to the members of the Council that
the war has, if anything, become louder and more
pressing over the last few weeks. I am concerned about
the increased number of ballistic missiles launched
towards Saudi Arabia, and I note that the Council has
already pronounced on that.

In addition, I am concerned about the intensified
military operations in Sa'dah governorate. Military
confrontations and air strikes have continued in
numerous other areas of Yemen, including Sana'a,
Taiz, Al-Jawf, Ma'rib, Al-Hudaydah, Hajjah, Al-Bayda
and Lahij governorates, The clashes continue without
major changes on the front lines, but with disturbing
reports of civilian casualties. We also - and this is of
great importance to us - hear unconfirmed reports
that movements of forces in Yemen are on the increase
and that the prospect of intensive military operations in
Al-Hudaydah, long heralded, may be soon forthcoming.
Our concern is simple - that any ofthose developments
would, at a single stroke, take peace off the table. I am
convinced that there is a real danger of that. We all
need urgently and creatively to find ways to diminish
the chances of those game-changing events upsetting
and derailing the very real hopes of the great majority
of Yemenis.

The people of Yemen are desperately in need of
signs of hope that the war will soon end. Apart from
the urgent requirement for unlimited humanitarian
access - as I am certain Mark Lowcock will mention
later - there are other measures that may provide some
hope. We have, for example, with the encouragement
of political leaders from all sides, been working to get
Sana'a airport reopened to air traffic and to ensure the
right of Yemenis to travel and rejoin their families. We
are also eager to arrange the release and exchange of
prisoners. Both sides have told me that they would like
to see all prisoners released. I am very encouraged by
that. We will do all we can to make it happen, and we
will report back to the Council on progress.

We are also very concerned about the issue of
detentions carried out by all sides. We know from
experience elsewhere that the arbitrary and widespread

detention of civilians in armed conflict is both a terrible
abuse and a fundamental impediment to the recovery of
a stable society and reconciliation, which is central to
peace. Those are important confidence-building issues.
Even more important is the heroic work being done
daily by humanitarian agencies in Yemen under the
leadership of Mark Lowcock and my good friend and
colleague Lise Grande.

The members of the Council know better than I do
the strategic importance of stability in Yemen. It is of
primary importance for its people, its neighbours and
the wider international community. It can be achieved
only by ensuring a stable Yemen where terrorist
activity can finally be focused upon and eliminated and
the safety of its sea lanes can be relied upon. Making
that happen requires an effective synergy between
mediation, in which I have a role, and diplomacy, in
which the Council does. Mediation without the backing
of diplomacy will certainly fail. We will do whatever
we can to find agreements that work among Yemenis,
but it is for the members of the Council and other
Member States, from time to time, to put the force of
international opinion behind such agreements, and the
Security Council's unity and resolve will be decisive.

