Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council on the situation in Syria, which
has further heightened the concerns of its members.

I would like to express, before the Council,
France's deep concern at the violent actions of the
Syrian authorities against civilian demonstrators. We
unreservedly condemn such unacceptable brutality,
which has already caused not only hundreds of deaths
among Syrian civilians, but also numerous
disappearances of demonstrators, journalists and
human rights activists. For the past three days, Dar'a
has been a city besieged by the Syrian army, deprived
of water, electricity and contact with outside world,
surrounded by tanks and threatened with heavy
artillery.

The memories of the bloody massacres of the
civilian population in Syria in the early 1980s, in
particular in Hama, are too painful for the international
community to silently stand by in the face of escalating
repression. Today, the Council must send a clear
message to the Syrian authorities that this
indiscriminate and brutal repression must stop
immediately. The Syrian authorities must respect the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the country's
citizens, particularly the right of peaceful protest and
freedom of the press. The arbitrary arrests must stop, as
must the restrictions being imposed on the media.

We call on the Syrian authorities to immediately
release prisoners of conscience. We support the
Secretary-General's appeal for an independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the crimes
that have been committed. Those who ordered and
perpetrated those acts should be held accountable for
their actions.

Only reforms responding to the legitimate
aspirations of the population will help to preserve the
country's stability, which is in the interest of all. Syria
plays a decisive role in regional stability. However, at
this stage, we cannot help noting that the lifting of the
state of emergency and other reforms announced by the
President have been followed by a contradictory
upsurge in violence. The Syrian people's call for
freedom, democracy and respect for their universal
rights must be heard by the Syrian authorities or,
failing that, by the Security Council.

If no positive developments unfold, France and
other countries will review a wide range of alternatives
for increasing pressure on the Syrian regime to stop the
repression and take steps towards reform. Strong
measures must be taken if these calls go unheeded. The
Human Rights Council is also seized of the matter, and
we trust that it will adopt a resolution at the close of its
special session on Friday.

