Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of this post of great
responsibility and to assure you of the Russian
delegation's readiness to cooperate fully with you. I
should also like to request the German delegation to
convey our gratitude to Ambassador Graf zu Rantzau for
his skilful leadership of the work of the Security Council
during the month of June.

Russia will abstain in the vote on the draft resolution
on extending the partial suspension of sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia because it believes
that the draft resolution's contents can hardly be
considered an appropriate way of encouraging a
constructive policy on the part of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in the matter of a peaceful settlement.

Suffice it to recall the past history of this question.
In August 1994, the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia decided voluntarily - I repeat,
voluntarily - to close its border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina to all goods except humanitarian supplies

 

and requested the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia to deploy on the border an international Mission
to assist in the implementation of this decision. In response
to this courageous and difficult step, the Security Council
adopted resolution 943 (1994) which, as an act of political
encouragement to Belgrade, provided for the lifting of
certain measures of - let us be frank - symbolic rather
than real economic significance.

The time that has elapsed since the adoption of that
resolution has fully and totally confirmed that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is playing a positive role in
connection with the situation in the former Yugoslavia.
This, incidentally, was recently demonstrated in the
dramatic situation involving the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) hostages.

As is clear from the most recent report of the Co-
Chairmen of the ICFY (S/l995/510), the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitment to close the border with the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The cooperation of the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to be
good, and the problems that arise are being resolved
effectively.

Under these circumstances, in our view, the
constructive policy of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
merits appropriate encouragement in the form of a further
easing of the burden of sanctions. The Security Council
should have at the very least made the partial suspension of
sanctions indefinite in extent, as was proposed by the
Russian Federation.

Unfortunately, this proposal, once again, was not
adopted. As was the case in resolution 988 (1995), the draft
resolution is extending the suspension of the sanctions for
a reduced period of only 75 days. This is all the more
incomprehensible since the draft provides for the immediate
imposition of sanctions if Belgrade violates its
commitments.

We cannot agree with the continually repeated tactic
of arbitrarily tacking on far-fetched and irrelevant elements
to the decision on the question of suspending sanctions.
Thus, a new preambular paragraph has appeared that speaks
to the importance of the cessation of military assistance to
the Bosnian Serbs. In addition to the fact that this provision
goes beyond the bounds of resolution 713 (1991), which
establishes a general and complete embargo on all
deliveries of weapons and military equipment to the region
of the former Yugoslavia, it is also particularly untenable
with respect to assertions concerning financing and
coordination of air defence, and is in no way confirmed
by ICFY reports. Most important, this provision is
directed at one of the parties to the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, while the responsibility for the recent drastic
deterioration of the situation there is borne not only and
not so much by the Bosnian Serbs. As a matter of
principle, if this ban is to be extended to all forms of
military assistance, then it should apply to all parties to
the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A unilateral
application of such an approach will inevitably be
interpreted by the parties as the manifestation of a double
standard, with all of the ensuing negative consequences.

We cannot agree either with the inclusion in the
operative part of the draft of paragraph 3, with its call for
mutual recognition between the States on the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, with as a first step recognition
between the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
This provision clearly does not fit within the context of a
generally technical and limited extension of the
suspension of a minimal set of sanctions for a short
period of time, and it is still not clear as to how it might
affect the diplomatic contacts being undertaken at the
present time.

Our delegation cannot fail to express its regret
regarding the fact that during work on the draft, its co-
sponsors were not able adequately to take into account the
views of a number of delegations, including that of the
Russian Federation. This represents a departure from the
recent and positive trend in the Security Council to reach
consensus decisions which reflect the positions of all its
members and thus acquire greater authority and
effectiveness.

Under these circumstances, Russia cannot support
such a draft resolution, although it fully backs not only an
easing but also a lifting of sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We hope that the next time this
question is considered, the Security Council will be able
to take a decision that will truly and fully promote the
interests of achieving a comprehensive political
settlement.

