Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania as he presides
over today's meeting.

We appreciate the statements of the Secretary-
General Kofi Annan and the representatives of regional
organizations.

Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security is a major issue and a
challenging task. The world today faces many
interconnected threats, such as armed conflict, terrorist
attacks, arms proliferation, humanitarian crises, the
spread of disease and drug abuse. Those problems
share the common characteristic of being transnational
and transregional. To deal effectively with those
problems, the United Nations must assume its full role,
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations must be strengthened. In the
United Nations system, the Security Council has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In recent years, regional organizations have taken
on an increasingly important role in conflict resolution,
post-conflict reconstruction, counter-terrorism and the
response to humanitarian crises. Their work has
provided effective support and assistance to the work
of the Security Council. The High-level Plenary
Meeting outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) recognized that role.

In that context, I would like to make the
following three points. First, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, all countries and
regions recognize the principle that the Security
Council is at the heart of the international machinery
for collective security. It is also universally recognized
that regional organizations play a positive role in
facilitating the resolution of regional issues.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
establishes the role of regional arrangements in the
settlement of disputes. It also provides guidance for the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The summit outcome document states
clearly that a stronger relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations is
required. That places a demand on our future work and
provides an important foundation for the conduct of
such cooperation.

Secondly, in the sphere of increasing coordination
on practical implementation, regional organizations
have unique advantages in dealing with problems in
their respective regions. When considering regional hot
spots, the Security Council should heed and respect the
views and the recommendations of regional
organizations. In the implementation process, the
Council should give due attention to the unique
advantages of regional organization. For their part, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter, regional
organizations should take the initiative to keep the
Council informed on their actions in a timely manner
and keep channels of communication open. It should be
noted that regional situations vary greatly, as do
regional organizations. Communication and cooperation
between the two sides should be governed by the
principle of flexibility and should be results-oriented,
and efforts should be made to avoid a one-size-fits-all
approach.

Thirdly, we should strengthen mutual assistance
and give prominence to Africa. Many issues on the
Security Council's agenda relate to Africa. China
greatly appreciates the positive efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development, as well as of mediation and good offices
missions, in seeking solutions to African conflicts.

The necessary financial resources and logistical
and technical support must be provided with a view to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and African regional and subregional organizations so
that the peacekeeping and peacebuilding capacities of
those organizations can be enhanced.

We welcome the decision in the Summit Outcome
document to develop and implement a 10-year plan for
capacity-building with the African Union. Such an
endeavour will enable the United Nations to better
cope with regional conflicts and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa. It will also benefit the African
countries themselves.

There are many regional and subregional
mechanisms for dialogue and cooperation in the Asia-
Pacific region that are playing an important role. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization is one such
mechanism. Since its establishment in 2001, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization has gradually
developed into an effective mechanism for promoting
regional security, stability and development. Last year,
it was granted observer status in the General Assembly,
and this year it participated in the summit. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization will continue to
work, in a spirit of mutual benefit and trust, to promote
equality, consultation and respect for cultural diversity
and shared development. It will pursue an external
policy of not allying with nor targeting other countries
and regions, as well as of abiding by the principle of
openness. It will cooperate closely with the United
Nations with a View to contributing to regional and
international peace and security.

Finally, China endorses the draft resolution
prepared by the delegation of Romania, which we
thank for its efforts.

