Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Spanish): I want
to take this opportunity to extend my delegation's most
sincere congratulations to you, Sir, and to the
delegation of Pakistan on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I also thank Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser
of Mexico for his dynamic presidency of the Council
last month.

I listened with great interest to the statement
made by His Excellency Mr. Jose Maria Aznar,
President of the Government of Spain. His
participation today in the work of the Council is an
honour and a privilege for us. The presence of the
President of the Government of Spain at our meeting
here in New York is an important demonstration of
Spain's leadership and its central role not only at the
European level but also at the global level in the fight
against terrorism.

Spain's priorities, guidelines and philosophy for
countering terrorism are fully in line with Bulgaria's
vision of this problem, whose seriousness can hardly be
exaggerated. Bulgaria welcomes Spain's assumption of
the chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
through Ambassador Inocencio Arias, a particularly
experienced and talented colleague. There is no doubt
that the Spanish chairmanship of the Committee will
contribute to speeding up the legislative process in
United Nations Member countries, creating a consistent
a consistent and coherent legal framework that includes
the broadest possible participation of States in the 12
United Nations anti-terrorism conventions. The
Committee's cooperation with regional organizations is
essential to an effective fight against terrorism. The
Council's 6 March meeting with representatives of
regional and subregional organizations was proof of the
immense potential of those organizations.

For its part, Bulgaria's future chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) will give priority to the fight against terrorism
in the activities of that important European
organization.

In my country's opinion, preventing at all levels
terrorist groups from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction is an absolute priority and an immediate
objective of extreme importance for the international
community. In that context, the 15 May meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with representatives of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, Interpol and
other organizations should be an opportunity for
formulating means of cooperation between the
Committee and those organizations.

The principal objective of terrorists is to
undermine the foundations of modern civilization,
whose core is without doubt international legality. In
the fight against terrorism, we must respect the norms
of international law. Not to do so would mean a battle
won by the terrorists. We would lose not only a battle
but even the war against terrorism if we allowed
terrorism to attack the world's civilizations and
religions. Terrorism does not belong to any civilization,
religion, nationality or political or ethnic group. There
is no such thing as good terrorism and bad terrorism. It
is a terrible scourge that needs be combated
relentlessly.

