Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I too would like
to welcome our new colleague from C6te d'Ivoire, and
we look forward to working with him very closely.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2428 (2018), especially the
measures contained therein. The Netherlands has
repeatedly called in the Council for the imposition of
an arms embargo. That imposition underscores the
fact that there is no military solution to the conflict.
We especially welcome the sanctions imposed against
two individuals. Their responsibility for gross human
rights violations has been well documented. Today
the Security Council is sending a clear message that
the international community no longer tolerates the
gross human rights violations in South Sudan, while
underscoring the need to achieve tangible results in the
ongoing political negotiations.

The Security Council will continue to monitor the
situation in South Sudan and stands ready to act further
if necessary. We very much welcome the insertion
of specific designation criteria for sexual violence
in resolution 2428 (2018). Through that extra set of
references the Security Council acknowledges the
systematic, structural and widespread nature of sexual
violence in South Sudan. The reports on South Sudan
bear witness to the horrific nature of those crimes time
and time again, and if anyone can stomach it, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights report of earlier this week is a clear indication
of that. Today the Council is sending a signal that this
violence has to stop. The impunity must end.

Finally, we welcome the strength of the reference in
the resolution to the link between conflict and hunger.
It is a particular point of concern for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, and it is pertinent to the situation in South
Sudan. We thank the penholder for her initiative, and
the Council has given a very clear signal. It is now high
time for the parties involved to achieve a sustained,
peaceful political solution.

