Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank China
for having convened today's meeting, which is of great
importance. I would also like to join other speakers in
paying tribute to those peacekeepers who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.

A great number of countries on the African
continent have made marked progress in achieving
peace and strong economic development. Yet many
regions still face the threat of conflict and terrorism.
The five largest United Nations peacekeeping missions
currently operate in Africa.

As those missions demonstrate through the
implementation of their mandates, United Nations
peacekeeping missions have a pivotal role in
contributing to efforts to maintain peace and security.
Successful and sustainable peace settlements must be
built on a political and social foundation that provides
peace and stability in the country.

In order to enable United Nations peacekeeping
operations to effectively assist political settlements and
achieve sustainable peace in Africa, the United Nations
must work to improve the quality of peacekeeping,
especially in cooperation with its African partners.
African countries play an important role in the peace
and security of their continent. That is illustrated by the
fact that 13 out of the top 20 troop/police-contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping are now from African
countries. Given their prominent role, we are therefore
convinced of the importance of capacity-building for
African nations.

Based on that conviction, for many years Japan
has supported African peacekeeping efforts both
multilaterally and bilaterally. For instance, since 2015,
Japan has provided engineering training to more than
200 personnel from eight African countries through
the United Nations triangular partnership project in
Kenya. Those trainees have been deployed to many
field missions, namely, the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

We also support the United Nations Military
Signals Academy in Uganda, which has trained more
than 1,500 personnel, many of whom have subsequently
been deployed to African peacekeeping missions.
Starting next year, we plan to launch medical training
to troop-contributing countries (TCC), including
African TCCs, through the United Nations triangular
partnership project.

In addition to support for multilateral efforts, Japan
has partnered with African peacekeeping institutes in
13 African countries, dispatching Japanese uniformed
and civilian experts to give lectures and assist with the
development of curricula at institutes in Cameroon,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Mali and South Africa.

The promotion of social stability for shared
prosperity was identified as one of the priorities at
the fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, in 2016. Japan truly believes that
empowering African institutions and the African people
is among the most effective methods of creating a more
peaceful and secure environment. Japan will continue
to work with the United Nations to improve the quality
of United Nations peacekeeping for a peaceful and
stable Africa.

In closing, let me reiterate the importance of
building the African capacity to realize a peaceful
and stable Africa. The challenges that Africa faces are
multifaceted and require integrated solutions.

Given the wide range of complex security challenges
in Africa, we believe that empowering African
institutions and the African people would be the real
driving force behind peace and security in Africa. Japan
believes that United Nations peacekeeping continues to
be a major contributor to that end.

