Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his presentation of
the report (S/2013/631) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome the participation of Serbian Prime Minister
Ivica Dacie and Mr. Hashim Thaci.

First of all, Argentina would like to highlight the
vital role played by the United Nations in Kosovo
through UNMIK by promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights. We also welcome its
cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), while maintaining a status-neutral position
under the auspices of the United Nations. Argentina
voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999) - at a time
when it was also a Security Council member - and
believes that it continues to serve as the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo in the quest to find an
overall solution through a political political process and
negotiations.

The importance of UNMIK on the ground is
clearly evident in the successes recorded during the
Kosovo municipal elections. We would like to express
our concern with regard to the incidents of violence
and intimidation that prevented the free exercise of
democratic rights in northern Kosovo during the
3 November elections. The role of the Mission was key
in that regard. Thanks to the efforts of the parties, we
can today welcome the fact that the process culminated
as expected in the completion ofthe electoral process on
17 November, during which the rest of the voters were
able to exercise their rights. We can only agree with
the Secretary-General in acknowledging the efforts
made by the parties in order to conclude the process.
We highlight the constructive spirit that prevailed to
help resolve matters related to the elections, especially
agreements that helped to facilitate the elections in the
north, including voting by displaced persons.

The Republic of Serbia in particular demonstrated
its firm commitment to the success of the process under
the April agreement and the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. The Serbian political leadership
responded with political vision and perseverance to the
many challenges that arose by taking steps to make the
participation of all groups possible.

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report, commendable progress was recorded in the
transition of local State structures, especially with
regard to encouraging the population in the north to
take part in the elections by building trust, answering
their questions and addressing their concerns.

Commitment is key with regard to the first
agreement on the principles governing the normalization
of relations is evident, so as to stabilize the situation
through compromise, trust and dialogue. We hope
that meetings will continue to be held between the
parties to move forward with the implementation of
the agreement and speed up the search for a political
solution to pending matters. We encourage the parties
to continue along that path to progress, in keeping with
resolution 1244 (1999). We also encourage them to
respect the letter of the agreement while also healing
the wounds of the past, peaceably and in good faith.

Although we are encouraged by the fact that the
overall security situation in Kosovo remained calm
during the period under review, we should not stop
paying attention to the security situation in northern
Mitrovica. That situation requires coordinated action
in order to resolve the problems in good faith so as to
avoid future tensions.

We condemn the tragic death of a EULEX officer in
September. We join others in calling on all the parties
to closely cooperate with the investigation to identify
those responsible and bring them to justice, as well as
to do everything possible to prevent such incidents in
the future.

It is also important to reiterate that UNMIK's
work continues to be essential in providing maximum
support for the political processes while paying special
attention issues relating to the implementation of the
19 April agreement.

With regard to the protection of cultural and
religious heritage, we are greatly encouraged by the
progress made in the area ofreconstruction, which is an
UNMIK priority. We hope that the activities under way
will continue so as to contribute to reconciliation among
communities. We also hope for the greatest success in
the restoration process to carried out by UNESCO in
the next three years in coordination with the Mission
and with financing from the European Union.

Argentina believes that it is extremely important to
achieve full respect for the human rights of internally
displaced persons, who should be able to return to
their places of origin and have access to substantive
rights without being subject to discrimination. It is
fundamental to continue working to ensure the return
and definitive reintegration of internally displaced
persons, in particular by facilitating their access to
housing, basic services and employment, expediting
the issuance of documentation relating to their civil
status, and preventing any security incidents. The
technical assistance provided by UNMIK is crucial in
that regard.

It is also important to continue to accord priority to
efforts to resolve the legacy of the conflict, including
pending cases involving disappeared persons, as well
as to promote and protect all human rights. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the fact that UNMIK
continues to support efforts to determine the fate of
the disappeared. Of course, we also take note of the
joint press conference, held in Pristina and Belgrade,
with the participation of Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo
Serb representatives of the association of families of
disappeared and abducted persons. We join the call
for a redoubling of efforts and cooperation in order
to prevent having impunity be the response to serious
violations of human rights.

We highlight UNMIK's work and its activities to
support the rule of law, especially in collaboration with
all the relevant interested parties, with regard to the
major problems on the ground. As rightly pointed out
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
that the international presences in Kosovo continue to
strengthen mutual cooperation with the common aim of
helping to establish appropriate conditions for the next
stages of the implementation ofthe 19 April agreement.

We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).

