Mr. Gounaris (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of my Government on the situation in
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I would
like to associate myself with the statement of the
European Union delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Ambassador Schori.
I wish to welcome the presence of Mr. Kerim,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, in the Security Council and
express our appreciation for his statement. We believe
that the points he outlined should be taken into serious
consideration.

Greece, along with the international community,
strongly and unequivocally condemns all acts of
violence and terrorism both across the northern borders
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and in
southern Serbia.

In his Visit yesterday to Skopje, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece, Mr. George Papandreou,
conveyed a message on behalf of the Greek Prime
Minister that underlines that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, within its internationally recognized
borders, is essential for the stability in our region.

Furthermore, Greece reiterates its full support for
all measures already undertaken and welcomes further
measures by the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the European Union, ensuring
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's
inviolability of borders, territorial integrity and unitary
character.

Greece firmly believes that the international
community, at this very moment, should not hesitate to
address, immediately and effectively, the fragile
security situation along the borders of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. The escalation of
acts of violence could destabilize that country's very
foundations as a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-
religious State, in which so much has been successfully
invested by the international community.

Greece encourages a continuous regional
dialogue, aiming at preventing any spillover of
Violence and promoting democracy, more tolerance,
less fragmentation, respect of existing borders and
prosperous development of the whole region.

