Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I, too, wish to thank
Special Representative Haysom and Executive Director
Fedotov for their briefings.

It is my duty to express the Italian Government's
appreciation of the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in this
third trimester and to renew our support for its mission,
which is being carried out in difficult circumstances,
often placing the staff and its safety in harm's way.

The security situation in Afghanistan continues
to be alarming. UNAMA's mid-year report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict indicates the
largest increase in the number of civilian victims since
2009, if not 2001. In recent weeks there has been a
surge in terrorist violence by rebel groups, with brutal
attacks in Kabul and other areas of the country. These
criminal acts affect innocent victims, and we condemn
them today, as we have in the past, in the most absolute
terms.

I take this opportunity to reiterate Italy's
full support for the efforts of the National Unity
Government to secure peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan. Our support takes the concrete form
of active participation in the non-combat Resolute
Support Mission, led by NATO, as a framework nation
for Afghanistan's western region.

In the few short months since our previous meeting
here (see S/PV.7467) on UNAMA and the completion
of the formation of the Government, we have seen
encouraging results. The first recommendations of
the Special Commission on Electoral Reform on
adequate tax measures, for example, have led to an
increase in internal revenue and a monetary policy in
the framework of the Staff-Monitored Programme of
the International Monetary Fund, as agreed with the
Afghan Government.

The recent senior officials meeting on the
refreshed Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework of
5 September in Kabul was very constructive, resulting
in the establishment of clear indicators and deadlines
in all of the sectors needing reform. These useful tools
help build our confidence in the country's progress
towards economic and social sustainability and further
democratic consolidation.

The concrete implementation of Afghanistan's
complex reform agenda under the self-reliance mutual
accountability framework is now more than ever a
fundamental goal for the sake of the Afghan people and
in compliance with international agreements. I thus
welcome the European Union's decision to accept the
Afghan Government's invitation to host and co-chair
the next ministerial conference on Afghanistan in
Brussels, which we hope will be a landmark moment in
the country's path towards self-reliance.

The promotion of the rights of women and children
and protecting them from any form of violence must
remain a priority. A milestone was clearly reached
on 30 June with the adoption of the national plan on
women, peace and security, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000) of the Security Council. We also greatly
appreciated the decision of President Ghani to present
the candidacy of the first woman judge to the Supreme
Court, although she was ultimately not appointed.

Efforts must continue in this direction. The data
collected by UNAMA is dismaying in that it highlights
an alarming increase, during the first half of the
year, of 23 per cent in the number of women victims
of conflict and of 13 per cent in the number of child
victims. Action to strengthen women's empowerment
in every sector of society, where Afghanistan has made
undeniable progress, must continue, since there is still
much work to be done. We thus strongly support the
Afghan Government in its commitment to upholding
women's and children's rights. We acknowledge this
commitment and trust that the results obtained to date
will be further consolidated and broadened.

A few months ago there were encouraging signs
of a possible reconciliation process and a cessation
of the violence in Afghanistan, such as the Murree
meeting of 7 July, the first direct encounter between
representatives of the Afghan Government and of the
Taliban movement. Recent developments have renewed
uncertainties about the future of this process.

It is our hope that genuine cooperation within
the region, which is a prerequisite for ensuring peace
and stability in Afghanistan, can be immediately
established to help overcome the current difficulties.
Italy will support, with strength and determination, any
and all initiatives to this end.

Finally, I also take this opportunity to say goodbye
to Ambassador Tanin, before I welcome him to one
of the upcoming meetings on Kosovo issues. I have
already had the opportunity to say to him today that
as he is moving closer to my country, the quality of his
food will improve in the coming weeks.

