Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, as well as the Swedish
presidency ofthe Security Council, for having convened
this important meeting on an issue that we deem of
great interest and high priority. My thanks also go to
Ms. Virginia Gamba for her valuable briefing on the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2018/465), as well as to Ms. Henrietta
Fore and Ms. Yenny Londofio for their briefings.

More than 245 million children are living in
conflict-affected areas throughout the world. This
year's report records the highest percentage of
violations of children's rights since Graca Machel's
famous study (see A/51/306). Egypt calls on the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to pursue
its positive approach, aimed at ensuring that these
reports are not merely a tool for pointing fingers at one
party or another but can truly sound a warning to the
international community about the threat posed by such
violations and promote the identification of solutions to
protect children in armed conflict areas.

We support her mandate, which will be consolidated
by means of resolution 2427 (2018), which we have just
adopted and which Egypt co-sponsored. The resolution
will complement the legal and institutional framework
of the mandate, and we trust that this will have positive
repercussions for children in areas of conflict next
year. Against this backdrop, we wish to emphasize the
following points.

First, we reiterate that the primary responsibility
for protecting civilians, particularly children, in armed
conflict lies with the Governments concerned.

Second, we will not be able to prevent conflicts,
as resolution 2427 (2018) states, unless we attack the
deep-rooted causes of their outbreak, which include
obstacles to sustainable development and the combating
against poverty. We must link conflict prevention with
cooperation with States so as to build their capacity.

Third, although we support the most recent
developments in terms of the way in which the report
of the Secretary-General is drafted, we believe that
no double standards should be used. The report refers
to positive aspects regarding children in situations of
conflict worldwide, with one exception: the children in
the Palestinian territories, whose suffering continues
as a result of killings, detention and the bombing of
schools under the yoke of Israeli occupation. We wish
to know why the perpetrators of those violations were
not included in the annex to the report. We echo the
Secretary-General in calling on the Israeli Government
to respect international principles relating to justice for
minors; to reconsider its use of administrative detention
for children and of solitary confinement for them as a
punitive measure; and to discourage the use of children
as spies. We call on the Secretary-General to continue,
in his next report, to follow up on such violations and
to include their perpetrators on the list annexed to the
report, not to point fingers to one party or another but
to identify solutions that will ensure the protection of
Palestinian children in the occupied territories.

Fourth, the lack of funding for rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes for children remains
a major obstacle in their protection. We therefore
support the appeal made in the resolution adopted
today to the international community, particularly
the donor community, to increase its contribution to
such programmes.

Fifth, Egypt has ratified the 2007 Optional Protocol
on prohibiting child recruitment, and amended its
Constitution to comply therewith. We pay particular
attention to child education and health and to support
their families, with the new strategy for children 2015-
2020. We are also taking special measures to help
refugee or displaced children who have left conflict
zones and are currently on Egyptian territory so that we
can ensure them the same levels of health and education
services as their Egyptian counterparts.

Sixth, Egypt pays tribute to the regional and
sub-regional dimensions reflected in the new resolution
on children and armed conflict, especially since the
exploitation of children can be a cross-border issue.
This drew the attention of Egyptian research centres,
which have done many studies on unaccompanied
children moving across borders to flee conflicts. They
are easy prey for human traffickers and armed terrorist
groups. We are willing here to make available all of the
services of the Cairo International Centre to provide
training on conflict resolution and the maintenance
of peace at the regional and sub-regional levels and to
provide greater protection for children.

Seventh, we cannot eliminate violations
against children's rights in conflict areas without a
comprehensive implementation of transitional justice
systems or bringing perpetrators to justice.

Eighth, the Peacebuilding Commission plays
a key role in highlighting the issue of the protection
of children in peacebuilding efforts in the aftermath
of conflict. We support the call made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to include specialized child
advisers in the various peacekeeping missions.

