Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the information he has just shared with the
Council on the situation in Kosovo since the
unfortunate events of March. I also wish to welcome to
the Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and Montenegro.

The briefing has demonstrated once again the
exceptional seriousness of the violence that occurred
from 17 to 21 March 2004, particularly since we now
know that those acts of violence were part of an
organized, widespread and targeted campaign. Given
the difficulty for the ethnic communities of Kosovo to
coexist, all the communities in Kosovo must be
protected. We must also consider Kosovo's effective
commitment to the normalization process under way
and the prospects for the "standards before status"
policy, which the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
striving to implement.

Nevertheless, we believe that we should stay the
course and continue the efforts undertaken to help the
Kosovars resume internal inter-ethnic dialogue and
dialogue with Belgrade. We should avoid solutions that
might enhance inter-ethnic division, as well as ones
that might lean towards abandoning the initial
objective of a multi-ethnic, democratic and prosperous
Kosovo.

However irreconcilable the positions of the
Albanians and Serbs of Kosovo might seem, UNMIK
must continue to pay special, and even central,
attention to the claims of the two parties and to work
toward national reconciliation. In that regard, my
delegation appreciates the efforts made to adjust the
implementation of the "standards before status" policy.
Those efforts should be continued in order to fully take
into account the new situation created by the events of
March 2004.

To do that, UNMIK should rely on initiatives
such as the memorandum of agreement whereby the
Albanians and the Serbs in Kosovo would establish a
partnership based on mutual respect and the
marginalization of extremists of all stripes, or on the
initiative of the open letter sent to the population of
Kosovo by some of its leaders. Those two actions,
which do credit to their authors, represent an
encouraging sign.

We also welcome the urgent steps taken,
including, inter alia, the creation of an emergency fund
that will allow for the start of reconstruction of
damaged sites and buildings, compensation of victims
for the loss of their property and personal effects and
facilitation of the return of refugees. Special attention
should be given to the fight against impunity.

In that regard, the international community
should mobilize additional resources in order to
effectively meet this requirement. That would help
strengthen the deterrence of serious violations of
human rights and acts aimed at erasing the history and
the memory of minority ethnic groups of Kosovo.

We cannot emphasize enough the need for
internal inter-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation.
Progress made to promote reconciliation and tolerance,
internally in Kosovo as well as with Pristina, is and
will remain the measure of success of the
reconstruction of Kosovo. Decentralization should also
allow for coexistence among all components of
Kosovar society.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
commend and encourage UNMIK, the European
Union, NATO and all those who helped contain the
violence of last March, particularly the Secretary-
General for his personal dedication to the cause of
peace in Kosovo.

