Mr. Montafio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I should like to thank your delegation
for organizing this debate, for presenting the concept note
(S/20l4/725, annex) as a guide to this discussion, and
for your work as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. In
that Group, the five presidential notes on the working
methods of the Security Council, which have been
presented when your country has held the presidency
of the Council over the past two years, are evidence
of Argentina's commitment and efforts to strengthen
and broaden the Council, as stated in presidential note
S/2010/507.

We also wish to recognize and acknowledge the
statements presented by the Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

The increasing participation of Member States in
these open debates clearly reflects improvements in the
working methods ofthe Council. Although that progress

has not come as fast as we would like, we are seeing
very valuable improvements. The flow of information
towards States non-members of the Council, even
when exchanged outside the Chamber, has improved in
recent years. The holding of monthly wrap-up sessions
presents two sides of the same coin; those who convene
such meetings promote transparency and strengthen the
value of this work.

In 2009, Mexico actively supported the
establishment of the Office of the Ombudsperson of
the 1267 (1999) Committee and the appointment of
Judge Prost, in the strong conviction that her mandate
was essential in the face of systematic violations of
the human rights of individuals and entities subjec to
the sanctions of the Committee. My delegation joins
with those who insist that the inclusion, amendment
or delisting of the names of individuals or entities be
based on due process. We believe that without a review
mechanism, the cooperation and support of Member
States in this area could suffer irreversible erosion in
our work.

Regarding the second topic proposed for this
debate, my delegation strongly reiterates the importance
for the Council and our work that the purposes of the
International Criminal Court under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations be supported by
the establishment of an internal Security Council
mechanism to follow up the referral of cases. We also
clearly affirm that the Rome Statute confers on the
Security Council the ability to request the Court to
suspend an investigation or indictment, which should
be used in a responsible manner with due consideration
and a careful assessment of its implications for
the registration of evidence, the status of detained
individuals and the protection of victims. We believe
that this authority should be used exclusively when
considerations of peace and justice are in clear conflict.

The lack of cooperation on the part of States is
undoubtedly one of the most serious challenges to the
effective performance of the Court. It undermines the
system and perpetuates unacceptable impunity for
those most serious crimes of paramount international
concern. That is why, alongside France, Mexico has
clearly and actively supported limitations on the use
of the veto on the part of permanent members of the
Council in cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We note with satisfaction that
Council members have done their utmost to combat
impunity. We are convinced that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.

