Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations represent
the core values of the Organization. As such, they
have stood the test of time, as evidenced both by the
successes and the failures of the United Nations over the
past seven decades. When interpreted holistically and
in good faith, they enable the international community
to respond effectively to the ever-changing challenges
to our international system.

They also serve as the primary benchmark for
the Security Council as the guardian of international
peace and security. In essence, this calls for an active,
decisive Security Council, taking action when the
circumstances so demand. In so doing, the Security
Council must place the people at the centre of its action,
thereby reaffirming in the words of the Preamble of the
Charter,

"faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small".

Certainly, as this and other debates have illustrated, the
Council can and must do a better job at upholding this
responsibility.

Today's conflicts are marked by widespread
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Many parties to conflict openly
disrespect human dignity and the most fundamental
rules of international humanitarian law, as evidenced
in the recent attack on the Medecins Sans Frontieres
facilities in Syria. The vicious cycle of death and
destruction in that country serves as one of the most
striking examples of the dramatic erosion of respect
for international humanitarian law. And it is human
suffering that serves as a catalyst for ever greater
threats to international peace and security, fostering
radicalization, paving the way for terrorist groups,
motivating foreign fighters and causing violence to
spread far beyond the territory of Syria. We must ask
ourselves: Would a decisive Security Council, placing
the rights of human beings at the centre of its action,
not have done more to end this man-made catastrophe?

Membership in the Council is a privilege that entails
the responsibility to take action when confronted with
mass atrocity crimes. The code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes is an expression of
commitment that, when faced with such situations,
Council member will get their priorities straight. It is a
commitment that they will actively pursue appropriate
Council action aimed at preventing or ending mass
atrocity crimes, and that they will not stand in the
way of credible attempts to do so. One hundred and
ten Member States of the Organization, including the
majority of the members of the Council, have signed on
to the code. We welcome that commitment. We expect
the code to be applied in practice, including on the basis
of information provided by the Secretary-General. We
also encourage all other States Members of the United
Nations, especially Council members and those aspiring
to become members, to join this initiative.

In that respect, we want to address the elected
members of this Council. The elected members ran
long campaigns and exerted great efforts to sit at this
table. We are convinced that a way to a more decisive
Council is through their taking greater ownership
of the Council's work. We are pleased to see that in
recent years elected members have been more proactive
and eager to make a difference. They have our full
support in that endeavour. At a time when differences
among permanent members are growing, elected
members' engagement and mediation efforts can help
overcome political differences in the Council, promote
compromise, improve transparency and foster the
political will to take effective action.

Finally, complementary to a decisive Security
Council, the International Criminal Court is central
in holding accountable those who manifestly violate
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Among its very first purposes is "the
suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace. When a State wishes to suppress a behaviour,
it can subject individuals to criminal penalties for that
behaviour - that goes without saying. But since the
Nuremberg trials, which took place 70 years ago, no
international court has been able to hold individuals
accountable for committing what has been called the
supreme international crime - the crime of aggression.
That will change in 2017 when the International
Criminal Court's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression is activated. Twenty-six States have already
ratified the Kampala Amendments to the Rome Statute
on the crime of aggression. We encourage others to
do the same, as the Amendments simply complement
the prohibition of the illegal use of force, one of the
key principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The effective criminalization of the illegal use of
force will also be an additional tool available to the
Council to effectively prevent armed conflict. We are
all in a position to help contribute to that truly historic
achievement.

