Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): At the time of the adoption
of resolution 998 (1995), on the establishment of the rapid
reaction force, my delegation called the Security Council's
attention to the fact that, contrary to the Secretary-General' s
request in his earlier report, in document S/1995/444, we
had failed to clarify and clearly spell out the mandate of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Furthermore, in supporting resolution
998 (1995) my delegation stated that in order for the
rapid reaction force to be able to enhance UNPROFOR's
capability of discharging its duties there must be a cease-
fire, a cessation of hostilities, cooperation by both parties,
and the intensification of the political process leading to
an acceptable political settlement of the conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Today in Bosnia there is no peace to keep and no
political will to impose one. Herein lies the dilemma of
the continued involvement by the United Nations with the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The fall of the safe
area of Srebrenica simply adds to the dilemma and
reinforces what we have all known - that is, that the
phrase "safe areas" is becoming a sad misnomer.
Furthermore, the detention of Dutch soldiers by the
Bosnian Serbs means that history is repeating itself within
a short time-frame and with tragic consequences for the
civilian population. This further exposes the impotence of
the United Nations under the present circumstances to
protect its own personnel - not to speak of protecting
innocent civilians.

In response to extremely provocative acts by the
Bosnian Serbs, the pattern of United Nations responses
has unfortunately been one of doing too little, and often
too late.

The draft resolution before us is intended to reverse
the latest of the debacles that have befallen the
international community in trying to confront a
determined and systematic aggressor. Whether the draft
resolution contains enough strong elements and any
additional political will which will finally convince the
aggressor of our collective determination to draw the line
remains to be seen.

None the less, this latest act of aggression by the
Bosnian Serbs must not be legitimized by inaction or
feeble action by the international community.

In the meantime, however, my delegation would like
to emphasize the need for the rapid deployment of the
rapid reaction force and also stress the need to respond
urgently and adequately to the humanitarian needs of the
tens of thousands who have joined the unfortunate ranks
of displaced persons and refugees.

For the thousandth time we also call for renewed
diplomatic efforts to find a political solution to this tragic

 

conflict. This appears to us now to be the international
community's only remaining hope.

Finally, in supporting the draft resolution before the
Security Council, my delegation would like to pay tribute
to the personnel of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and, in particular, to those deployed in
Srebrenica, for their sacrifices in the cause of peace. We
sincerely hope that those sacrifices will not have been in
vain.

