Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate of the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Allow me also to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing to the
Security Council.

The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms that a lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question
will be achieved only through the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital in accordance with United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the decisions of the
Quartet, as well as all international terms of reference
in that regard. Just peace can be obtained only through
a complete Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories and the lifting of the illegal Israeli siege of
Gaza.

A peaceful settlement of the Middle East issue
requires putting an end to the illegitmate Israeli
occupation of Arab and Palestinian lands, including
East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan. as well as a
Israel's complete withdrawal from other occupied
Lebanese territories, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The most recent brutal
aggression against the Gaza Strip, which led to the
widespread destruction and more than 2,000 martyrs,
clearly demonstrates Israel's violations and its breach
of all international resolutions, laws, norms and
treaties owing to its expropriation of Palestinian land,
construction of illegal settlements, their expansion and
the imposition of the blockade.

The Kingdom of Bahrain underscores the words of
His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
State of Palestine, when he called for the international
protection of the Palestinian people and their occupied
land, Israel to commit to implementing the Fourth
Geneva Convention, a specific timeline to end the
Israeli occupation and the realization of the aspirations
of the Palestinian people to set up their own independent
State of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June 1967 lines,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. All of this must
be undertaken pursuant to the Arab Peace Initiative,
the two-State solution, international legitimacy and
relevant United Nations resolutions.

We pay tribute to the key role played by the Arab
Republic of Egypt in securing the ceasefire and as
co-host with the Kingdom of Norway of the International
Conference on Palestine, "Reconstructing Gaza". The
Kingdom of Bahrain will always support the principles
of peace, freedom, justice, self-determination and
coexistence. We support moderation and international
resolutions, and will continue to act and work to ensure
the implementation of resolution 1515 (2003).

