Mr. Motomura (Japan): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council.

I would like to touch upon three points relating to
post-conflict situations, which are especially salient
with regard to Sierra Leone and to the Mano River
Union. First, in order to ensure the stability of West
Africa, every effort should be made to encourage
confidence-building among the countries concerned.
My delegation notes and welcomes the efforts that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Morocco and other countries are making
toward that end.

Secondly, the smooth transition from a post-
conflict situation to development is also essential for
regional stability and will require the support of the
international community. Japan has thus decided to
extend, through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, assistance in the amount of $3 million
to the project for the reintegration of ex-combatants in
Sierra Leone that will be implemented by the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
This assistance will be used for capacity-building
activities and the creation of employment opportunities
in that country.

Thirdly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of a system of justice in post-conflict situations, and I
thus express my Government's strong support for the
activities of the Special Court in Sierra Leone. To that
end, Japan has contributed $500,000. We welcome the
recent progress towards establishing the Court.

I would like on this occasion to refer to Japan's
new strategy regarding Africa, which was recently
announced by Prime Minister Koizumi. Under this
strategy, entitled "Solidarity between Japan and Africa:
concrete actions", Japan over the next five years will
extend to low-income countries more than $2 billion in
assistance for education. In addition, in cooperation
with UNDP, Japan is promoting the development and
dissemination of Nerica rice - New Rice for Africa -
which is the product of hybridization between African
and Asian rice strains. This miracle rice is expected to
help solve the problem of food shortages, especially in
West Africa. These efforts are based on the concept of
human-centred development, which Japan emphasizes
in extending assistance. Finally, under this strategy
Japan will provide support to reinforce the conflict-
prevention and peace-building efforts of African
countries themselves. We are confident that our efforts
under this new strategy will make a genuine
contribution to the stability and development of the
region.

