Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country members of the
European Economic Area Iceland, align themselves
with the comments I am going to make. The full text of
our remarks will be available in writing.

I would like to make a few comments, and then
ask a few questions. At the outset, I would like to thank
the High Representative, Paddy Ashdown, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Jacques Klein, for their briefings.

Bosnia and Herzegovina went to the ballots on 5
October, seven years after the signing of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Politicians were elected for the first
time for a period of four years. It was also the first time
that the Bosnian authorities themselves assumed
responsibility for the election process. The European
Union commends the electoral authorities for their
professional organization of the elections, which were
carried out in a peaceful manner.

At the same time, the European Union regrets the
low participation in the election, which the High
Representative has characterized as protest vote. The
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have shown their
disappointment with the inadequate progress in
creating change and building a better future. This was a
call for a more efficient political system and for faster
social and economical reforms.

Here, I would like to ask Lord Ashdown how he
sees the possible outcome of the deliberations
regarding the formation of a new Government, and
when we can expect to have a well functioning Bosnian
Government in place. I would like to ask him in
particular if he has any indication on the matter from
the Bosnian parties.

Secondly, the existence of organized crime and
corruption prevents the roots of progress and democratic
development from taking hold. Organized crime is a
threat to the rule of law, democracy, human rights, social
progress and economic reform. Organized crime is, in
other words, a threat to security and stability. Unless
those destructive structures are brought down,
international efforts to promote democracy and
economic development will not be sustainable.

In this respect, I would like to ask about the
upcoming conference in London on 25 November,
which in our view will be a good opportunity for the
countries in the region to live up to their commitments
and to set clear targets in order to strengthen the fight
against organized crime. I would like to hear Lord
Ashdown's view as to how we can ensure an effective
and positive contribution from that conference to the
fight against organized crime.

Thirdly, the European Union emphasizes the need
for a sustainable solution to the issue of displaced
persons. In recent years, there has been a steady
improvement of the return figures. In 2002 alone, there
have been more than 60,000 registered returns,
resulting in a total of almost 900,000 returnees. More
still needs to be done in order to create a favourable
climate for the acceptance of returnees. The European
Union therefore strongly regrets the local obstruction
to returns and urges all authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to honour their commitment to address
the outstanding legal and administrative issues in this
regard.

The adequate allocation of resources by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities towards the
sustainability of the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons is of utmost importance. In that
regard, I would ask Lord Ashdown to elaborate on the
remaining obstacles to the return of refugees and to
comment on the plans to dissolve the refugee
department.

Finally, the European Union noted with
satisfaction that the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has
been prolonged until the end of the year. After seven
years, UNMIBH has now successfully fulfilled its
mandate in the area of police reform and restructuring.
The prolongation will ensure an orderly transition
between the United Nations mission and the European
Union Police Mission (EUPM), which will take over on
1 January 2003.

I am happy to inform the Council that the Status of
Forces agreement between the European Union and
Bosnia and Herzegovina relating to EUPM. was signed
in Sarajevo earlier this month, enabling the immediate
follow-on of that mission when UNMIBH ends its work.

In this context, the European Union would like to
stress the importance of enhanced cooperation and
coordination between different international actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Through the Stabilization and
Association Agreement and EUPM, the European
Union will continue to work with the authorities and
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their endeavours
to build a well-functioning, multi-ethnic society.

