Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government and people have been
following very closely the developments in Rwanda. Earlier
this month I made my first visit to Rwanda as a member of
the Special Mission of the Security Council, during which
I met with officials of the Rwandese Government and other
personages and learned a lot from the Rwandese people.

What I saw and heard in Rwanda is full of strong
contrasts. On one hand, Rwanda is a beautiful and richly
endowed land, and its people are industrious and talented.
Having just experienced a tragedy of enormous dimensions,
the Rwandese Government and people have already made
some gratifying progress in restoring and maintaining social
stability and in promoting national reconciliation. In Kigali
and some other places I witnessed the Rwandese people
rebuilding their homeland, and engineers and technicians
from many countries, including China, working side by side
with them. On the other hand, the wounds caused by the
recent tragedy are far from being healed, and many
destabilizing factors still exist - prominent among them
being the millions of refugees and internally displaced
people still living a miserable life and unable to return to
their homes.

The Hutus and Tutsis in Rwanda have lived together
and intermarried for generations. They share the same
language and religion and have common cultural
traditions, and they have set up many happy families
through intermarriage. They fought together against
colonialism and for national independence in the past, and
are now faced with the common task of developing their
economy and restoring social stability. They therefore
have every reason, and are able, to live in amity.

Obviously, the background and causes of the
turmoil, massacre and tragedy are profoundly
complicated, multifaceted and, indeed, thought-provoking.
When I left Rwanda, with mixed feelings, I was
convinced that the Rwandese people, with the help of the
international community, including the help of the United
Nations and African neighbours, would surely be able to
master their own future and destiny, on the basis of an in-
depth analysis and digest of the historical experience and
lessons.

The Rwandese people are faced with a very arduous
task of rehabilitation and reconstruction. They have to
rely mainly on their own strength to gradually achieve
national reconciliation. At the same time, they need
encouragement and assistance from the international
community, including the Security Council. All outside
efforts and assistance should contribute to political and
social stability in Rwanda, and must follow the principles
of respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in
others' internal affairs, as set forth in the United Nations
Charter, and must be based on the necessary condition of
the consent and cooperation of the Rwandese
Government.

The draft resolution before us, which has the full
support of the Rwandese Government, is aimed at
assisting the Rwandese Government and people properly
to address the problems left over from the recent tragedy
and to prevent criminals from remaining at large. The
Chinese delegation hopes that its adoption will further
promote the peace process in Rwanda and help the
Rwandese people to achieve national reconciliation so that
they can live and work in peace and contentment at an
early date.

