Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Permit me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your recent election
to the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. My
delegation has great confidence in your ability to
effectively guide the Council during your presidency,
and we want to assure you of our unwavering support.

The debate on strengthening cooperation with
troop-contributing countries is as timely as it is
appropriate. This is because during the Millennium
Summit and the Millennium Assembly a lot of energy
was devoted to the issue of peacekeeping operations
and how to make them more effective. The Brahimi
Panel's report on peacekeeping operations generated
significant interest among Member States and thereby
renewed the momentum to push for strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly endorsed various recommendations of the
Security Council working group and of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on the Panel's
report. It is therefore commendable that the Council
decided to debate under your presidency, Sir, the issues
raised.

As a major troop contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Nigeria has always felt the
need for better coordination and consultation between
troop- contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. This, in our view, is the best way to
forge trust and understanding among the various
stakeholders and to ensure the success of the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations. While the
Security Council may be responsible for issuing
mandates, and the Secretariat may be responsible for
logistics and administration through the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, it is troop-contributing
countries that actually translate Security Council
mandates into action. It is their soldiers that are
deployed in the field to face the dangers of war and,
sometimes, to make the ultimate sacrifice in the
process. It is therefore important that these three bodies
continue to consult among themselves for the eventual
success of any operation at hand.

War and conflict constitute a phenomenon that
has been associated with the existence of homo
sapiens. While time has changed the means and tools of
war, the basic instinct of man's desire to overpower the
other has remained unchanged. The creation of our
Organization, the United Nations, was itself a reaction
intended to curb man's desire for war and to save the
human race from self-destruction. Since the creation of
the United Nations, in 1945, and despite its best efforts
in this direction, wars and conflicts have remained a
constant factor in man's geopolitical and geo-strategic
thinking. This led to the cold war, the consequent arms
race and nuclear proliferation.

Recently, new forms of conflict have emerged
that are mainly intra-State in nature. Some of these
conflicts arose as a result of deliberate post-colonial
policy to bring together, sometimes by force, ethnic
groups that had lived independently and, often, in an
adversarial relationship with one another. Others arose
because of contests over the control of national
resources and/or the machinery of government. The
situation is further compounded by dwindling
economic development and an increase in the level of
poverty in most developing countries. Consequently,
most of the conflicts to emerge have been in
developing countries. Today, post-independence
African countries are faced with the challenges of
peace, security and stability. The intensification of
these conflicts in the post-cold-war period has led to
the phenomenon of failed States in such places as
Liberia and Somalia, where all institutions of
government have disintegrated.

As a result of these conflicts there has been an
uncontrollable increase in United Nations
peacekeeping activities in recent years. The number of
troops, military observers and civilian police personnel
involved has now risen to about 40,000, from
approximately 15,000 barely a year ago. Current
United Nations missions include the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, just to mention a few.
These United Nations missions have met with varying
degrees of success, and in some cases they have met
with total disaster or setback, such as in Somalia and in
the recent abduction of several UNAMSIL troops in
Sierra Leone.

If we are to stem the rising tide of conflicts in the
world and to ensure the success of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations must
redefine its strategies and embrace closer consultation
and cooperation among stakeholders. This is why my
delegation embraces the recommendation contained in
the Brahimi Panel's report, which has also been
endorsed by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. If they are to be achieved, mandates must
not only be clear and credible, there must also be
adequate coordination and consultation between
potential troop-contributing countries and the members
of the Security Council during the mandate-formulation
process. The report also recommended the
establishment of an ad hoc subsidiary organ of the
Council, as provided for under Article 29 of the
Charter, so as to institutionalize the advice of troop-
contributing countries to the Security Council.

My delegation welcomes these and all other
recommendations requiring that troop-contributing
countries be consulted when the concept and/or plan of
operation of a peacekeeping operation is being
considered; when the extension of the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation is being considered; when a
substantive modification of the mandate of an existing
peacekeeping operation, including the broadening or
narrowing of the geographical scope, changes in rules
of engagement and the introduction of new functions of
its components are being considered; and, finally,
during cost consideration for the selection of field
commanders.

It is heart-warming to observe that after the
Brahimi Panel's report the Secretary-General has come
out in support of the need for

"countries that have committed military units to
an operation [to] have access to Secretariat
briefings to the Council on matters affecting the
safety and security of their personnel, especially
those meetings with implications for a mission's
use of force." (S/2000/809, para. 64 (d))

It is our belief that a clear exchange of facts and
an assessment of the risks involved in an operation will
better prepare the minds of troop-contributing countries
for possible political backlash at home resulting from
their involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. This sense of mutual trust, if created
through open and frank consultations, will make
potential troop contributors more forthcoming and
accept joint responsibilities for decisions taken.

Consultation by itself is not enough when the
advice of those who have relevant experience, whether
solicited or not, is not taken into consideration. We
believe that the views of troop-contributing countries
and of other regional actors should be taken into
consideration at all stages of decision-making on
peacekeeping operations, as has been recommended.
While we are not saying that the present system is
adequate, we nevertheless wish to commend the
Security Council's initiative of holding consultation
with the Economic Community of West African States
ministerial Mediation and Security Committee on
Sierra Leone, led by the Malian Foreign Minister,
Modibo Sidibe, which held extensive consultations last
year with members of the Council on the situation in
Sierra Leone.

The outcome of that consultation and the
subsequent visits of the Security Council members to
various conflict areas in Africa definitely were useful,
as they led to better appreciation of the issues involved.
In addition, they played significant roles in renewing
the confidence of our subregion, and indeed the
continent, in the capability and sincerity oftlie Security
Council in maintaining international peace and
security. This approach of holding consultations with
regional leaders and troop-contributing countries
should, therefore, be sustained and institutionalized,

It is our sincere hope that at the end of this
debate, a common ground on the method of
consultation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries will be
found. My delegation would like to suggest that the
Secretariat should, in addition to the other points
mentioned earlier, consult troop-contributing countries
during the review of document guidelines manuals. In
addition, it would be appreciated if the briefing notices
and working papers could be gazetted and circulated
well in advance to the troop»contributing countries.
The operational briefings by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to troop-contributing
countries should also be in written form.

My delegation will appreciate it if the Secretariat
will assume responsibility for the transportation and
accommodation costs of those delegates who may be
invited from capitals to brief or consult with the
Security Council or the Secretariat on issues relating to
ongoing peacekeeping operations.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to conclude
by extending the warm congratulations of the Nigerian
delegation to the newly elected non»permanent
members of the Security Council: namely, Mauritius,
Singapore, of course, Colombia, Ireland and Norway.
My delegation wishes to reassure you of its
commitment to the Charter of our Organization,
particularly its provisions regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security.

