Let me start with the glimmers of hope. We welcome the declarations in favour of a ceasefire by Prime Minister Serraj and Speaker of the House of Representatives Saleh. This is a real window of opportunity. This gesture of compromise must now also feed into the 5+5 Joint Military Commission for the resumption of talks. It must be translated into a lasting ceasefire agreement. This is an opportunity we must not miss. The coming days and weeks will be a test of national responsibility, including for Mr. Haftar and the Libyan National Army (LNA). Let me make this clear: protracted rejection of talks is unacceptable. The 5+5 talks must continue constructively. We take note of the optimism expressed by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/832). We must all support this approach. The country's wealth is the property of the Libyan people. Therefore, we call for an immediate lifting of the oil blockade by the LNA. We wholeheartedly support Acting Special Representative of the Secretary- General Stephanie Williams in her unwavering dedication. At the same time, we want to strongly underline the need to agree on a successor of Ghassan Salame swiftly in the Council, with a view to the upcoming mandate renewal. UNSMIL must be enabled to quickly react to provide the necessary support for monitoring a possible ceasefire and for a demilitarized zone. Let me now turn to the gloomy elements. I want to enumerate three. With regard to the first one, Special Representative Williams already referred to the tensions within the Government of National Accord. We have noted with serious concern recent internal tensions in Tripoli. And we call on all Government actors to respect the rule of law and to act responsibly for the common good. The second gloomy aspect I wish to stress is the arms embargo and the violations of this embargo. It is foreign interference by a number of countries that keeps reappearing in the reports of the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya that is fanning the flames of this conflict. The delivery of guns and bombs, of unmanned aerial vehicles, of missiles and launch systems, of armoured vehicles, of ground and air defence systems, this entire build-up of arms and military material, is obvious, as is the harmful presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries. These blatant violations of the arms embargo must end in the Council. We frequently have exchanges about double standards and hypocrisy. We believe that this is a very good example of this, and we are extremely concerned by the fact that members of the Security Council and participants of the Berlin Conference are involved in this. We must therefore continue to increase pressure through targeted sanctions with operations. With the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, the European Union has so far been the only actor implementing the mandate. We need more credible international engagement to fight against arms embargo violations and violators. The third gloomy aspect I wish to touch upon is attacks against civilians and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights. The continued suffering of the civilian population remains alarming. We see a rising death toll of the civilian population due to mines, unexploded ordinance and victim-operated explosive devices left behind in southern Tripoli by General Haftar's forces. We are horrified by the discovery of multiple mass graves in Tarhouna. The perpetrators must be found and brought to justice. We therefore commend you for providing the technical support to the Libyan Government to conduct its investigation as the United Nations registered an increase in reports of human rights violations. We need to also support the Mission and the Libyan people amid the demonstrations. Libya has witnessed during the past days a call for the full preservation of the civil and political rights of all Libyans.
