Ms. Kadare (Albania): At the outset, I would like to
extend my since condolences at the loss of Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin to the Mission and Government of the
Russian Federation, as well as to his family.

I thank the delegation okaraine for choosing such
an interesting and important topic for the second open
debate of their presidency. I will focus my intervention
on issues of stability and security in my region, South-
East Europe.

Albania has continuously striven to facilitate
peace, reconciliation and cooperation in our part of
the world. Only two decades ago, South-East Europe
experienced one of the most tragic conflicts after the
Second World War.

Today, thanks to the contribution by NATO and
the European Union (EU), in cooperation with the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), our region is more
peaceful and secure than it has ever been in its long and
troubled history. All the Western Balkan countries are
now involved, albeit in different stages, in the process
of European and Euro-Atlantic integration. They are
actively cooperating with each other. Dialogue has
replaced conflict, even when we disagree. Nonetheless,
although the progress achieved is immense, it remains
fragile and can be put at risk, as some irresponsible
and provocative actions have demonstrated lately, if
the unfinished business in the Western Balkans is not
properly addressed.

The EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia needs to accelerate and lead to the normalization
of relations between the two countries. It needs to be
concluded with mutual recognition and full membership
of Kosovo in the United Nations.

European integration is the common denominator
in the region and the most effective driving force for
peace and cooperation. As a key stabilizing factor in the
region, the European Union has a major, irreplaceable
role to play as a mediator and a peacebuilder. In that
context, the European Union needs to step up its
engagement in the Balkans and lead us towards our
final and natural destination: EU membership. Any
alternative visions are as perilous for the security of
our region as they are for the EU. Failure to achieve
EU integration risks fuelling nationalist politics and
ethnic or religious divisions. Let us not forget that our
regional peace and stability are closely interconnected
with Europe's security architecture. In other words, the
Balkans need Europe today as much as Europe needs
the Balkans.

There are still many challenges in our region, and
we must all work together to stay the Euro-Atlantic
course. Threats, provocations and inflammatory
rhetoric lead nowhere and draw us back in time to a
dark chapter in Europe's history. We should be building
bridges, not erecting walls. Albania has always actively
contributed to strengthening regional cooperation,
based on the principles of good-neighbourliness and
all-inclusiveness. That is also what we seek to achieve
through the so-called Berlin process, convinced that
connectivity is the key word.

The United Nations should shore up the role of the
EU in our region and also deepen the strategic dialogue
with regional organizations, notably NATO and the
OSCE, in order to forge common approaches and
provide collective responses to protracted conflicts. A
stronger global-regional partnership is needed to ensure
that the Security Council can rely upon a more resilient
and diversified network of actors in order to efficiently
prevent and resolve conflicts.

What Europe and the world need today is to build
bridges of cooperation and mutual respect. Human
security can be achieved by instilling hope for a better
common future. As our national icon, Mother Theresa,
taught us, "If we have no peace, it is because we have
forgotten that we belong to each other".

