Mr. Costa: Let me begin by thanking you once
again, Sir, for the invitation, and the members for their
kind words and support for the work of my Office.

I heard three questions raised by the Japanese
representative, and I would like to add a couple more
comments on more general issues raised during the
debate.

The first question posed by the representative of
Japan dealt with how the Council could incorporate the
analysis and assessment of our Office into its work, its
function and the role it plays. There are at least three
ways that the Council could be helpful. First, as I said
in my statement, the Security Council's engagement in
promoting security worldwide is what is needed to
reduce areas of conflict and instability. Indeed,
instability creates insecurity and, as a consequence, the
Council's own work generally is the first and most
important antidote.

Secondly, regarding our own work and how it
may benefit the Council, I think the Council has
already gone a long way. It started in 2004, when we
began alerting the Council and Member States of the
threat posed to Africa by traffickers from across the
Atlantic. In a crescendo, the Council has adopted a
number of measures and has certainly listened to our
reporting, in writing and in person here in this
Chamber. Our periodic reporting has indeed facilitated
a better understanding of the role of law enforcement
in peacebuilding; in Department of Peacekeeping
Operations activities, which are always approved by
the Council; in the integrated missions; and in the use
of early warnings, such as we have already provided
concerning West and East Africa.

The third and most or equally important role that
the Council can play is through the work of individual
member States. Around this table are, obviously, some
of the world's major economic and military Powers.
The work that they are doing bilaterally in the various
areas I have referred to, and the work that they are
doing by providing resources to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for the work it does on
behalf of Member States and the Council in this area is
another important contribution.

The second question - actually twin questions in
a single statement - asked by the representative of
Japan was about what I meant by "sharing
information". First and foremost, mine was a general
exhortation to Member States about working together,
naturally based on the nature of this institution and of
our United Nations work. Regional efforts are ongoing,
but I think we need a change in attitude. No, I am not
asking Member States to "love thy neighbour", but
certainly I would ask Member States to "trust thy
neighbour", or to trust their neighbours at least to the
extent of being willing and able to share intelligence
information.

We have seen - and I saw it myself last week -
the important seizures in West Africa, whether in a
poor country like Sierra Leone or a somewhat better-
off country like Senegal. These important seizures
were the result of transatlantic intelligence-sharing,
such as information coming from Colombia or tips
coming from Venezuela. We have to build on this. It
might have been unrealistic to assume that the two
West African countries I referred to could seize tons of
cocaine, but they were able to do so because the tips
came from a neighbouring country, or at least a
neighbour across the sea. So I believe that this is a
crucial element, which is still missing.

Our own Office has been working quite actively.
The representative of Brazil mentioned what we are
doing in West Africa, through the West Africa Coast
Initiative. Reference was made to the Central Asia
Regional Information and Coordination Centre, and I
should mention the Gulf Centre for Criminal
Intelligence as well.

Today, the Secretary-General mentioned an
important session we are holding this afternoon to
promote the processes of the Santo Domingo Pact and
Managua Mechanism. They mimic, to some extent, in a
different regional context and for different drugs, the
Paris Pact, to which you referred yourself, Sir.

All of this is extremely helpful, but more is
needed. At the meeting held on 8 December (see S/PV.6233), I referred to the importance of establishing
a network of monitoring stations throughout the Sahel
and Sahara. There we find countries with very limited
resources - I am referring to Mali, which I visited on
Thursday, and Niger. They are very large countries:
Mali has 7,500 kilometres of borders with five
different neighbours. They are practically uncontrolled.
And it was in Mali that a Boeing 727 with 10 tons of
cocaine crashed. All of this shows that, unless we help
these countries through various new technologies -
perhaps not through physical border control, but virtual
control through satellites and radar stations and in
various other ways - I am afraid we will have some
nasty surprises.

To finish on this second point, with regard to
intelligence sharing, I appreciate the statement by the
representative of Austria, in which he said that the
globalization of law enforcement has not been able to
keep up with the globalization of crime. This is indeed
the point that I have been trying to make, namely, that
globalization has perhaps not weakened sovereignty,
but has transferred it to market forces: to traders and to
the financial sectors, through information technologies
and so forth. However, there are, of course, sinister
forces in the market: the ones we have been talking
about. They have also taken advantage of
globalization. We therefore need - and this is the
point raised by the representative of Gabon - to
regain control of sovereignty by working together and
perhaps sharing sovereignty.
The final point, raised by the representative of
Japan, is about system-wide cooperation within the
United Nations. The legal frameworks are in place. I
was very pleased that the representative of the United
States referred to the whole set of conventions and
instruments we make use of at the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, not only the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime or the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, but also the three drug conventions and the
various protocols. We have to see all of these in a
systematic way.

When our Office was established in 1997, we
inherited three programmes: drugs, crime and,
eventually, terrorism. They were separate programmes,
with different commissions and different expertise;
people would not talk to one another. It took a number
of years, seven or eight years, until 2005 or 2006, to
bring about an integrated View of all of this. Indeed,
drugs interact with crime, as has been said here, and
crime interacts with terrorism, and so forth. Now we
are moving one step forward, thanks to the members of
the Security Council and to the Council itself. The
United Nations system as a whole is being advised by
the Council to mainstream these three areas, which
have already been addressed in an integrated set of
instruments and policies, into the overall work of the
United Nations.

Now, the system did respond positively a few
years ago when the United Nations Chief Executives
Board called for the mainstreaming of our work within
the United Nations system. This has only worked up to
a certain point. To a large extent, the matters we have
been talking about today - drugs, crime and
terrorism- are rather sinister, both in name and in
logic, and some of our colleagues who deal with the
very noble causes of education, health, employment
and so forth resist, in a way, being associated with
these sinister causes.

But the Council has done a good job of spinning
the work differently: not only drugs but health; not
only crime but security; not only terrorism but stability.
I believe that with this kind of logic that the Council
has put forward, it may be possible for the Secretary-
General to propose the integration of our work within
the system at large, just as he did in 2008, a year and a
half ago, when he promoted an effort to mainstream
human rights within the global logic of the United
Nations.

This is an important development for us, because
those institutions of the United Nations that work for
development, whether Bretton Woods institutions or
the United Nations Development Programme, are
helping, in their work, to reduce the threat of crime.
Members mentioned poverty and underdevelopment
being midwives, in a way, to crime. The bodies dealing
with security - the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Peacebuilding Commission and so forth - can indeed
help. Those working with the environment - I refer to
environmental crime, illegal logging and so forth -
such as the United Nations Environment Programme,
can become an important related institution in our
work. Urban security is another element. Everything
that we have been talking about is a threat especially to
individuals and to society at large, especially in large
cities. UN-Habitat is an important player, and so are
those dealing with education and health and so on and
so forth.

I would like to make a couple of quick points,
just to refer to specific important considerations. The
representatives of Japan, China and Mexico underlined
the importance of shared responsibility. Those are key
words; they are not slogans. Yesterday someone - a
member of the Council - looked at the maps that are
included in our report and said, "All the arrows on all
these maps point to the North. What is the problem?"
Well, the problem in the North is that that is where the
demand is. I am glad that the representative of the
United Kingdom also explicitly called for not only a
reduction of supply and trafficking in drugs, but also a
reduction of demand.

Regarding the question of the trilogy of
development, security and justice - and I list them as
the three cornerstones of the work that we can do
together - these are indeed crucial, because it is the
absence of development - namely, poverty - or
insecurity in post-conflict situations that creates the
context that is so helpful to organized crime in terms of
establishing itself. This is not only because there are
weak judicial institutions, but because there are foot
soldiers, and plenty of them. Travel to West Africa:
half of the population is below age 30. They are largely
unemployed, perhaps even illiterate. And a little
lubricant from an organized crime group, paying them
to play the role of foot soldiers in distributing drugs, is
certainly welcome. Of course, it would be very
difficult for me to criticize those kids. I think it is our
inability to help find those kids a job or some sort of a
decent life that is to be blamed.

Finally, on the situation in Afghanistan, referred
to by the representatives of the Russian Federation and
United Kingdom, indeed, our most recent report, which
was shared with the international community two
weeks ago, shows that in 2010 we are likely going to
see a stabilization in cultivation - still at a very high
level, 130,000 or 140,000 hectares, but still about
36 per cent less than two years ago. The 20 opium-free
provinces we listed last year will, by and large, remain
opium-free, and perhaps with some energetic measures
by some governors, that number could even go up to
22 or 23. Much, of course, will depend on security. The
recent military operation in the Marjah district was
important from the point of View of stability, but what
is also important to note is the tremendous amount of
drug seizures. These large seizures proved that, indeed,
the link between terrorism, insurgency and drugs is
very present in that country. Progress is possible, but
there is no room for complacency, as the representative
of the United Kingdom said.

