Mr. Normandin (Canada): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to discuss the
challenges facing contemporary peacekeeping
operations. The presence of the Force Commanders of
our peacekeeping missions here in New York this week
is very welcome. They certainly merit our recognition
and our sincere gratitude for the exceptional work they
do, often in the most trying conditions and
circumstances. Their opening commentaries this
morning have afforded members a unique occasion to
gain a deeper insight into the more practical aspects of
their missions.

As we know, peacekeeping forces continue to be
put to the test in operational environments that are
characterized by multidimensional challenges and
asymmetric threats. Military, police and civilian
experts face continuous threats from belligerents who
either ignore or seek to undermine the progress of
peace processes. Casualties, unfortunately, are
becoming more common. United Nations personnel
have been taken hostage or victimized by unchecked
criminality. There is thus a growing need for the use of
force to protect United Nations personnel or others
from immediate danger. To cope with threats and
practical difficulties on the ground, it is our duty as
Member States to ensure that field commanders have
the tools for success.

We call upon peacekeeping forces to execute a
wide range of tasks. This requires mandates and forces
designed for flexibility, responsiveness and mobility.
Equally, inherent adaptability to changing conditions
on the ground has become a necessary characteristic of
forces deployed on missions. The success of field
commanders in achieving mandated tasks is shaped in
part by their awareness of the situation on the ground
and their ability to mobilize adequate forces
appropriately to deter, disrupt or, if necessary, defend
against attacks.

Enhanced situational awareness is a key enabler
for the command function. In support of this, modern
technologies must be fully exploited to provide force
commanders with timely and accurate information
allowing them to gauge both the nature and the
criticality of threats to security. At the same time,
improving the ability to collate and analyse data,
building on the concepts of the joint mission analysis
centres and joint operations centres, is essential to
improving decision-making. In addition, the
development of staff capacities through training and
mentoring is vital to providing missions with the
ability to distil information and translate it into
effective action.

(spoke in French)

In responding to threats, force mobility, often
over extremes of terrain and distance, is now a defining
feature of peacekeeping capabilities. In this regard,
commanders appear to be hampered by two difficulties.
The first is the capacity gap, in particular in terms of
helicopters and ground transport. It is therefore
essential that the Secretariat work with existing and
potential contributors to address any systemic
impediments that limit the capacity of Member States
to support missions in this way.

The second difficulty is that contingents are
deployed without the contingent-owned equipment and
materials needed to meet expected tasks. Here,
effective cooperation among the Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and donors can serve to quickly identify such shortfalls
at the mission-preparation stage and thus allow
solutions to be found.
As important as properly equipped forces are
troops that are properly trained to carry out the tasks
assigned them. Deployed personnel need to be given
appropriate guidance that enables them to fulfil their
complex and specialized responsibilities. From an
institutional point of view, we must continue to build a
doctrinal framework on the basis of which effective
pre-deployment training can be designed. In practical
terms, we need to make use of existing organizations
that focus on training cooperation - such as the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres, the Latin American Association of Peace
Operations Training Centres and the African Peace
Support Trainers' Association - to ensure coherence
in pre-deployment training programmes.

In conclusion, we have seen some significant
progress in terms of capabilities in planning, managing
and executing peacekeeping operations. It is therefore
vitally important that we keep up this momentum in
order to ensure that these missions can carry out their
work in a way that keeps pace with the changing
realities on the ground. It is by adapting resources,
equipment and training to these changing conditions
that we will be able to provide commanders on the
ground with the optimal conditions for success. We
would, of course, appreciate comments from the
Commanders on the issues that I have addressed in my
statement, in particular practical on-the-ground issues
relating to mobility, information management, doctrine
and training.

