President Bachelet Jeria (spoke in Spanish): Ithank
the United States for its initiative in organizing this
Security Council debate on foreign terrorist fighters.
This growing and alarming phenomenon is linked to
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security - terrorism, a phenomenon that cannot
be associated with any religion, nationality, ethnicity
or civilization.

Because of the atrocities committed by terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front,
which include in their ranks a large number of foreign
terrorist fighters, we must take both urgent and
preventative measures in the long term to deal with this
international threat. The participation of such fighters
on an unprecedented scale is aggravating the conflicts,
the humanitarian, social and economic crises and
human rights violations.

The response ofthe Members ofthe United Nations,
and in particular the members of the Security Council,
must be timely and effective, devising suitable strategies
and mechanisms to prevent foreign terrorist fighters
from leaving their countries, crossing their borders and
preventing their access to financial resources for their
activities. The adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) today
responds to that need.

It is vital that we act on many fronts at the same
time. The role of international cooperation at all levels
is decisive. Without it, any strictly national effort will
be in vain. Actions are also required at the regional
and global levels between our various financial and
intelligence services, as well as good practices in
preventing terrorism. We also feel that international
cooperation is key to preventing impunity for those
responsible for terrorist acts. In that regard, we call
on Member States to strengthen the mechanisms for
cooperation. We also support the work being done
by the Security Council Sanctions Committees and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and we urge those
committees to continue working closely with all
Member States.

The democratic development of our countries
requires us to deal with terrorist threats decisively and
to be alert to new manifestations of this phenomenon.
In order to ensure permanent and legitimate
achievements we must deal with the problem in all its
social complexity, taking into account the three United
Nations pillars, peace and international security,
sustainable development and the strict respect for
human rights. Only in that way we will achieve lasting
and legitimate results, which will be fully supported by
our societies.

The counter-terrorism measures adopted by States
must rigorously respect the rule of law and comply with
the obligations derived from human rights law, refugee
and international humanitarian law and the Charter
of the United Nations. We need to apply timely and
effective coercive measures carried out in accordance
with international law, but that is not enough. As many
previous speakers have said, the underlying causes
must also be addressed. The most effective tools
include strengthening democratic culture, education,
eliminating inequalities and working with the most
disadvantaged groups of society - in other words,
greater integration and inclusion in our societies. That
is undoubtedly a long-term task, on which we must
embark without delay.

Chile has ratified the 14 international agreements
that make up the United Nations legal framework for
efforts to combat terrorism. We have supported key
Security Council resolutions on that topic. In addition,
our country has reaffirmed its commitment to the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, supporting
efforts to combat and to prevent that scourge, because
we believe that no grounds or situation can excuse or

justify acts of terrorism.

We must deal with situations that are conducive to
the spread of terrorism, including unresolved protracted
conflicts, the absence of the rule of law, human rights
violations, discrimination on national, religious or
ethnic grounds, political exclusion, social and economic
marginalization and a lack of good governance.

Chile is and will continue to be a safe and stable
country. But we have also faced isolated acts of terrorism
that we will defeat, because we will act with decision
and because the entire united society condemns and
opposes such acts. Our longing for peace, progress
and democracy are infinitely stronger than the acts of
small groups that do not understand the fundamental
meaning of democratic coexistence or the transcendent
and universal value of human life.

In conclusion, I would like to express my country's
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families, in particular women and children. Chile will
continue to support the fight against international
terrorism and to promote the human rights of all
individuals, thereby contributing to the peace, stability
and development of our peoples.

