Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we are grateful to our United
Kingdom colleagues for their constructive approach
during the consultations and willingness to take our
chiefconcerns into consideration, enabling us to support
today's Security Council resolution 2015 (2016) on
extending Operation Althea of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

After thoroughly studying the reports of
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we are compelled to conclude that, like
similar previous reports, they do not attempt to assess
what is happening in the country objectively. We regret
the fact that despite our frequent appeals and warnings,
the High Representative, in his actions and public
comments, is clearly not giving enough attention to
the basic tasks of encouraging intra-Bosnian dialogue
and strengthening inter-ethnic trust. We are getting the
distinct impression that Mr. Inzko's guiding principle
has become an anti-Serbian credo, thereby creating
artificial ruptures between the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, when his main objective should be to
unite them.

Instead of pursuing these seemingly obvious
priorities, the High Representative is increasingly
sliding into politicized polemic, with the focus on
personal sympathies and antipathies. From now on, we
repeat that what we want to see in his reports is not a
flood of emotion dictated by the current environment,
but at least an attempt at impartial analysis of the
situation, something that we are firmly believe would
be very useful to every member of the Security Council.

With regard to the documents Mr. Inzko presented
to the Council, we cannot agree with the tendentious
interpretations, taken out of context, of the Republika
Srpska referendum held on 25 September on the entity's
main holiday, Republika Srpska Day. We believe that
a plebiscite held on an issue within the Republika
Srpska's constitutional remit in no way threatens the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There is no need to create artificial
problems. Moreover, the steps taken on 25 October by
the Republika Srpska authorities, following up on the
expression ofthe electorate's opinion by enacting a new
law on Republika Srpska Day, testify unambiguously to
Banja Luka's readiness to affirm the holiday's secular
and non-discriminatory nature.

Security Council members can acquaint themselves
with those and other useful facts in the substantive
report of the Republika Srpska Government, which, by
tradition, we recommend that our colleagues read and
note as a helpful guide to a more objective understanding
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly
since for some reason the High Representative's
reports purposely do not touch on those Republika
Srpska actions. And the abuses of the independent
Government's central judicial organs are simply way
out of line.

The credibility of the Bosnian State-level justice
authorities should be built solely on improving their
professionalism, impartiality and effectiveness and
ending the process of withdrawing foreign specialists
from the staff of the higher judicial authorities, which
by definition should be national and independent.
The key to that is carrying out thorough reform of the
judicial and prosecutorial system on the best possible
foundations, which should be developed collectively by
Bosnians themselves without any pressure, imposition
of ready-made schemes or interference from outside.

We believe that the principle of transferring
responsibility for all the country's processes to the
Bosnian authorities should define the international
community's approach to the other issues that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is currently dealing with, whether
they concern the publication of the census results, the
implementation of the decisions of the European Court
of Human Rights on the well-known Sejdic' and Finci
case or the holding of municipal elections in Mostar.
That is why we have consistently advocated for shutting
down as soon as possible the remaining elements of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
represented by the High Representative and the Bonn
powers, which have outlived their usefulness.

We should recall that in his recent reports the High
Representative pays lip service to caring about the
importance of respecting the decisions of the Bosnian
State structures, but he was not always so scrupulous. In
2011, for the sake of short-term ambitions, he suspended
the implementation of the decision of the Central
Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in a
significant blow to its positions as a crucial body for the
functioning of democracy in the country. And we are
all familiar with the lamentable consequences of that
step. That voluntarism vis-a-vis the law proved to be
ineffective five years ago and would be all the more
inappropriate in the future.

We would once again like to draw attention to the
fact that both in his reports and in practice, Mr. Inzko
gives too little space to the implementation of the 5+2
plan, adopted almost 10 years ago as one ofthe conditions
for closing the Office of the High Representative.
We believe that he should turn his attention back to
implementing that programme. And the subject of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's relations with the European
Union and NATO, which has nothing to do with the
High Representative's Dayton mandate and diverts his
Office's limited resources, should on the contrary be
immediately dispensed with. We are fundamentally
opposed to any attempts to use external channels to
influence the sovereign choice of the independent State
that Bosnia and Herzegovina unquestionably is.

We note that after a series of persistent reminders,
the High Representative's reports have begun to touch
on the counter-terrorism situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, we hope that future reports
will reflect the subject appropriately because Islamic
terrorism poses a real threat to the security of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and neighbouring countries, unlike
something that is occupying much of Mr. Inzko's
attention - the anti-Serbian demagoguery. Mr. Inzko
has said that this demagoguery has reached its apogee.
Furthermore, in an interview on 1 November with a
correspondent of the Wall Street Journal he suggested
that the Western community needed to rethink the
current President. He said:

(spoke in English)

"He was the hope of the West... Dodik is building
his own empire... The Western community should
think about removing him."

(spoke in Russian)

But can an international official of such rank,
whose gold standard should be objectivity, neutrality
and impartiality, make such a comment? We do not
believe the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
as bleak as it is being depicted. In that vein, we would
note the municipal elections held on 2 October, which
were by and large held normally, as an example; and we
wish every success to those representatives who will be
taking office at the local level.

The Russian Federation, as a guarantor of the 1995
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will continue to help its steadfast
implementation, including by guaranteeing genuine
equality for all three constituent peoples and the
defence of broad authorities of the entities, as outlined
in the Dayton Peace Agreement. We will continue to
consolidate a beneficial partnership with Bosnia and
Herzegovina at all levels of authority.

