Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the obseraver of the
European Union.

We thank the briefers for their presentations. We
would also like to thank Lithuania for convening this
high-level open debate on the protection ofjournalists
in armed conflicts - a theme that needs our full
attention.

We welcome the important resolution the Council
adopted today (resolution 2222 (2015)), which Finland
also co-sponsored.

In recent years and months there have been too
many reports ofjournalists being killed or kidnapped
in conflict areas. Journalists, bloggers and others who
defend human rights and report on violations of human
rights or international humanitarian law in fragile or
conflict situations often put their lives at great risk.
They are being persecuted because of their work in
shedding light on injustices. They are to be respected
and protected, not targeted. All attacks against
journalists must be investigated, and perpetrators must
be brought to justice. Impunity is not an option. Finland
strongly supports the United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
initiated and coordinated by UNESCO.

Women and girls are often the most vulnerable in
conflict situations. Furthermore, female journalists
face a greater risk of discrimination and violence than
their male colleagues. All Governments must guarantee
a safe environment for all media professionals so they
can perform their work independently and freely. We
also need to pay special attention to promoting a safe
environment for female journalists.

We know that stable and peaceful societies are
based on respect for human rights and the principles of
democracy, transparency and the rule of law. A truly
democratic society requires freedom of expression
and assembly, free media and a safe environment for
journalists. Finland is proud at having ranked number
one for five years in succession in the World Press
Freedom Index, which measures the performance of
countries according to a range of criteria, including
media pluralism and independence and respect for the
safety and freedom of journalists.

Media professionals, journalists and human rights
defenders can play an important role in preventing
conflicts by providing and disseminating valuable early
warning information. They report on the inequality,
discrimination and flagrant human rights violations
that often underlie conflicts, thus providing the
international community with the pieces of the puzzle
that enable us to form a comprehensive picture and act
accordingly.

In terms of early warning, an excellent example
is the Council of Europe's platform to promote the
protection of journalism and the safety of journalists,
which is an open web page where partner organizations
can post alerts. These alerts are concrete cases, and
they contain information on the country and the type
and source of threat. The platform has been open
since the beginning of April, and at the moment there
are 49 active alerts concerning 15 States. The idea of
the platform is to offer a transparent early warning
mechanism and provide information for the use of
Council of Europe bodies.

Finland strongly believes that all human rights also
apply online. Respect for human rights and international
law is also crucial to all activities in cyberspace.
Finland supports openness and transparency online
and equal access to the Internet. For journalists these
are an imperative. The Internet provides an important
means for enhancing the participation of civil society,
including human rights defenders and non- governmental
organizations.

In May 2016, Finland will be proud to host the main
event of the UNESCO World Press Freedom Day, with
a focus on the freedom of information and tackling
questions related, inter alia, to freedom online and the
issue of impunity. The event also coincides with the
fiftieth anniversary of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.

I believe that we all share great respect for all those
journalists who risk their lives in order to report on the
injustices of our world. We owe it to them to provide the
protection they need to carry out their work.

