Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The protection of civilians in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations continues to be at the
centre of attention of the United Nations and its
Security Council. At the same time, we do not absolve
Governments of their primary responsibility for
ensuring and protecting the rights of children in their
own countries.

Resolution 1612 (2005) laid out new systemic
bases for ensuring the protection of children in armed
conflict and in post-conflict reconstruction. Specific
results include the launching of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism in that field and the beginning of
work by the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is now necessary to
ensure the effective functioning of those combined
instruments and to guarantee the reliability and
integrity of the information being received by the
Security Council through the multi-tier mechanism
from elements of the reporting and monitoring
mechanism on the ground.

The deployment of the mechanism in conflict-
affected countries is ongoing and beginning to generate
its initial results. However, it is important that the
process be implemented in strict compliance with
resolution 1612 (2005), which provides for the priority
establishment of the mechanism in situations on the
Council's agenda. We look forward to the conclusions
of the independent review of the functioning of the
mechanism, which should give us a clear picture of
what has been done and what remains to be done if the
system is to operate effectively.

The Council's new Working Group is off to a
good start, to the great credit of the President of the
Security Council and our colleagues in the French
mission. The core documents regulating the activities
of the Group have been agreed. The first report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of children in a
specific situation has been considered, and information
is being regularly received from the monitoring and
reporting mechanism. We are confident that, under the
leadership of Permanent Representative De La
Sabliere, the Working Group will continue to operate in
a spirit of cooperation and focus on constructive
measures.

With respect to plans for the Group's future work,
we feel that it must focus its attention primarily on the
most urgent and largest-scale situations of armed
conflict, and not only in Africa. That will require an
impartial and non-selective approach, as well as strict
compliance with the principles of the United Nations
humanitarian activities. Unfortunately, the current
world situation gives us every reason for serious
concern in that context, as particularly reaffirmed in
the 20 July statement of Ms. Coomaraswamy.

The Security Council must support the
implementation of the entire range of aforementioned
tasks, with a key role to be played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict. We welcome the appointment to
that post of Ms. Coomaraswamy and note her highly
proactive and balanced approach in the fulfilment of
her mandate. The latter is especially relevant in the
context of one highly important aspect of her work -
visits to countries where children suffer most in
conflict.

Closest to suffering children are those working in
the field, including Government structures,
peacekeepers and civil society representatives. We
expect to see results from the appointment to
peacekeeping missions of child-protection advisers. We
must support the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for child
soldiers, ensure humanitarian access to conflict zones,
maintain the civilian nature of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, and end the sexual
exploitation of children.

In the context of preventing violence, key
elements include the fight against impunity and
bringing to justice all those who are guilty of crimes
against children.

The protection of children is system-wide. Such
work must be well coordinated in order to enhance its

effectiveness and avoid redundancy. There is a need for
a streamlined division of labour between United
Nations bodies, in accordance with the Organization's
Charter, and other international legal instruments. Core
United Nations agencies and programmes, as well as
other international and regional organizations, must be
involved in that process.

