Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, for his participation, and today's briefers Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary- General's Envoy on Youth; Olla Al-Sakkaf; and Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth for their remarkable contributions. The late Secretary-General Kofi Annan once said, "Have confidence in the young people, give them a chance and they will surprise you". Many of the world's major changes were ushered in by the dynamism, fearlessness and undying optimism of young people. Africa is the world's youngest continent. It also has the fastest-growing population in the world. While this is an unprecedented opportunity, it also presents our African countries with a difficult task: to create the conditions for a secure future in an interconnected world where the pace of change is accelerating. A fully empowered youth population could allow African countries to harness the benefits of the demographic dividend. However, if its potential is left untapped, a large unemployed youth population could become a hotbed of social discontent, turmoil and conflict. Unlocking the potential of the millions of African youth would be a game-changer for Africa and for the world. Last month, the Secretary-General published the first report (S/2020/167) on youth, peace and security, specifically on the implementation of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015). One in four young people is affected by conflict and violence. In the Sahel region, the security situation is having a disproportionate effect on the youth. The majority of Boko Haram combatants are young people. Young men disillusioned by high levels of unemployment and lured by easy gain join terrorist groups such as Boko Haram. Young women are kidnapped into the ranks as prisoners of war and used as sex slaves or as human bombs. Their future is compromised, and so is that of our countries. Young people, including young women, face multifaceted challenges and inequality in access to education, and severe human rights violations such as child marriage and various forms of violence. Those challenges limit their full participation in the socioeconomic development of their communities and countries. This translates into a cycle of systemic exclusion that creates deep generational divides and grievances that ill-intentioned groups often exploit to indoctrinate and recruit young people into their ranks. We in the Niger recognize the necessity of disengagement and reintegration, one of the five pillars outlined in resolution 2250 (2015). Since 2017, 240 ex-combatants of the terrorist organization Boko Haram who had voluntarily surrendered to the authorities joined a reintegration centre in the Diffa region. Through this centre and the humane treatment that they receive there, the Niger intends to send a strong signal to encourage those young people to lay down their arms and lead a new constructive life in society. Youth, particularly young women, play a critical role in peace processes. Studies have shown that the most sustainable way to preserve and secure peace is to involve women: they are the pillars of the consolidation of peace, and, above all, of conflict prevention. Therefore, my delegation reiterates the need to continue to protect and strengthen the full participation of women in peace and security. Young women such as Captain Ouma Laouali, the first female pilot in the Niger's air force, who has just completed her training as a Herk pilot, is debunking stereotypes about youth and young women in particular. We must continue to reinforce the type of partnerships that have allowed Captain Ouma Laouali and many others to hone their skills, which will be essential to regional peacekeeping operations. The latest Secretary-General's report on women and peace and security (S/2019/800) has established that young women human rights defenders face serious levels of intimidation because of their essential work and service. Yet a report on development finance notes that only 0.2 per cent of total bilateral aid for interventions in precarious and conflict areas went directly to women's organizations. We recognize the essential role of young women in peace processes but regret that only 20 per cent of peace agreements signed between 1990 and 2018 contain special provisions for women. A gender-based approach to conflict prevention would be a step in the right direction to enlarge and consolidate the civic space for young women's participation. Measures must account for the gendered dimensions of conflicts and how they amplify existing inequalities. Unless we tackle the structural barriers to youth representation in political processes, we will continue to face a poor presence of young people in decision- making bodies. In the Niger, the Youth Parliament and the Youth National Council are two platforms that have successfully ensured that the voices of youth are heard at the highest levels of decision-making in national policies and at the local level. When we do not involve young people, we silence them, and when we silence young people, we silence our future and overlook new ways of tackling seemingly intractable challenges. That is why my delegation would make the following recommendations. First, with regard to the disengagement and reintegration pillar of the youth, peace and security agenda, we recommend the establishment of programmes to support the reintegration of children and youth rescued from armed conflicts and the adoption of a handover protocol for the transfer of children from military custody to civilian child-protection authorities. We would like to stress the need for such programmes to be gender- and age-sensitive and to be inclusive of those groups in the process of building more resilient and sustainable communities. Secondly, my delegation calls for increased funding and technical support for the vital efforts of youth, especially young women, working in conflict areas, in accordance with the recommendations contained in resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000). Thirdly, as the Envoy on Youth stated last July (see S/PV.8577), we support the designation of a youth focal point in each peacekeeping mission to ensure and consolidate the participation of young people in peace processes. Lastly, we call on all Member States to set up bodies that allow for the systematic participation of the youth in various national, regional and international decision-making processes. To conclude, at a time when the world is facing a common enemy and a global pandemic, we are reminded of the importance of partnerships. We welcome the institutionalization of the youth, peace and security agenda by the African Union in its Peace and Security Council since 2018. This has created a unique platform for reinforcing the role of African youth in the African Union Silencing the Guns initiative. The words of Wangari Maathai, "There are opportunities even in the most difficult moments", find greater resonance today in the African youth's resolve to silence the guns and as the world battles the coronavirus disease pandemic.
