The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

Russia supported the adoption of resolution 2098
(2013) and welcomed the signing, on 24 February in
Addis Ababa, of the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes Region as an important
step in resolving the crisis in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also supported
the proposal of the Secretary-General for modifying
the currently deployed United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) peacekeeping contingent
and its reconfiguring so as to achieve a qualitative
breakthrough in combating anti-governmental groups
in the eastern part of the country.

Moreover, it was important to us that the mandate
of the future brigade and the remaining contingents
of the Mission be carefully limited. That provides
the opportunity to observe the basic United Nations
peacekeeping principles on supporting peace, rather
than forcing or imposing peace, and to ensure the
security of peacekeepers.

However, we feel that the fundamental
responsibility to resolve the situation is borne by
the Congolese Government itself. There is a need to
comprehensively reform the security sector, bolster
the capacity of the national army, which, in the end,
must undertake all responsibilities for the protection
of civilians, and ensure the territorial integrity of the
country. An important step in reinstating stability in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region as a whole was the transfer, on 24 March,
of Bosco Ntaganda and his referral to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague. That will help promote a
settlement of the root causes of the conflict, including
the elimination of the culture of impunity, in particular
with respect to those responsible for atrocities and
crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that
Russia will continue to provide support to the people
and Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in resolving the tasks before it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

