Mr. Baird (Canada): I am grateful for the leadership
of the United States and for the tremendous amount of
hard work that you, Mr. President, have put into that
challenge.

I do not need to explain to participants the
impact that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is having in Iraq and Syria. I do not need to
persuade them that ISIL is evil. The question that we
must answer today is how do we, as an international
community of civilized nations, face this dangerous
and nihilistic force? I believe not only that is terrorism
the greatest challenge of our generation but also that we
need to face up to a new generation of terrorism. ISIL
is more of a terrorist army than the traditional image
of an isolated cell of extremists. It is the toxic mix of
medieval ideology with modern weaponry.

With that unusually high capability comes great
arrogance and a sense of invincibility. They do not
need to hide their vile acts. In fact, they bask in them
and exploit the Internet to try and give themselves a
disproportionate impact. They think that the more
brutal that they are, the more cowed we will be. They
are wrong. They wanted attention, and now they have
it. It is time to show them that they are more vulnerable
than they realize. We must also reject their world View
wherever we find it.

Sadly, their extremist ideology and bloodthirsty
methods are shared by a growing number of other
groups and individuals around the world. I visited Iraq
for myselfjust a few weeks ago. I talked to a Christian
family who had five minutes' notice to flee their
traditional home after neighbours told ISIL fighters
about their religion. Such rejection of religious freedom
and the severing of long-standing bonds and shared
history are not humanity. They represent the law of the
jungle. No nation-State condones ISIL. However, as
I stated in Paris earlier this week, it is not somebody
else's problem. We must work together to each of our
strengths and abilities.

For Canada's part, we are supporting Iraqi forces
in the front line against ISIL with the deployment of
advisers and the delivery of equipment. We are also
funding regional efforts to stem the flow of foreign
fighters. We welcome the leadership of Shaikh Khalid
Al-Khalifa of Bahrain to work to cut off the finances of
ISIL. That has our full and active support. We are, of
course, assisting with urgent humanitarian efforts. As
Valerie Amos has reminded us, much more help will
be required from us all. That includes, in particular,
efforts to combat sexual violence in conflict.

There is no question that ISIL and like-minded
groups are a real danger to global stability and security.
Such terrorists have talked openly about wanting to
establish a caliphate from India to southern Spain. They
stretch their delusional fantasies across generations and
across borders. To confront them, we must rely on the
forces that have shaped human history. We must defend
the firm and unyielding principles of human liberty
and dignity that have withstood the tests of fascism and
communism, and now terrorism. That is the test facing
us today. We cannot afford to fail.

