Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by expressing our
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Colombia following the terrorist attack yesterday on
a police academy in Bogota, which has left eight dead
and 38 injured so far.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report of 7 January
(S/2019/l9). We are also truly grateful to Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL), for his hard work and his briefing
on the current situation in the country. We congratulate
Germany on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, during its membership of the
Security Council. We offer Ambassador Schulz our full
support and thank him for the report on the work of
the Committee.

Almost eight years after the outbreak of the Libyan
crisis in February 2011, Equatorial Guinea remains
very concerned about its current difficulties, the result
of the ongoing political stalemate that exists despite the
agreement signed on 17 December 2015, the precarious
security situation, continued sporadic violence, the
uncontrolled activity and influence of armed groups,
terrorists and organized crime and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, especially for the
migrants who find themselves stranded in Libya. This
demonstrates once again that despite the small positive
steps forward that have been made, we still need further
efforts on the part of the Council and the international
community if we are to reach a definitive and lasting
solution that restores normalcy to the Libyan people.

In accordance with the decisions of the African
Union, and as we have said on previous occasions, one
of the solutions to the problem of Libya lies primarily in
reconciling the opposing parties. We therefore affirm
our full support for the notion of the territorial integrity
of Libya, while condemning any action that might lead
to divisions on ethnic, tribal or any other grounds that
in turn fuel the conflict. In that regard, we stress the
urgent need to put an end to the worrying proliferation
and activities of the various terrorist and armed groups,
which are operating with total impunity. That is
another of the ways to help end the crisis. That said,
we take this opportunity to express our total rejection
and firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its origin, cause or area of
action, and to reiterate our conviction that there can be
no military solution to the Libyan conflict.

If they are to achieve unity, the Libyan people
must work together to move towards a prosperous,
free, secure and lasting future where the Libyans
themselves are in control and are the major players. In
that regard, we commend the work of UNSMIL, since
its establishment in Libya on 16 September 2011 based
on resolution 2009 (2011), and Mr. Salame, for their
ongoing efforts to reach a political solution on the basis
of the Libyan Political Agreement by facilitating an
inclusive dialogue between the parties to the conflict,
with the aim of promoting national reconciliation and
emerging successfully from the current transitional
phase. We were also pleased with the intentions of the
Palermo conference, held from 12 to 13 November last
year. We hope that the outcome this time, as opposed to
the previous meeting in Paris, will have a clear impact
on the prospects for overcoming the impasse in Libya
and preventing the escalation of violence around the
country. We hope that the right political and security
conditions will be in place for the elections scheduled
for next spring, as the conference indicated.

We believe it is important to stress the importance
of improving the cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations with a view to reaching
a broad consensus on the actions to be taken to deal
more effectively with the situation in Libya. It is
also important to take into account the vital role of
neighbouring countries in ensuring security and
addressing the impact of the conflict in the region.

Turning now to the humanitarian situation
and the issue of human rights in Libya, we want to
highlight our concern about the continuing violations
of international humanitarian law and violations or
abuses of international human rights law in a climate
of impunity, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report, and which make the situation of migrants and
refugees even worse, as they continue to be subjected
to human rights violations, being deprived of their
freedom or arbitrarily detained, and becoming victims
of sexual violence, kidnapping, extortion, sex work,
ill-treatment, torture and so on. They also continue
to be prey to traffickers and smugglers, a situation
that we have denounced from the beginning and that
demands international collaboration to ensure that they
are protected. It is a point we often repeat in every
statement we make, as it is increasingly alarming. That
is why we once again call on the Council to put an end
to the situation by joining forces to tackle the problem
in order to restore dignity to the thousands who suffer
such humiliations on a daily basis in much of Libya.

We acknowledge and thank the African Union for
its participation in the trilateral working group that it
has established together with the United Nations and
the European Union in order to facilitate the orderly
repatriation of migrants detained in Libya. Despite
such efforts, additional measures and resources are
needed to address the situation.

In conclusion, we commend the efforts undertaken
by the Government of National Accord with UNSMIL's
support in the area ofsecurity. We also welcome the steps
taken by the Presidency Council to introduce economic
reforms that are having a very positive impact, and to
improve the sector with a view to combating corruption
and implement a system that benefits the Libyan people
as a whole, as Mr. Salame just said in his briefing. We
believe that more tangible, transparent and credible
international support is required in order to address the
current crisis in our brother country of Libya.

