Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): The Security Council
has long been engaged in monitoring and addressing the
situation in Sierra Leone, harbouring both serious concern
at the persistent lack of peace and stability in that country
and hope at Sierra Leone's arduous progress towards
constitutional democracy. The successful democratic
elections held last year in Sierra Leone were welcomed
by the Council as a milestone in the peaceful transition of
that West African country to civilian rule. They were seen
as a precious example of democracy prevailing over
violence and strife in Africa.

Similarly, the Council recognized the great
significance of the Abidjan Agreement, signed by the
Government of Sierra Leone and by the Revolutionary
United Front, not only for the prospects for national
reconciliation and the reconstruction of the war-stricken
country, but also as encouragement for the peace efforts
in other parts of Africa. The conclusion of the peace
accord appeared finally to put the country on the path
towards recovery.

The military coup which earlier this year overthrew
the democratically elected Government and the
constitutional order in Sierra Leone came as a serious
setback to the prospects for consolidation of democracy,
the rule of law and respect for human rights in that
country.

The Security Council, along with other
representatives of the international community, including
the Secretary-General, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Commonwealth, condemned the coup
and strongly deplored the actions of the military junta
which had illegally seized power in Sierra Leone. Deeply

 

concerned at the aggravated crisis in Sierra Leone, which
jeopardized security and stability in the whole region, the
Council repeatedly called for the unconditional restoration
of the democratically elected Government and the
constitutional order in that country. The Council also
supported determined regional efforts, especially those of
ECOWAS, to achieve these goals. Unfortunately, so far
these objectives have remained elusive.

In the face of the intransigent position of the military
junta, which has refused to step down, bringing about
further deterioration of the situation in the country, which
has one of the world's lowest living standards, and
threatening regional peace and security, the Polish
delegation believes that the measures recommended by
ECOWAS, which the Security Council would take by
adopting the present draft resolution, are appropriate for the
objective of the expeditious restoration of the
democratically elected Government of Sierra Leone.

We support the sanctions to be introduced in response
to the request of African States, although we are aware of
the potential risks related to the use of such measures,
especially with regard to their possible adverse effects on
the humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone. In this context
it is also essential that the proposed sanctions regime be
equipped, inter alia, with a mechanism for humanitarian
exemptions with regard to petroleum and petroleum
products, subject to effective monitoring of delivery. It is
also worth stressing that the measures envisioned in the
draft resolution - including the comprehensive arms
embargo, to which my delegation attaches the utmost
importance - are strictly targeted on the military junta and
its representatives.

In the context of the impact of sanctions on civilian
population we wish to express our satisfaction that the
ECOWAS Committee of Five has given the United Nations
Department of Humanitarian Affairs assurances that in
implementing the current ECOWAS regional sanctions
regime it does not intend to constrain humanitarian relief
operations in Sierra Leone.

We believe that by adopting the draft resolution before
us the Security Council will send a sufficiently strong
message to the military junta to make it comply with the
demand of the international community to relinquish power
and allow for the restoration of democratic order in Sierra
Leone.

The relevant paragraph of the draft resolution related
to the enforcement of measures stipulated therein authorizes
the regional organization - ECOWAS - to ensure strict
implementation of Security Council decisions. It is our
sincere hope that by creating such an enforcement
mechanism this draft resolution will contribute to
resolving the crisis in Sierra Leone and immediately
terminating the plight of its people, thus preventing
possible adverse implications for peace and stability in the
whole region.

Accordingly, the Polish delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

