The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset of
the meeting, I should like, on behalf of the members of
the Security Council, to express our deepest sympathy
to the Government and people of Nigeria in connection
with the death of President Alhaji Umaru Yar'Adua on
5 May 2010.

May I ask the members of the Security Council to
join me in observing a minute of silence to honour the
memory of the deceased Nigerian President.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Burundi

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gahutu
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Charles Petrie,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Petrie to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance With the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Heidi Grau, speaking on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Peter Maurer, Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Switzerland.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Grau to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Charles Petrie and Mrs. Heidi Grau. I
now give the floor to Mr. Petrie.


