Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his briefing. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Dacie, the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for attending
today's meeting. China also listened carefully to the
statement made by Mr. Thaci.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of Serbia on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) constitutes an important legal
basis for finding a solution to the question of Kosovo.
It is necessary to work on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions to find a proper settlement that is mutually
acceptable to the parties concerned through dialogue
and negotiation.

Thanks to the joint efforts of the parties concerned,
the security situation in Kosovo has generally remained
stable. The number of security incidents resulting
from inter-community friction has decreased from
previous levels. However, at the same time, Kosovo as
a society still faces elements of instability in terms of
development.

China commends Serbia for actively working to
find a political solution to the question of Kosovo. We
welcome the resumption of the high-level dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and are happy to
see that important consensus on questions such as
institution-building in the justice sector was achieved.
We believe that this will help the parties to further
enhance mutual trust and cooperation.

China supports the efforts by both parties to

continue to pursue pragmatic and constructive dialogue,
implement the existing agreements, effectively protect
the rights and interests ofdifferent ethnicities in Kosovo
and promote national reconciliation so that people can
enjoy the dividends of peace and development as soon
as possible. We hope that the parties will avoid any
words or actions that might escalate or complicate the
situation and actively search for a durable settlement to
the question of Kosovo, which would be in the interest
of security and stability in the Balkans and Europe as
a whole.

China commends the work being done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under Special Representative Zarif's
leadership and supports UNMIK's continuing efforts
to implement the Council's mandate. We hope that
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the Kosovo Force will carry out the tasks assigned
under their respective mandates and strengthen
their coordination and cooperation in order to play a
constructive role in finding an appropriate settlement
of the question of Kosovo.

