Mr. Braun: It is quite obvious that the
reconstruction of a functioning police system
throughout Afghanistan is a vital pillar of the
international efforts to create security for that war-torn
country. Against this background and at the request of
the United Nations and the former Afghan Interim
Administration, Germany assumed the lead role in
rebuilding the Afghan police force - a task that is
closely linked to the four other security sectors that
have already been mentioned several times.

What has been achieved so far in the police
sector? An initial analysis carried out by German and
Afghan experts in early 2002 showed that the Afghan
police infrastructure had been largely destroyed in
Kabul and throughout most of the country's provinces.
Many police officers had little or no training, were
inadequately equipped, burdened with a multitude of
non-police tasks and lacked health care and social
security. Both the pay and the training systems had
collapsed and relations with the public were often very
poor
The Interim Administration's control over the
police, as in many other fields, was mostly limited to
Kabul. Certain police functions were at times executed
by informal "back-door policemen", mujahideen who
were nominally affiliated with the police force but
lacked adequate qualifications to fulfil police tasks and
actual assignments. The so-called conscript patrolman
system assigned men available for military service
either to service in the army or to two compulsory
years in the police force as patrolmen without pay.

Thus, the following tasks presented themselves:
reorganization of the police force; restructuring the
Ministry of the Interior and its relevant departments;
reconstructing destroyed police buildings and re-
equipping the police force; re-establishing a police
training system; qualifying or demobilizing conscript
patrolmen and "back-door policemen"; extension of the
police rebuilding programme to all parts of the country
and the creation of a nation-wide police structure;
securing the role of a modern police force operating on
the basis of new Afghan police legislation under the
rule of law, in the professional ethos of the police and
among the populace; and enforcing the State's
monopoly on the use of force and the central
Government's authority throughout the country.

Based on that assessment and in coordination
with the other lead nations in the security sector, the
following three-stage timetable was established. In the
first stage, starting with the Bonn process in late 2001
and running to the Emergency Loya Jirga in June 2002,
the basic structures of the new Afghan national police
were created in Kabul. A second stage, currently under
way and set to last until parliamentary elections are
held in 2004, comprises the consolidation and
expansion of central structures in Kabul and the
gradual extension of these structures into the provinces.
A third stage will ensure the functionality of federal
and provincial police forces and their interlinking with
other security structures, as well as our gradual
withdrawal as a lead nation by the end of 2005. This is
detailed in annex I of the printed version of my
statement that is being circulated.

From the outset, it was very clear that certain
framework conditions were going to be crucial to
success. These are the full implementation of the Bonn
Agreement by Afghanistan; Afghan ownership-based
support for the Administration from international
organizations and lead nations; the continuation of
international support for the fight against terrorism in
Afghanistan; sustained financial assistance from the
international community; the continuation of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), at least
on the current scale; diminished interference from
regional leaders; and interaction in the fight against
illicit drugs by the police force, justice system and
armed forces.

We all know that not all of these conditions have
been fully met in the past 12 months. While
cooperation with the Afghan Transitional
Administration and, in particular the Ministry of the
Interior, was very good, the overall security situation
has not significantly improved, with the exception of
Kabul, where ISAF guarantees a reasonably secure
environment. Regional cooperation in the effort to
include all provinces in police training has not been
uniformly satisfactory, and progress has also been
difficult in the reconstruction of other security sectors,
such as the army, and in the fight against illicit drugs.

Financing has been a problem, though not a
restricting factor as yet. The principal source for police
salaries - the Law and Order Trust Fund for
Afghanistan (LOTFA), administered by the United
Nations Development Programme - is struggling with
insufficient funding, among other difficulties. The
Fund's current size, $11 million, falls far short of its
target of $65 million. Furthermore, international
contributions towards police reconstruction do not fully
meet current needs. The overall cost of reconstruction,
equipment and training for the national police over the
next four years has been estimated at roughly 180
million euros - close to $200 million - excluding
salaries. That does not include the border police, for
which budget figures have not yet been established.
The targeted amount of donor participation has to date
fallen short of the mark.

Notwithstanding those restraining factors, we are
on course with our timetable. The groundwork has
been laid for a functioning police force in Kabul. Since
August 2002, the reopening of the Police Academy and
the successful train-the-trainers programme, as well as
international contributions from, inter alia, the
Netherlands, India, Norway, Finland and Turkey, have
enabled the start of standard training for Afghan police
recruits. Approximately 1,500 are now enrolled at the
Academy in courses for commissioned and non-
commissioned officers and are thus ensuring the
permanent nature of the building of a police force
committed to the rule of law and to human rights. For
the first time in more than 20 years in Afghanistan,
classes include female police recruits.
A structure for the further training of serving
police officers has been created and training courses
began last summer. Annex 2, which is supplementary
to my printed statement, shows Police Academy
training structures.

The infrastructures of the national criminal police
and the national drug police have been re-established,
with contributions from the United Kingdom, the
United States and the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme. The police force in Kabul is
now able to work again, thanks to the reconstruction of
its buildings and to new equipment.

The foundations for the re-establishment of the
police health service have been laid through the
creation of a medical care unit built on the Police
Academy premises. A forthcoming contribution by
Japan will further expand that nucleus.

The reorganization of the police and of the
Ministry of the Interior is making good progress. A
structure for the national police and a new Afghan
border police, comprising border patrol and
immigration units, has been established. Annex 3,
supplementary to my statement, shows the structure
envisaged for the national police and the border police.

The Ministry of the Interior is adopting a new,
modern structure, as can be seen in annex 4. I
understand that President Karzai gave his consent to
the new Ministry of the Interior structure yesterday.

Payment of Kabul police officers and the students
and staff of the Police Academy is guaranteed through
LOTFA, thanks to contributions by Canada, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Ireland, Norway, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom and the World Bank. A nation-wide,
computer-based police information system called
POLIS is being established, starting with a central unit
in Kabul, where police officers are currently being
trained on its future use. Finally, Afghanistan became a
member of Interpol in October 2002.

The integration of the provinces into the police
rebuilding programme has begun. To date, 10 of the 32
provinces have been evaluated on the basis of their
equipment, reconstruction and training needs. The
information required for their inclusion in the
reconstruction and local training programme and police
pay system, as well as for staff restructuring, has been
provided. A structure for police deployment in the
provinces has been established and can be seen in
annex 5.
I would like now to speak about the way ahead.
The year 2003 will be decisive. We hope that it will see
the consolidation of the work of the re-established
central police institutions in Kabul, the further
development of the training system and the inclusion in
it of the country's patrolmen, the build-up of a
professional border police and, above all, the transfer
of results achieved in Kabul to other parts of the
country. The level of development and achievement
will depend on positive developments in the general
security situation and the participation of the
international community.

A strategy for national police reconstruction
through 2005 that is synchronized with advances in
demobilization and armed forces build-up and that sets
out milestones and benchmarks is currently being fine-
tuned by the Afghan Ministry of the Interior. We are
confident that it will be adopted shortly by the cabinet
of the Afghanistan Transitional Administration and that
a presidential decree will be issued, mirroring the
presidential decree on the reconstruction of the armed
forces.

Two critical features of that strategy are, first, the
decision on a target size of 50,000 for the National
Police and the build-up of a border police force of

12,000; and secondly, the conversion of the conscript
patrolman system into a third professional pillar of the
Afghan police structure. The conscript system was
discontinued at the end of 2002. During the transitional
period, current conscripts will be offered professional
training programmes so that they can qualify as
members of the police force under the nationwide
trainer snowballing system, or they will be discharged.
The United States of America has undertaken the
organization and financing of that momentous task.

Extending police reconstruction to the provinces
is a big challenge. In many provinces, the challenge
will be chiefly financial and organizational. In others,
it will also entail important security problems that
cannot be tackled by police means alone. Instability
resulting from fighting among regional commanders,
ethnic groups and their militias must end in order to
successfully integrate all provinces by the end of 2004.

Combating drug production and trafficking will
be crucial litmus test with regard to the ability of lead
nations in the security sector to achieve synergies in
their overlapping fields of responsibility. This will
continue to require well-coordinated efforts and
commitment from all Afghan and international actors
in the security sector.
Building the border police will be another vital
task, linking both the anti-drug effort and the
rebuilding of the Afghan National Army with the
police project. We hope that the Nordic countries, led
by Norway, will assume a prominent role in this task.
Germany, as the lead nation for overall police
reconstruction, is prepared and will be glad to support
the Nordic countries with regard to concept and
coordination. We are optimistic that initial structures,
recently laid out by the Afghanistan Transitional
Administration, can be built this year.

We regard lobbying the international community
and taking responsibility for international coordination
as the central functions of our role as lead nation for
the reconstruction of the Afghan police and border
police. On a technical level, we have established a
catalogue of modules, including training courses,
equipment and reconstruction projects, as a basis for
potential contributions. Using this, we can implement
any kind of support measures, whether directly,
through the German project office in Kabul, which is
currently staffed by 14 senior German police and
border guard officers, through organizations acting on
our behalf, or through the Afghanistan Transitional
Administration.

I have already mentioned the international
contributions that have made the police reconstruction
project a success so far. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate that sustained and additional
support for the Afghan police is needed. We ask
Council members to help us to carry that message to
their respective Governments.

The upcoming reorganization of the Afghan
Ministry of the Interior and the strategic decisions
made on the future shape and structure of the police
and the border police provide us with a solid basis on
which to move forward in constructing a modern,
professional Afghan police force committed to
upholding the rule of law and human rights. But much
remains to be done before the Bonn process becomes
irreversible and before the Afghan Government and
Administration grow stronger and gain the structures
and experience necessary for carrying forward the
building process on their own. Indeed, 2003 will be an
important year in that respect, and we rely on the help
and the contributions of Council members to make it a
success.

