Mr. Lamba (Malawi): My delegation wishes to
commend the delegation of Singapore for its sustained
commitment to issues confronting Africa, which is
demonstrated by the convening of this very important
meeting during its presidency of the Council. I would
also like to commend the Security Council for offering
us yet another opportunity for an interactive debate on
Africa, this time specifically related to the Security
Council's ad hoc Working Group on Africa. The
creation of the Group is yet another important
endeavour of the Council in its progression towards
increased openness and active engagement in Africa.
Although the establishment of the ad hoc Working
Group represents a collective effort, permit me to pay
special tribute to Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius for
his singular contribution to the idea that led to its
formation. My delegation congratulates him on his
lucid and comprehensive presentation of the
programme of work of the ad hoc Working Group and
its objectives.

Since the establishment of the Working Group on
27 February 2002, my delegation has viewed it as a
potentially important medium for interaction and the
exchange of useful ideas between the Security Council
and delegations on the issue of conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa. The Working Group has come at
an opportune time because, although the turbulence in
Africa may be showing signs of abating, as is now the
case in Angola, Sierra Leone, Ethiopia and Eritrea and,
to a certain extent, in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, any temptation to believe that the end of the
hard political road for Africa is now in sight would be
rather premature and dangerous because potential hot
spots remain in several areas of the continent. The ad
hoc Working Group will therefore have the enormous
task of evaluating political crises in Africa to
determine the extent of possible intervention by the
Security Council before the eruption of an armed
conflict.

A number of areas indeed exist for useful liaison
by the Working Group's with other bodies of the
United Nations. In this regard, my delegation supports
the Group's outlined approaches to its work, especially
its planned operational relationship and cooperation
with the Economic and Social Council and with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) aimed at
dovetailing their work. The involvement of the
Economic and Social Council in the rehabilitation of
societies emerging from war should certainly elicit
increased interest in the work of the Security Council
through the ad hoc Working Group.

For the Working Group to remain in touch with
Africa, its interaction with the Organization of African
Unity and subregional organizations such as the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
others is imperative. Those organizations can provide
benefit to the Working Group with their hands-on
experience and their knowledge of ongoing conflicts in
Africa.

The OAU and the United Nations have all along
operated in cooperation within the legal framework of
the United Nations Charter, strengthened by resolutions
of the General Assembly. The functional interface
between the two organizations remains a desirable
meeting point of ideas related to conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa. A new era of field missions of
the Security Council and the OAU would mark a
welcome and more practical approach to Africa's
problems.

Besides supporting the suggested close
cooperation among the Group, the Permanent Observer
OAU/African Union (AU) to the United Nations and
subregional organizations, my delegation also fully
endorses the idea of occasionally inviting
representatives from academia and the community of
non-governmental organizations to interact with the
Working Group. Ideas flowing from those sources can
only be rejuvenating and enriching, ultimately leading
to useful redefinition of some of the strategies of the
Security Council.

The suggestion that the Working Group could
play a role in the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is by
no means far-fetched. The vast nature of NEPAD's
structure and objectives would assure the Group a
useful place in the operation of this gigantic African
initiative for economic development. NEPAD was
conceived as and is being launched as an OAU/AU
brainchild. Obviously, many elements of NEPAD will
neatly relate to the aspirations and ideals of the United
Nations and the Security Council, especially in the
political aspects of democracy and good governance.
Those features, which are at the core of NEPAD's
thrust, will no doubt be of interest to the Security
Council. NEPAD therefore provides not only an
instrument, but also a yardstick of Africa's renaissance.

Talking of synergy, it will be necessary to avoid
duplication between the Group's mandated work and
that of the ad hoc Advisory Group on African
Countries Emerging from Conflict of the Economic and
Social Council; a carefully planned interface of the
efforts of the two groups will achieve important and
productive collaboration in tackling conflict situations,
from prevention to post-war activities and confidence-
building.

The ad hoc Working Group's proposed
programme of work represents a fairly comprehensive
challenge and the Group will need support from
various United Nations organs for its implementation,
especially where funding is crucial to the execution of
the proposed functions. My delegation feels strongly
that assessing conflict situations in Africa without field
visits for on-the-spot evaluations cannot yield a truly
realistic picture that will facilitate the formulation of
realistic strategies. The promotion of confidence-
building in the countries of the Mano River Union and
the enhancement of the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General will always
require financial support.

At this point allow me to congratulate the
Security Council on its recent field mission to the
Great Lakes region, during which it visited several
conflict spots in the area for a realistic assessment of
the situation. In my delegation's view, the expenditure
on that mission was well worth it as it went towards a
noble cause.

That kind of expenditure will also apply to United
Nations involvement in election observation from the
preparatory stages to the conclusion ofthe process. The
terms of reference of such involvement will, of course,
require careful formulation to avert possible backlash
in the host county. This important aspect in the pursuit
of election transparency and accountability will
strengthen the ability of the United Nations to make a
proper evaluation of a country's election results. The
involvement of the Commonwealth or the European
Union in such situations has proved useful in the
appraisal of the performance of the democratization
process in countries where those organizations have
played an observer role.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its congratulations to the Security Council on
its innovation in the form of the ad hoc Working Group
as a practical demonstration of its commitment to
meaningful, progressive openness and transparency in
the work of this crucial organ at the United Nations.
These initiatives deserve encouragement from all of us
as they characterize a new era. Malawi's request is that
the Group become a permanent feature of the Council.
But for the Working Group to become sufficiently
productive and useful, delegations will have to play the
important role of engaging it in frequent dialogue about
conflicts in Africa. My delegation commits itself to
staying fully engaged with the ad hoc Working Group
in order for its formation to be worthwhile.

