Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this very
important debate, which focuses on the nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime. We
express our deep appreciation for the efforts of Chad
in drafting resolution 2195 (2014), which we have just
adopted on the subject.

Terrorism in itself is a very serious threat to
international peace and security - and all the more
so when it is connected to the activities of organized
transnational crime. That undoubtedly further
undermines the stability, security and sovereignty of
affected States, as well as further exposing civilians to
greater violence and increasing the difficulty of finding
solutions or reaching settlements for conflicts. And it
would strengthen the potential for exporting crises
to neighbouring States and extending the length of
conflicts.

Terrorist organizations throughout the world,
especially in the Middle East and Africa, have continued
seeking sustainable financial resources that they can
be used to carry out their terrorist activities and to
strengthen their sources of income. In doing so, they
have relied on a number of illicit sources. That requires
all Member States to accord greater importance and
attention to the question of the financing terrorist
organizations and to address more rigorously the
issue of drying up the sources of financing terrorist
organizations.

The fact that terrorist organizations use and
exploit organized transnational criminal activities is
not limited to a particular region. We are now seeing
witness terrorist organizations being engaged in
organized criminal activities in Somalia, Nigeria,
Libya, Yemen, Syria, Iraq, Mali and Afghanistan. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other similar
terrorist organizations in the Middle East constitute a
concrete example before our eyes of how these benefit
from organized crime.

Combating terrorism and organized transnational
criminal activities and the connections between them
requires Member States to carry out a number of well-
thought-out measures, primarily developing adequate
criminal justice systems and national legislations as
well as adopting development plans in border areas
in order to prevent recruitment and engagement
in smuggling networks and any cooperation with
terrorists. It is equally important for States to freeze
funds, assets or economic resources belonging to
terrorist organizations without delay. Border-control
activities and border-management measures are the
foundation for any efforts in that regard. It is very
important as well that they should be accompanied by
adequate regional coordination and cooperation and
information-sharing among the relevant authorities at
the regional and international levels, and that they do so
also through INTERPOL, which has a very important
role to play in that context.

In addition, implementing United Nations
sanctions regimes, including bans on financing and
travel, will establish a firm foundation for addressing
this phenomenon. However, sanctions regimes alone
are not enough to fully address and combat the issue,
as it also requires carrying out security and preventive
measures at the national and multilateral levels and
United Nations entities increasing their efforts through
creating and strengthening well-planned partnerships
with Member States that would bring us to a stage of
providing the necessary concrete support to States in
the area of capacity-building to enable them to fulfil
their commitments.

Jordan exerts great efforts to monitor and control its
borders and to confront terrorists and criminal activities
of the organizations in Syria and Iraq. In addition to
these organizations' attempts to infiltrate the borders
and to send terrorist elements to carry out terrorist
activities inside neighbouring countries, we must also
be alert to attempts by the terrorist organizations to
establish smuggling networks throughout the region,
which would have negative ramifications on all States.

Jordan reiterates the calls to other States,
international partners and all United Nations entities
concerned with counter-terrorism and combating
international organized crime to provide the necessary
support to help build the capacities of the countries
combating terrorism and transnational organized crime
in the front lines to enable them to confront this danger,
shoulder the burden and increase their capabilities to
control their borders.

In conclusion, we look forward to the report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the efforts carried out by the various United
Nations entities to address the threat of terrorists who
benefit from organized crime in the affected regions,
as well as concrete recommendations and options to
be provided by the United Nations to strengthen the
capacities of States.

