Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank

our briefers for their informative, albeit sobering and,
indeed, alarming briefings.
We are gravely concerned about the continuation
of the conflict and its potential for local and regional
escalation ofviolence. It is the responsibility of all sides
to do whatever is possible to avoid further escalation
and seek a peaceful solution to the conflict. As we have
learned once again from today's briefing, this conflict
encourages and strengthens terrorists and extremists,
primarily at the expense of the civilian population.

The conflict in Libya has caused a humanitarian
disaster. More than 75,000 people have fled their homes
and more than 400 people have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict. In addition, the plight of
many refugees and migrants in Libya is of particular
concern, especially those held in so-called detention
centres. Some of them are located in direct proximity
to the fighting.

We strongly condemn and are appalled by the
attacks civilians, civilian infrastructure and health
workers. We call upon all parties to the conflict to
abide by international humanitarian law and secure and
ensure safe and sustainable humanitarian access.

Let me also say that many local civil society
organizations are doing incredibly important work
on the ground in the current difficult environment.
In particular, I would like to highlight the work of
human rights defenders, who often speak out in spite
of considerable risks to their personal safety. Germany
condemns attacks, intimidation and violence against
human rights defenders, including women human rights
defenders and journalists.

We urge all parties to return to the negotiating table
and commit to an immediate ceasefire, as proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Council must send a clear signal to the Libyan
stakeholders - stop military offensives and work
towards a political solution. We would like to reiterate
our strong support to the Special Representative and the
United Nations-led peace process, which we see as the
only way forward to tangible results. We support the
Special Representative's call for a Council resolution,
which should include three main elements - first, an
immediate ceasefire; secondly, the resumption of the
political process; and, thirdly, strict implementation of
the arms embargo.

On the resumption of the political process, we still
believe that an including format, such as the national
conference, offers the best chance for a peaceful and
inclusive solution. We must return to the inclusive
political process, which the Special Representative
has been continuously working towards, as quickly
as possible.

On the issue of the arms embargo, the alarming
and seemingly endless amount of arms used in Libya
is truly shocking and contributes to further escalation
of the conflict. Increasing numbers of heavy weapons
are being brought into Libya, despite the arms embargo
imposed by the Council. The enormous influx of arms
made available to parties to the conflict is one of the
core causes of the humanitarian disaster in Libya, and
we are gravely concerned about the ongoing violations.
We urge all State and non-State actors to immediately
take the necessary measures to ensure the strict
implementation of the arms embargo.

Before I conclude, I would like to refer to the
case of Mr. Moncef Kartas, a member of the Panel Of
Experts on the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The arrest and
detention of Mr. Kartas is a very serious concern for
us, since he enjoys immunity from arrest and detention
in his capacity as a United Nations expert on mission.
The immunity of United Nations staff and experts is an
important element of our multilateral system. It must
be protected and upheld. We are encouraged by the
most recent news from Tunis in that regard. We look
forward to receiving more detailed information on the
way forward.

