Mr. Pleuger (Germany): As I have not yet had
the opportunity to do so, I too, Sir, would like to
welcome your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to pledge the full support of my
delegation. I would also like to thank you for
convening this very important meeting. Mines are truly
a scourge and are killing people every day. I just
learned that today, six citizens of Chad and one
German citizen working for a German non-
governmental organization (NGO) were killed in an
explosion related to unexploded ordnance disposal. We
deplore the loss of life, and our condolences go to the
bereaved families.

A few days ago we had the opportunity to learn
of - and to see - the cruelties mines cause to human
beings, when we met with mine-action experts in
Kabul as part of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan. Mines make life unbearable for all: not
just for those injured or mutilated, but also for those
who have to live with the constant fear of falling victim
to them. Mines hamper the resurgence of civilian life
after conflict and thus prolong the war situation for the
civilian population, sometimes long after hostilities
have ceased.

Laying mines is one of the easiest things in the
world to do. Finding and removing them safely,
however, is a Herculean task that absorbs resources far
exceeding the value of the mine itself. I have read
expert estimates that an anti-personnel mine costs $3 to
produce, but that its removal costs roughly $3,000.
That is an unacceptable relationship - as mine laying
is unacceptable anyway.

It is a great relief that the number of States
signing and ratifying the Ottawa Convention is steadily
increasing, thus enlarging the commitment to the
prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and
transfer of anti-personnel mines and the commitment to
their destruction. However, even if the load of new
mine-related problems may be decreasing, the burden
of existing mine problems remains staggering.

You and your fellow citizens, Mr. President,
know best what I am talking about, because Angola is
considered to be one of the most heavily mine-affected
States in the world.

Mine action, which addresses a variety of mine-
related issues, is a new concept that goes beyond the
mere military and disarmament aspects. The authors of
the Ottawa Convention were wise to establish a broad-
based approach to mine action that also includes the
humanitarian aspect. When dealing with mine action,
the Security Council needs to ask where the Council
comes into play. The hybrid nature of mine action does
not seem to supply an easy answer.

In broad terms, after armed conflict the
peacekeeping phase calls for demining in the interest of
the resurgence of basic civilian life in former war
zones, and in the interest of the security of the
peacekeepers themselves. Demining and mine
awareness may at that stage be the essential elements
of mine action. And at that stage, the United Nations,
especially the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS) and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), plays a key role in organizing and
coordinating mine action. It is essential that
peacekeeping missions be mandated and subsequently
organized in such a way as to ensure that the necessary
mine-action measures are taken from the outset. In
other words, mine action needs to be on the checklist
of items to be considered in any peacekeeping mandate
issued by the Security Council.

However, as peace begins to be consolidated, the
whole array of mine-action features is brought to bear.
It is at that stage that, gradually and increasingly,
actors from outside the United Nations come into the
picture. These include NGOs as well as local and
national authorities of the affected country. The role of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
is to help build local and national capacity to take over
the role of coordinating the various actors in the
minefields. To the extent that the number of parties
involved in mine action is increasing, coordination is
of the essence, and the role of each player must be
clearly defined.

Another aspect is the distribution of roles
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly with reference to mine action. It is not my
intention to prejudge the blue-ribbon Panel of eminent
persons on the reform of the United Nations, but as I
see it, the Council's role is basically to ensure that
mine action is considered and, as the case may require,
included in peacekeeping mandates.

The General Assembly, on the other hand, deals
with mine action in all its aspects, thus responding to
the report of the Secretary-General on that matter
(A/58/260). Together, the report and the draft
resolution on assistance in mine action which is to be
submitted in the General Assembly within the next few
weeks form an important basis for this discussion.

Germany has, from the outset, supported the
concept of mine action. Former German Foreign
Minister Klaus Kinkel, together with his Canadian
colleague Lloyd Axworthy, was one of the promoters
of the Ottawa Convention. The German contribution to
mine action, since 1992, has reached almost $106
million. Germany is a founding member of the Mine-
Action Support Group formed by donor countries in
1997 with the objective of establishing a regular
exchange of information and views with one another
and with United Nations bodies such as UNMAS,
UNDP and UNICEF on mine-action activities
worldwide.

One of the most important tasks of the Mine-
Action Support Group is to help ensure adequate
funding of mine-action projects. As Chair of that
Group for the current year, I wish to seize this
opportunity to appeal to all Member States inside and
outside the Security Council that have the means to do
so to lend their generous support to the cause of mine
action.

