Mr. Moore (Bahamas): Let me say, as most of my
colleagues have before me, how very pleased I am to see
that you, Sir, have taken time to come to address this very
urgent matter before us. Let me also say to the members of
the Council that the idea of this open forum is indeed a
welcome one and gives those of us who are interested in
the stability of the world, and more particularly that of
Africa, an opportunity to express our feelings.

I will be very brief. For the United Nations, there
could be no higher goal, no deeper commitment, indeed
no greater ambition than the preventing of armed conflict
on the continent of Africa. I had the opportunity to read
the report the Secretary-General presented to the Council
last year and I also listened this morning to his statement
and that of the Ambassador of Canada. Quite frankly,
embodied in those reports and statements are solutions to
the problems of Africa.

Rather than the lengthy repetition of the same things,
it appears to me that there is a need for the political will
not only of our member States of Africa, but indeed of
the States members of the General Assembly and, more
particularly, of this Council.

I listened to you this morning, Sir. You made a point
of your being a son of Africa. I took that and examined
it and found that this must be Africa's moment in history.
Right now, today, the President of our General Assembly
is a son of Africa; the Secretary-General is a son of
Africa; you, Sir, are also a son of Africa; the Chairman
of the parliamentary grouping of the Commonwealth is
also a son of Africa; the Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Movement is also a son of Africa; and so is the President
of the Group of 77 and China. What more is needed
here? It has to be the political will of this Council and,
indeed, the members involved.

I read, too, the report of the African Economic
Community and I know of its commitment to its Treaty
and to the Organization of African Unity (OAU). We can
go over the definitions and the problems as we have
identified them over and over in this Chamber. What is
needed now is action in Africa. We need a greater
presence of the agencies of this United Nations and we
need the resources to support and to implement many of
the recommendations put forth in the Secretary-General's
report and in the statement made by Ambassador Fowler
of Canada.

I feel that this is the right moment. The interest of
the world is focused on Africa. We should do all that we
can, rather than talk about it again. We should use those
programmes as laid out and put action behind them -
put the resources of the world behind them.

I am going to be very nice by being very brief. I am
going to end as I began. The political will that is needed
for the correction of the problem in Africa needs to come
from this Chamber. We can talk forever; we need to get
the political will to act. I conclude by paraphrasing the

 

Secretary-General: For the United Nations and its agencies,
there can be no higher goal, no deeper commitment and no
greater ambition than the prevention of further armed
conflict on the continent of Africa.

