Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): May I
begin by congratulating Argentina on having assumed
the presidency of the Council for this month. I believe
that under your leadership, Madam President, the
Council will achieve positive results in its work.

I should also like to thank the United States for the
work done in its presidency of the Security Council last
month. Let me also thank Lieutenant General Maqsood
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
three Force Commanders of peacekeeping operations
for their briefings, which have enabled the Council to
have a more comprehensive and direct understanding
of peacekeeping operations on the ground as well as of
the efforts made by the peacekeepers in fulfilling their
mandate.

China would like to pay tribute to all the
commanders present as well as all of the United Nations
peacekeepers who are implementing their mandates for
the dedication and courage displayed in the context of
difficult and complex environments.

In recent years, regional conflicts have become
increasingly complex, and United Nations peacekeeping
operations are facing major changes in their situations
and mandates; they should therefore adapt and continue
to innovate and improve. China supports the initiative
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for a comprehensive
review and assessment ofpeacekeeping operations, and
we expect positive progress in the work in this area on
the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations next year. With regard to the issue of how to
promote the development of peacekeeping operations
so as to ensure improved efficiency, an optimized
mandate and the best results, I would like to make the
following four observations.

First, we should focus on increasing the relevance
and visibility of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in its deployment of such operations. The
Council should ensure that peacekeeping mandates
are realistic and feasible and should also clearly define
the priority tasks and focus, and avoid seeking full
coverage of every minor detail and area at the cost of
effective execution.

The results of mandate implementation should
be assessed in a timely manner and in the light of the
requirements as well as changes on the ground, and the
relevant adjustments should be made to the mandates,
the force level and the scale.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur has carried out useful experiments
in adjusting mandates and functions that may serve
as a reference to draw upon in our future exploration
of mandate improvements for other peacekeeping
operations.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations should be
carried out in strict observance of Security Council
resolutions, with respect for the sovereignty of the
countries in question and with attention paid to
increasing communication with those countries.

The deployment of peacekeeping operations
itself is not the goal. Only through political dialogue,
comprehensive consultation so as to settle differences
and the attainment of national reconciliation can
we effectively curb violent conflicts, stabilize the
situation and restore security. This is also an important
foundation for and a guarantee of the effective
implementation of the civilian protection mandate
by peacekeeping operations. The work of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has shown that the
support and cooperation of the country in question is
Vital for the robust enforcement of the protection-of-
civilians mandate in peacekeeping.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations should improve
their efficiency. The rapid projection and deployment
capacity of peacekeeping operations has a bearing
on whether the missions are able to play their role
at the crucial moment. The Security Council, the
Secretariat, the countries in question and the troop-
contributing countries, inter alia, should improve their
communication and coordination. The procedures for
the configuration and deployment of missions should
be improved, and logistical backstopping mechanisms
should be optimized. There should be better scientific
planning and management of the peacekeeping
operations, and an effective and efficient use of
resources so as to avoid any unnecessary overlap or
waste. Through inter-mission cooperation and other
means, existing resources can be better transferred and
used.

Fourthly, peacekeeping operations should enhance
their capacity-building. The parties concerned should
work on such areas as technical equipment and
personnel training and in closer cooperation with
regional organizations. Consideration may be given to
formulating standards for the organization, training and
supervision of personnel, and, in the light of changes in
the security environment in mandate areas, increased
safety and security measures for peacekeepers. The
operations should focus on the adoption of new
technology and equipment while also studying in depth
the legal issues involved and continuing to draw lessons
from their experiences, both positive and negative, with
their gradual dissemination and application carried out
on the basis of observance of the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for the sovereignty and will of the
countries in question.

The United Nations should increase its support
for regional organizations such as the African Union
in terms of peacekeeping and help Africa with its
capacity-building in that area, giving full play to the
role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.

China is firmly supportive of and actively engaged
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. To date,
China has contributed more than 25,000 peacekeepers
to various missions. At present, we have approximately
2,200 peacekeepers who are working to implement the
mandates of nine United Nations missions, including
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Mali.

China has for the first time sent a security detail

to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and will send an additional
700-person strong peacekeeping infantry battalion to
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. That will
be the first time that China sends an infantry battalion
to a United Nations peacekeeping mission. China is
also actively considering despatching helicopters to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and stands
ready to contribute further peacekeeping police and
police experts to join the ranks of Blue Helmets.
We will continue to support, to the extent of
our abilities, the peacekeeping capacity-building of
African countries, including the establishment of an
African Union rapid reaction force. China is ready to
work with the international community in a concerted
effort by actively contributing to the promotion of
the development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

