Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like other members of the Council, we are
eager to see sustainable peace and stability achieved
as soon as possible in Somalia and Eritrea, and in the
Horn of Africa as a whole, but we were obliged to
abstain in the voting on resolution 2385 (20l7) for the
following reasons.

The main criteria for instituting restrictive measures
against Asmara in 2009 were based on Eritrea's support
to the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, the border dispute
between Djibouti and Eritrea, the support Asmara was
lending to armed groups operating against Djibouti
and Ethiopia and Eritrea's lack of cooperation with the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea.

In the intervening eight years, the situation on the
ground has changed significantly. For the fourth year
in a row, the reports of the Monitoring Group conclude
that there is no convincing evidence of Eritrea's support
for Al-Shabaab. As for its claims that the Eritreans
allegedly support regional armed groups, the same
report from the experts says that this kind of assistance
is forthcoming not just from Asmara, but from almost
every State in the region. In other words, the problem
is clearly a regional one, and it would be unfair to
blame Eritrea alone for the destabilization of the entire
region. We would like to draw the Council's attention
to the fact that some of the armed groups mentioned
by the Monitoring Group have headquarters in the
capitals of countries whose delegations are sitting
around this table. We can therefore see that some of the
reasons that gave rise to the need to impose sanctions
on Eritrea no longer exist, while the sanctions regime
itself continues unchanged.

We are concerned about the fact that the
Monitoring Group was unable to visit Eritrea this year,
and we supported the draft text's provisions related to
that. However, in our view, compared with last year's
version, this year's resolution has only worsened.
Despite our repeated requests, it makes no reference
to a road map that could serve as a kind of guide for
Eritrea's actions in the future. In addition, the authors
deleted the reference in the preamble to the fact that the
Monitoring Group once again failed to find conclusive
evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab, on the
pretext that the passage also appears in the operative
part of the resolution and according to them was
therefore superfluous.

At the same time, however, in both the preamble and
the operative part of the resolution there are paragraphs
critical of Eritrea that correspond to the penholders'
interests, and we cannot support this kind of selective
approach. In that regard, we once again reiterate the
importance of formulating some sort of road map for
gradually lifting the sanctions on Asmara, as we and
a number of delegations suggested during the work on
the draft resolution as long ago as last year, as well as
during 2017.

