Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Indonesia and you, Mr. President, for presiding
over and convening this open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We thank the Secretary-
General, the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the Executive Director of the
Center for Civilians in Conflict for their briefings
this morning.

This debate is very timely, as it takes place at a time
when the international community is commemorating
the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
and 20 years since the Security Council included the
protection of civilians as an item on its agenda under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Yet,
despite all that, we continue to witness the suffering
of millions of women, children and men trapped in
conflicts around the world.

Chile is strongly committed to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts and directs
its international action based on the promotion and
protection of human security, defined as the right of
people to live in freedom and dignity without fear of
their overall development and human potential being
threatened. Everyone, in particular the vulnerable, has
the right to live without fear and, in this case, civilians
have the right not to be targets of war.

My delegation believes that in order for peace
operations to be more effective in their key task, which
is the protection of civilians, it is necessary for mandates
to be clear and specific with regard to the aspects of
that protection, with an appropriate assessment of the
conditions on the ground. That also includes the need to
improve information and intelligence work.

In that regard, I would like to echo the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2019/373) and highlight the
importance of disaggregated data of victims, which
provide the necessary information to identify patterns of
violence and risks to particular populations, including,
as I have said, children, women, internally displaced
persons, journalists, teachers, medical personnel and
humanitarian workers.

We highlight the need to promote accountability
and justice in the case of indiscriminate attacks
and support the participation of entities such as the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
and independent civil society actors, which are
valuable sources of information, especially those
based in communities affected by conflict and with
limited access.
I would like to reiterate my country's commitment
to the protection of civilians from the use of explosive
areas in populated areas, including through active
participation in the focal points network on the issue and
the convening in my country in December 2018 of the
Latin American and Caribbean regional conference on
protecting civilians from the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. The outcome of the conference, in
which 23 Member States participated, was the Santiago
Communique, in which participants acknowledged
the need to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and supported the
development of a political declaration.

In line with the above, Chile is deeply committed
to the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers and the Safe Schools Declaration, signed in
Oslo in May 2015. For our country, supporting those
principles represents a way of contributing to the
collective commitment to maintaining international
peace and security so as to make the work of personnel
deployed in peace operations more effective in
protecting civilians, in particular children, by helping
to re-establish a sustained peace.

In conclusion, Chile reiterates its support for the
reforms and the strengthening of the system for the
protection of civilians in conflict, since it puts into
practice the general principles of our foreign policy,
such as strict compliance with international law, the
promotion of democracy, respect for human rights
and support for multilateralism. The Council and the
institutional framework of the United Nations must
ensure the protection of civilians on the basis of
effective, people-centred, comprehensive, context-
specific and prevention-oriented responses. Chile will
remain committed to that end, based on its pursuit of
peace that inspires my country's diplomatic efforts.

