Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his briefing and for his efforts at the head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Bringing an end to the violence and terrorism in north-western Syria is today an urgent necessity if we are to prevent the humanitarian catastrophe threatening 4 million people living in that region and to avoid hindering efforts to find a solution to the conflict through negotiation leading to security and stability in Syria. My delegation is deeply concerned by the escalation of violence over the past few weeks in Idlib and neighbouring towns and by indications of renewed clashes in the region that are unprecedented in nature. In that regard, and given the humanitarian repercussions and suffering of the inhabitants of the region, Tunisia expresses its concern over the loss of dozens of lives among civilians and the increased exodus of people seeking shelter from the violence. We condemn attacks on civilians, whoever the perpetrator, including those committed by terrorist groups and their allies, such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other extremist jihadist factions. We call on all parties to respect their commitments under international humanitarian law and international law to ensure civilian protection at all times and guarantee assistance in a safe, unimpeded and sustained way so as to meet the needs of all. We regret the violations of the ceasefire agreement concluded between Turkey and the Russian Federation on 19 January, particularly because the ceasefire - which lasted just a few days - allowed some displaced persons to return to their homes. We call on the guarantors to work to promote a lasting ceasefire in the region and to reduce tensions so as to calm the overall situation until stability and security can be restored across sisterly Syria. The short-term potential for breaking this current cycle of emergency humanitarian aid in Syria is very weak due to the lack of calm and the faltering political process. We believe that, despite their importance, de-escalation efforts in Idlib are only a temporary solution to the humanitarian crisis. We will not reach a lasting solution unless we find a practical, shared solution that excludes terrorist groups in Idlib and eliminates them from the region. Withregardtocross-borderhumanitarianassistance, I commend the solidarity of Syria's neighbours over the past few years through assistance provided to millions of people crossing Syria's borders or within the country, including through the United Nations cross-border assistance plan. Based on our experience in seeking to resolve the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Libya, we understand the burden this imposes on neighbouring countries and their societies. My country's delegation notes the continued consultations under way within OCHA following the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), on the continuation of cross-border assistance. Tunisia looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General, to be issued next month under that resolution, with respect to the possibility of using alternative routes and avoiding the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point. Against that background, we believe that ending the system of cross-border humanitarian assistance will require a progressive approach, in full respect for Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, leading to the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance, pursuant to international law and the principles of humanitarian work. Finally, the Syrian crisis is now entering its tenth year and the brotherly Syrian people are still facing indescribable suffering. My delegation reaffirms the fact that the solution cannot be a military one. The only possible way to bring an end to the suffering of the Syrian people is through a political approach, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), that responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to live in liberty and dignity and to maintain the unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria. That will promote security and stability in the region.
