Mr. Ntahomvukiye (Burundi) (spoke in French): The
Government of Burundi welcomes this special meeting of
the Security Council and hopes that it that in its wake there
will be even greater understanding on the part of the
international community of the actual situation, resulting
in increased determination on its part to help Burundi to
emerge from the security and socio-economic crisis that
has been disrupting it since 1993.

I have the honour to speak before the Council in
order to present my Government's views on security, the
peace process and the economy.

Speaking first on security, compared to the years
1995 and 1996, when virtually the entire territory was
engulfed by civil war, the situation in general has
significantly improved. Overall the situation is under
control, and one can say that no national catastrophe in
terms of widespread massacres is really imminent at this
point. Only four provinces out of 17 still suffer from a
lack of security.

With respect to Rural Bujumbura - one of those
four provinces - the Government had to take special
security measures establishing sites, known as
regroupment camps, for the protection of the people. The
underlying grounds for that decision were explained in
detail in a statement made public on 13 November 1999.

Clearly, Rural Bujumbura had become the focus of
an undertaking aimed at overwhelming the security forces
and destabilizing the capital through indiscriminate
terrorism, which would have led to what could be termed
the "Somalia-ization of the country", with a resurgence of
militias and various uncontrolled self-defence
organizations throughout the entire national territory. This
is fact, not fiction. In that same region, genocide already
occurred when national security forces lost control of the
situation, giving the upper hand to militias and leading to
chronic vendettas.

The Government categorically rejects allegations that
regroupment camps are part of an "ethnic cleansing"
system or that they involve human rights violations. That
is pure anti-Govemment propaganda and disinformation.
There is no selectivity in that province; it has the same
mixture of Hutu and Tutsi as the others.

The only goal of those operations was to ensure
security. We had to avert a national threat and to prevent
people from being caught in the vice grip of
confrontations between the army and the rebels, which
were using them as cannon fodder and human shields.
Unfortunately, this is the price of State security when the
entire nation is at risk.

 

Currently the Government is taking stock of the
security situation in Rural Bujumbura three months after the
regroupment operation began. We can now inform the
Security Council that we will be able to close about 10 of
the 50 camps within two weeks. They will be dismantled in
a fully transparent way, in the presence of national and
international monitors.

I would like to reiterate once again that regroupment
is not an end in itself. Absolutely all of the camps will be
gradually dismantled as satisfactory security conditions are
restored. For the national security reasons mentioned
earlier, the camps around the capital will be the last to be
closed, that is to say, after we have completely done away
with any threat of destabilization.

Meanwhile, the Government, with the invaluable
assistance of humanitarian organizations, is making every
effort to provide health care, food and shelter to the
regrouped persons. People are increasingly able to resume
their usual farming, trading, educational and professional
activities. We would reiterate that all camps are accessible
and open to all monitors and humanitarian personnel,
enabling them to carry out their work there. N o restrictions
are imposed, contrary to certain untrue information that has
been disseminated, and protection is provided on request.

It is true that overall, living conditions in the camps
are harsh. The real and definitive solution is to stop the
war. This has been the Government's position since the
inception of the Arusha process, but the rebels also have to
made to understand this. The international and regional
communities must become involved, for the rebellion is not
only internal; it has taken root in neighbouring and even
distant countries as far away as southern Africa, where,
supposedly, the militarist option is once again gaining
support in certain countries. There the Government of
Burundi is powerless. All countries, without exception,
must struggle against the logic of war. Military victory,
from wherever it might come, will not bring lasting peace
to Burundi.

With regard to the Arusha peace process, my
Government welcomes the appointment of President
Mandela as the new mediator. We assure him of our
honest, willing, accountable and resolute cooperation in this
process, which must be reconfigured to ensure inclusive
participation by all the parties to the conflict so that an
appropriate pace and working method can be established in
order to bring about a swift and positive conclusion.

The situation is extremely urgent. We have
confidence in the new mediator's abilities in this area,
and his prestige is such that he can rally all Burundians
around our true national interests and help bring Burundi
back into the mainstream of international solidarity. We
call on the entire international community to provide him
with unwavering support.

I have already had occasion to express my
Government's concern with regard to the socio-economic
situation. The needlessly prolonged and extreme economic
pressure on my country due to the embargo on
international cooperation threatens to lead to an explosion.
That explosion would be not only at the level of society,
but also at that of security. The peace process in which
the people of Burundi and the international community
have placed their hopes runs the risk of collapsing.

The link between peace and development is now
more necessary than ever before. Burundi calls on its
partners to review and correct their analysis of this
situation and to resume cooperation immediately. We see
no valid reason for not resuming such cooperation; even
reasons of insecurity are not well founded, given that
three fourths of the country is secure. Even less well
founded is the wait-and-see approach regularly taken with
respect to the peace Agreement and to meaningful
progress in the negotiations, any assessment of which is
far from being precise.

I am making a veritable cry for help. Strikes began
on Monday, 17 January, this year. Looking at it closely,
it is clear that they are due not only to the increasing
unavailability of the minimum means of subsistence, but,
more seriously, to the political manipulation of our poor
citizens by extremists and those who are against the peace
process - and they indeed exist. By continuing to
impoverish the population in this way, the international
community will only serve to vindicate those people.
They are close to achieving their aim of bringing about an
indefinite halt to the peace process by instilling in the
people of Burundi a sense of distrust and disbelief in the
Government, the regional community and the international
community.

