Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): For many
months, and with increasing distress and concern, Egypt has
followed the continuing military confrontations between the
warring Afghan parties. The recent armed clashes represent
a dangerous escalation of the situation, especially because
of the repercussions on civilians suffering from their
destructive effects and forced displacement to other regions.
This is something my country strongly condemns, and it is
why Egypt invites the international community to provide
assistance and to work to put an end to the suffering of the
Afghan people, and to provide humanitarian assistance to
the refugees.

The situation of civilians in Afghanistan has become
a source of constant concern to the international
community, especially now when we are hearing that one
of the Afghan parties is practising a "scorched earth"
policy in order to change the demographic map of
Afghanistan. If this allegation proves true, such a policy
would undoubtedly be a repudiation and grave violation
of the agreements and commitments that should be, and
are expected to be, adhered to by all Afghan parties.

Egypt is following with a great deal of interest the
discussions conducted by the Security Council on the
situation in Afghanistan, given its obligation, as a
Member State of the United Nations, to work to establish
peace and stability in that part of the world. Likewise,
Egypt, as a country of the Middle East region - which
has a role to play in Central Asia and is affected by what
happens there - sees stability in Central Asia as an
opportunity to profit from their resources and carry out
economic and social development.

Following very closely the situation in Afghanistan
and its repercussions on the neighbouring regions and
those further away, we have noted the tendency among
terrorist groups to exploit Afghan territory and the lack of
a strong central authority in order to export terrorism to
other pars of the world and to train terrorists there. This
is something my country condemns, and we ask the
international community to deal with this situation.
Establishing stability and peace in Afghanistan
would undoubtedly play an important role in preserving
the peace and security of the world as a whole,
particularly of the Central Asian region. It is for this
reason that we very much hope that we will see the
Afghan parties and the other forces interested in the
Afghan situation, as well as neighbouring countries,
succeed in achieving a real easing of the situation. This
would once again make Afghanistan a stable and active
member of the international community. Key steps in this
direction would undoubtedly be for the outside parties to
refrain from giving material and military support to the
warring parties and to respect the sovereignty and unity
of the Afghan territory.

The first step to putting an end to the conflict in
Afghanistan begins with ending the supply of weapons to
all the warring parties. This means that international
parties who can exert influence in this area must bring

 

strong pressure to bear in order to convince the Afghan
factions to continue negotiations and political dialogue
under the auspices of the United Nations, so as to achieve
a national reconciliation that takes into account the interests
of all the parties. In this context we underscore the
importance of establishing a broadened interim Government
that would include the different factions and that would lay
the foundations for peaceful and political coexistence
among all the components of Afghan society.

While Egypt supports the efforts of the "six plus two"
group to resolve the crisis, including that group's Tashkent
declaration of 19 July regarding a settlement of the conflict
and the 8 August communique of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, Egypt calls as well for the full
implementation of the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly concerning Afghanistan.

Egypt also calls on all the concerned parties to
strengthen their efforts to put an end to the bloodshed and
the squandering of energy and resources in Afghanistan and
to alleviate rapidly the suffering of the civilian population.
We also invite the Afghan parties to relinquish the use of
force, bring about an immediate end to the killing and
begin negotiations on a final settlement of the conflict. In
this context, it is our hope that Ambassador Brahimi will be
able to resume his positive and active role, and we wish
him a complete recovery.

