The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Fore for her statement. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Development of Belgium. (spoke in English) I am delivering this statement on behalf of the two co-penholders, Germany and Belgium, and I welcome the presence here of Minister Maas of Germany. I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and Executive Director Fore for their briefings. Their statements helped to shed light on the ongoing tragedy in Syria, as they were illustrated with concrete examples that they have encountered in Idlib in the vital work that UNICEF and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) are undertaking to alleviate the unspeakable suffering there. Both briefings recalled once again that after nine years of war, 11 million Syrians, in particular children, continue to be in need of humanitarian help and protection. These numbers need to prompt us to take action. They are a dire reminder of the fact that the humanitarian situation in Syria must remain at the top of the Council's agenda and that the Council needs to act. Now more than ever before, the situation in Idlib requires our common attention and common action: 950,000 people have fled the violence since the beginning of December, and OCHA foresees that another 200,000 men, women and children may have to take the same decision shortly. The conditions that these people are experiencing are dire. If they decide to stay behind, they risk being hit by indiscriminate bombings. If they decide to leave, they have no other option but to join those who have already found refuge in overpacked camps, in unfinished housing, in tents, or, for the most unfortunate, under the open sky, in freezing temperatures. Let us make no mistake: all of those people face serious protection risks. The situation in Idlib goes to the very core of why we all committed to the principles of international humanitarian law. Those principles must not be neglected; they must be put into practice. We would like to echo the Secretary-General's statement last week in which he called for an immediate ceasefire, adding: "There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only possible solution remains political. This man-made humanitarian nightmare for the long-suffering Syrian people must stop. It must stop now". In the wake of the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020), on the cross-border mechanism, we the co-penholdersthank the Secretary-General for his report concerning alternative modalities to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing, which, regrettably, could not be extended along with the two other crossings into Idlib last month. We the co-penholders will continue to consult with all members of the Council in a transparent and inclusive way in order to consider how best to take forward the options outlined in the report. The Council has to guarantee that the United Nations and its humanitarian partners can continue to deliver vital humanitarian assistance to all those in need ina timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded manner. The Syrian people need our commitment; their humanitarian needs should be our constant guideline. We will address that further in our national statement. I will now make an_ intervention national capacity. in my I would like to start by paying tribute to all the humanitarian workers in Syria - many of whom are Syrians - especially those who provide support to the north-west of the country. Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis in 2011, Belgium has provided more than €230 million to alleviate the humanitarian needs of the Syrian population. We intend to approve an additional €4 million in humanitarian aid to the Syrian people via the cross-border pooled fund and the Syria humanitarian fund. In my remarks, I would like to focus on two points: first, the situation in Idlib, and secondly, the question of humanitarian access. On the situation in Idlib, the Council has the mandate and the responsibility to maintain peace and international security. The situation in Idlib requires the full attention of the Council. I support the Secretary-General's call for an immediate and sustainable ceasefire. We call on all parties concerned to show a maximum level of restraint. The front lines have progressed towards the most densely populated areas. There is a risk of all humanitarian action being suffocated. Moreover, the direct confrontation between Turkey, on the one hand, and Syria and Russia, on the other, constitutes a dangerous escalation that could have unpredictable consequences. Belgium repeats its unequivocal condemnation of the attacks perpetrated by groups the Council has designated as terrorist groups. But efforts to fight terrorism never relieves parties of their obligations under international humanitarian law. Those grave violations of international humanitarian law cannot W27 remain unpunished. I want to reiterate the political and financial support of Belgium to the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We fully support the United Nations board of inquiry. On the question of humanitarian access, since 2014 the humanitarian needs in Syria have all but decreased. Regrettably, no agreement was reached in January to renew the crossing point of Al-Yarubiyah, which offered access, through the most direct route, to people in need in the north-east, in accordance with the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/139) on the alternative modalities for the border crossing. The report shows clearly that this gap will be hard to fill. It offers two venues. On the one hand, it clearly states that cross-line access can work only if four conditions are fulfilled. In view of past experiences, the international community needs verifiable, unquestionable guarantees that the Syrian authorities will implement the conditions, as outlined by Ms. Mueller, in full and without delay. The United Nations needs to closely monitor the process and deliver full and detailed data that would allow the Security Council to fully understand the how those conditions are to be implemented and, specifically, where gaps in humanitarian access remain. The Syrian authorities' track record on humanitarian access raises a number of questions. Their good faith will be systematically evaluated based on their ability to fully and sustainably implement those conditions. A partial or conditional implementation is unacceptable. The second venue mentioned in the report is the crossing point of Tall Abyad as the most feasible alternative to the Al-Yarubiyah crossing when it comes to cross-border options. As such, that option must be actively considered by all Council members, in conjunction with the necessary prerequisites and guarantees. As mentioned before, the co-penholders will continue to see how to best advance the options outlined in the report. We must focus on access to humanitarian aid for all those in need. Today, more than ever, it is time for action.(spoke in French) I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I now give the floor to those other members of the Council that wish to make statements. I call on the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
