Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by thanking
the President of the Republic of Togo for attending the
beginning of today's meeting, as well as his senior
Minister. That is a sign of the political support that their
Administration attaches to our work. We also commend
the outstanding work done by Ambassador Kodjo Menan
and all of his team at the helm ofthe Council. The concept
note (S/2013/264, annex) that was circulated for today's
debate is a reflection of the high quality of that work.

We should like also to express our recognition ofthe
importance of the issue that Togo has selected for our
debate: its geographic expression, Africa, and thematic
expression, terrorism, are at the heart of the Security
Council's agenda. We also acknowledge the presence
of the Secretary-General, and we thank him for his
statement this morning. We also thank Mr. Shehu for
his statement.

The concept note invites us to consider, on the one
hand, the conditions and consequences of the terrorist
threat in Africa and, on the other, to look at regional
efforts and the need for greater support from the
international community.

Regarding the first aspect, it is well documented
that terrorism is often the product of basic conditions
such as oppression, social injustice, the lack of
economic opportunities and weak State institutions.
Thousands of young people choose this path out of
despair, which is sometimes magnified by groups
that systematically promote their radical and violent
causes. In that respect, we should not underestimate the
potential links and interconnections between terrorism
and destabilizing factors such as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and piracy. In areas
where crime is widespread, terrorists may move in and
operate for their own benefit, or terrorists may rely on
criminal acts to finance their activities.

Moreover, the issue of transnationalization is
extremely relevant, since the perpetrators of criminal
activities and, sometimes, terrorist groups seek to
establish themselves in countries where police or
military enforcement is non-existent owing to weak
border control and crime. Therefore, the better control
and regulation of cross-border activities is essential
to guaranteeing peace and stability and to promoting
the appropriate policies and necessary socioeconomic
activities, especially with a view to the integration of
the economies of Africa.

We deem of particular importance the need to
focus more on the conditions that are conducive to the
existence and spread of terrorism. We believe that the
effectiveness of our efforts in the fight against terrorism
is related to our capacity to successfully address the
conditions that fuel that phenomenon.

In that regard, we believe that during the
past decade we have acquired a large number of
multidimensional operational tools to address this
issue and to cooperate effectively, taking into account
the needs and specificities of each region. Within the
scope of the Security Council in particular, we believe
that the sanctions regimes have been effective. Let me
recall that this organ has reiterated its determination to
continue to adopt new sanctions, in accordance with the
sanctions regime established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), against groups and persons
that do not cut off all ties with Al-Qaida and associated
groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa.

As we have already heard from previous speakers,
we have learned the lesson that it is not possible to
combat terrorism exclusively through military force.
Although terrorism is clearly an unjustifiable criminal
act, any measure to combat it must be taken in strict
conformity with international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The legitimacy of the actions of
both the United Nations and its Member States is of
fundamental importance.

For that reason, we would like to touch upon another
issue mentioned in the concept note: peacekeeping
operations. It is no coincidence that a number of those
operations were established in situations that posed a
threat to peace and where the presence of terrorist groups
was a destabilizing factor. Examples in that respect
range from Somalia to Mali. When militant extremists
threaten the peace, the issue starts to overlap with that
of the protection of civilians, which our peacekeeping
operations are typically mandated to ensure. Therefore
the fight against terrorism can, in some cases, threaten
the guiding principles of peacekeeping operations, such
as impartiality and the non-use of force, except in cases
of self-defence.

That leads me to the second point touched on in
the concept note: that international and interregional
cooperation are fundamental pillars of the global effort
to eradicate international terrorism. In that context,
two dimensions should be borne in mind: cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, and
cooperation within the United Nations system.

All States in all regions, large or small, strong or
weak, are vulnerable to terrorism and its consequences.
Therefore, in discussing this important issue, the focus
should be not only on the individual risk to a particular
State or region, but also on a global concerted response
on the part of all countries. That means that it is a
shared responsibility, because we cannot fight the
problem successfully if each and every State does not
at the same time combat it within its own jurisdiction.

Lastly, let me say that many of these comments are
reflected in the presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/5)
that we have just adopted, whose text we of course
support.

