Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome you, Sir, along with the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia and the Foreign Ministers of the Niger, Spain and Guatemala. I wish to thank the Kingdom of Belgium for bringing this important topic to the Security Council. We express our appreciation to our briefers, Ms. Bachelet, Father De Roux and Ms. Sooka, for their important statements. Their first-hand experiences in implementing various transitional justice mechanisms have made a major contribution to our better understanding of the advantages of those mechanisms and the challenges they face. The genuine tragedy experienced by a post-conflict population calls for the urgent establishment of the rule of law in a State where human beings can live in freedom, human rights are respected and legislation is subject to international law. The reinstatement or establishment of the rule of law becomes imperative in order to safeguard human dignity, which is the goal of transitional justice. However, that is no easy task. We must therefore continue to examine and improve the various tools at our disposal to enhance transition mechanisms and ensure that peace and security are permanently restored to societies that have fallen victim to conflict. When a society experiences conflict, many different kinds of victims emerge. That is why we understand that the classification of the types of victims must be taken into account when drawing up the laws, norms, protocols and regulations of truth commissions, courts and special commissions, as well as other institutions created for the post-conflict transition. That is of the utmost importance in order to directly and specifically respond to violations of rights so as to create more efficient mechanisms for reconciliation. Post-conflict processes must include specific mechanisms to provide relief and help to families, as well as to develop programmes for family reunification, the search for missing persons, the right to information about family members and reparations for moral damages. Furthermore, the Dominican Republic would like to highlight the importance of including a gender analysis in the measures created to guarantee rights, justice, reparation and non-recurrence. The realities, needs and evolving nature of the roles of women survivors of the conflict must be taken into account, particularly with regard to preventing impunity. We take this opportunity to congratulate the people of Colombia for their efforts to achieve a transition from a conflict situation to one of lasting peace, reconciliation and progress for its population, including both the victims and the actors involved in the conflict. There is no doubt that transitional justice presents major challenges, such as the optimization of time and budgets for the operation of the various mechanisms, the participation of victims and the development of special and specific protocols to serve as guidelines. However, we are confident that those challenges will be successfully overcome and that the Colombian people will emerge as a stronger, safer, more resilient and more united society. During the visit of Security Council members to Colombia last year, we witnessed first-hand the efforts of the Government, the parties and the general public to implement the mechanisms for a peaceful transition. We also observed the important role that Security Council missions play and the significant support they represent within peace and post-conflict processes. Finally, members of the Security Council must make a greater effort to promote the culture of peace. As an international community, it is incumbent upon us to fight for the restoration of peace and to foster an ideology for effective transitions towards peace, democracy, justice and guarantees of non-recurrence, avoiding at all costs the political polarization of such processes.
