Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank the President
for convening today's meeting. I also thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing on the situation in Ukraine.
Rwanda welcomes Sunday's presidential elections.
We congratulate President-elect Petro Poroshenko for
his decisive victory that will provide him with the
legitimacy required to end the Ukrainian crisis.

As reported by several national and international
monitors, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), elections in most
of Ukraine were free, fair and peaceful, with a high
turnout of over 60 per cent, despite reported cases of
polling irregularities and disruptions. However, it is
unfortunate that Ukrainians in some areas in the eastern
part of the country were denied the right to vote.

We commend the President-elect for his
commitment to continuing the political dialogue,
including with the separatists in eastern Ukraine. We
recall that the Geneva declaration of 17 April provides
a good basis for that dialogue. We are also encouraged
by the Mr. Poroshenko's pledge to engage the Russian
Federation in talks. We are equally encouraged by the
willingness of the Russian Federation to engage in
dialogue with the new Ukrainian leadership. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the Secretary-
General and his good offices, aimed at finding a
political and diplomatic solution to the crisis. We are
convinced that he will seize the momentum to achieve
a breakthrough with the support with the parties
concerned.

Meanwhile, the continuing violence in the east,
especially around the city of Donetsk, where a fierce
battle for control of the airport took place, is alarming.
We are also concerned about the killing ofjournalists
and the abduction of international monitors representing
the OSCE. We take note of the release of 11 monitors
and call for the immediate release of the remaining
four monitors who were abducted on Monday. We
urge all armed protesters to disarm and respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine.

Rwanda recognizes the legitimate right of the
Government of Ukraine to restore law and order in
the east and on the whole territory of Ukraine, as was
reaffirmed by the President-elect. However, we call
on the Ukrainian authorities to exercise that right in
a proportionate manner, bearing in mind that the only
sustainable way out of the crisis is through a political
and inclusive dialogue as well as constitutional reforms
aimed at further decentralization and the promotion of
equality and rights of minorities, including cultural and
linguistic rights.

Let me conclude by saying that the Ukrainian
presidential elections of last Sunday were a turning
point, as they have provided the country with a
legitimate leader who has enough political capital to
make peace among Ukrainians and to in the region. We
call on the international community, particularly the
United Nations, the European Union, the OSCE and the
Russian Federation, to support the new leadership in
that political and diplomatic process.

