Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings. The signing of the agreement in Juba on 3 October was a milestone for the people of the Sudan and an important step towards the stabilization of the region. We welcome the appointment of the chief administrators by Juba and Khartoum, and we take this opportunity to commend the parties, and in particular South Sudan, for the arduous work undertaken in making this a reality. We also welcome the conversations that took place in Khartoum in September. We know that the final status of Abyei and border demarcation are delicate issues that have often been overlooked in the face of more pressing bilateral issues. However, we understand that these broader considerations of relations between the two countries should not prevent the definitive establishment of the status of Abyei. Therefore, we join the Secretary-General in calling for a resumption, as soon as possible, of discussions in the framework of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, as well as the meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. It is imperative to encourage discussions on border demarcation and facilitate the implementation of the decisions of the Joint Mechanism, including the establishment of checkpoints and the reactivation of the Joint Military Observer Committee and the joint military observer team. We commend United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for providing bilateral forums for conflict prevention and its willingness to jointly draft a road map for the establishment of the Abyei police service. We encourage both Governments to participate actively in this initiative. It is essential that UNISFA be equipped with the appropriate tools. To that end, the appointment of the civilian Deputy Head of Mission and other civilian and police personnel, the operationalization of the Athony airstrip and the issuance of the pending visas for the police units are essential. We remain very concerned about incidents of intercommunal violence and the presence of armed elements in the Area, which have had devastating effects for the civilian population. We applaud the efforts of UNISFA, in collaboration with the community protection committees, to keep Abyei free of weapons, despite the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We reiterate the need to ensure sustainable and unimpeded humanitarian access to alleviate the needs of that population. We also recognize the commitment of UNISFA with the authorities to promote and defend the women and peace and security agenda. Those efforts have resulted in the identification and nomination of women for possible appointments to local administrations. The collaboration between UNISFA and Concordis International to strengthen gender and youth issues in the Abyei Area is an important step in this direction. We remain concerned about the increase in sexual and gender-based violence involving minors. The establishment of a joint office and a service with a direct telephone line for victims is a fundamental tool to protect them. We congratulate UNISFA for its handling of the COVID-19 pandemic and the support it has given to communities, together with humanitarian personnel, non-governmental organizations and United Nations agencies. Lastly, we urge both countries to recognize their geographic and historic links. There is no shortcut to lasting peace. Both countries must affirm their bonds and develop good economic, social, political and security relations. To do that, they must be willing to make a commitment and honour those commitments for the benefit of their peoples.
