Mr. Moustafa (Egypt): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Sir, and the New Zealand presidency of
the Council for the commendable way in which the
proceedings have been conducted during September.
I should also like to extend my appreciation to
Ms. Fang Liu, Secretary General of the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), for her valuable
briefing.

The timing of the submission of the draft resolution
before us is questionable, coming as it does just a few
days before the triennial 39th session of the ICAO
Assembly, which takes place in the last week of this
month. The Assembly gathers all ICAO members to
address all aspects related to civil aviation and aviation
safety and security.

The introduction of today's draft resolution
suggests a desire to meddle in ICAO's business in order
to have the draft resolution adopted before that session.
However, as agreed by the members of the Council,
the goal of the draft resolution is to raise awareness
within the international community about the gravity
of the situation and the threats posed to civil aviation
security, and to recall the incidents that have taken
place since 2011. The threat is growing and aims to
influence national economies and relations among
States. We must recall the gravity of the threat in order
to promote cooperation among countries, provide the
technical assistance needed, respect the sovereignty of
countries and emphasize the role of ICAO as the global
body in charge of such issues.

In view of its awareness of the importance of
countering the terrorist threat and of protecting its
citizens and tourists, Egypt continues to work closely
with all countries and with ICAO. A recent review of
aviation practices and procedures in Egyptian airports
took place, in line with the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, and it is my pleasure
to inform the Council that the ICAO audit team has
given Egypt a positive assessment for its application of
standard security procedures. The Egyptian authorities
received a formal letter from ICAO in August,
indicating the progress made by Egypt in the field of
aviation security. We hope that other countries are at
the same level.

We believe that the threat to civil aviation requires a
collective effort to counter terrorism in a comprehensive
manner by addressing the root causes that lead to
terrorism within countries and by countering it in all
its forms. If we are serious, we ought to engage in
intensive cooperation and stop financing terrorism and
providing safe haven to terrorists. We should also halt
all attempts to use social media to spread messages of
hatred and terrorist propaganda.

We must equip and assist countries in fighting
terrorism in the required manner. We should also keep
pace with the fast-changing attitudes and resources
of terrorist groups, and adopt uniform measures and
standards for countries that have been victimized by
terrorism, which seeks to destroy their economies. We
should not treat Victims differently depending on their
origins, but sympathize with all victims of terrorism.
It is our ethical and political duty to treat everyone
equally.

Lastly, we reaffirm Egypt's commitment to
countering the scourge of terrorism on the basis of
cooperation, openness and transparency. We will work
to offer practical responses to the threat to the field of
civil aviation security.

