The President (spoke in French): I should like, at
the outset of this meeting, to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to Sir John Sawers, new
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to
the United Nations. I look forward to working closely
with him in the work of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of international peace and security

Role of the Security Council in conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular
in Africa

Letter dated 14 August 2007 from the

Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent

Mission of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2007/496)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Canada,
Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guatemala, Honduras, Japan, Kenya, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Namibia, Norway, Portugal, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
invitations extended by the Council under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ambassador
Leo Merores, on behalf of the President of the General
Assembly, and Ambassador Leslie Kojo Christian,
Acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
2
the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in the
consideration of the item.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/496, which contains the text of a letter dated
14 August 2007 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting. I now give him the
floor.


