Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
I thank you, Sir, for having organized this briefing, and
take this opportunity to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union Haile
Menkerios very much for his enlightening briefing,
which strongly highlights the stakes related to
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) in the area of peace
and security.

As noted in the report of Secretary-General
(S/2017/744) before us, the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union has taken several
important steps forward over the past recent years. The
positive development in that cooperation emanates
from a shared awareness of the interdependence and
complementarity of the two organizations in the area of
peace and security. It is worth recalling the importance
of strengthening that cooperation and developing a
more effective partnership to confront the common
challenges of collective security in Africa. In that
connection, we welcomed the signing on 19 April of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission. We are hopeful that the monitoring
mechanism put in place by the two secretariats to that
end will facilitate the implementation of that important
instrument to further strengthen cooperation between
the two organizations and reach its full potential.

The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council have a central role to play in
that cooperation, as you have just illustrated, Sir, in
summarizing the proceedings of the eleventh annual
joint consultative meeting of members of the Security
Council and African Union Peace and Security Council,
chaired by you, in Addis Ababa on 7 and 8 September.
I will limit myself to underlining that, as pertains to
that cooperation, African peacekeeping operations
are illustrative of the fact that they constitute local
responses to global problems. From that perspective,
the strengthening of the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations should enable
the African Union to equip itself with additional
capacities, tools and means for effective and concerted
action to the benefit of all. That requires strengthening
the partnership not only at the strategic and operational
levels, but also on the level ofj oint analysis and planning
until deployment so as to ensure a more effective and
adapted response to the evolving peace and security
challenges that the African continent is facing. The
lessons learned, particularly in the transition from
African Union-led peace operations to United Nations-
led peacekeeping operations, illustrate the numerous
logistical, operational and capacity difficulties facing
both organizations in the effective management of
peace and security issues.

In that respect, we believe that strengthening the
capacity of the African Union and its regional economic
communities in the area of peace and security is
important. In the same vein, it is necessary to strengthen
the means and capacities of regional Offices, such as
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
as well as the work of African Union special envoys and

special representatives to optimize their contributions
to that end.

My delegation welcomes the efforts made thus far
in seeking predictable, sustainable and flexible funding
mechanisms for African Union-led peace operations
authorized by the Security Council, in particular the
adoption of resolution 2320 (2016) in November 2016,
during the Senegalese presidency, which, in our opinion,
is an important step in that it opened up real prospects
for further reflection on how best to ensure sustainable
and predictable financing for African Union-led peace
operations. We are counting on the Ethiopian presidency
to take the lead in realizing that vision.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for the quality of their reports,
submitted in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
the concrete proposals of which bring us closer together
towards realizing our common goal and making the
strategic partnership more predictable. The Senegalese
delegation hopes that the Council will demonstrate the
necessary political will so as to ensure an appropriate
follow-up through working collectively in a constructive
spirit on the adoption of a substantive draft resolution
establishing the principle that peace support operations
mandated or authorized by the African Union with
the consent of the Council must be financed through
assessed contributions to the United Nations budget,
with decisions on the funding of specific missions to be
determined on a case-by-case basis.

My delegation looks forward with great interest to the
review of the implementation of resolution 2320 (2016).

