Mr. Moreno (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank to the Secretary-General,
Dr. Nabarro, Ms. Chan and Mr. Niamah for the
information that they have provided to us. We assure
them that it is highly useful and necessary.

The gravity of the situation created by the Ebola
epidemic that is plaguing several countries in Central
and West Africa highlights the need to deal with it
energetically and with the cooperation of all countries.
In this spirit, at the request of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and the Director General of the World Health
Organization (WHO), Ms. Margaret Chan, Cuba has
already engaged in an assistance initiative under the
leadership of the WHO, as announced last Friday,
12 September 2014, by the Minister of Health of the
Republic of Cuba, Mr. Roberto Morales Ojeda. That
cooperation will enable a medical brigade to be sent
to Sierra Leone. Its members have expressed their
willingness to join the fight against this epidemic, have
over 15 years of professional experience and have worked
in other countries facing natural and epidemiological
disasters and in medical cooperation missions. We are
ready to work alongside other countries, including those
with which we do not maintain diplomatic relations.

Cuba's response is in line with our country's
ongoing solidarity and cooperation with Africa, Asia
and Latin America and the Caribbean. Over the past
55 years, we have cooperated with 158 countries, with
the participation of 325,710 health workers. A total
of 76,744 health workers have been working in 39
countries in Africa. Currently, 4,048 Cubans, 2,269 of
whom are doctors, are providing services in 32 African
nations.
In addition, Cuba, which is a small and poor
country, has trained, to date and entirely free of charge,
38,940 doctors from 121 countries. Currently, 10,000
young foreigners are studying medicine on our island,
6,000 of whom are doing so totally free of charge.
That is being done in accordance with the principle
of providing ongoing assistance to the poorest among
us paid for by those with resources, with a view to
ensuring the sustainability of the Cuban health system
and international cooperation.

In this struggle against Ebola, which should be
everyone's battle, the Government of Cuba has decided
to maintain its cooperation and expand it to the most
affected countries, which have already been informed.
In the rest of the region, the areas not affected by
Ebola and where we have, as I mentioned, in excess
of 4,000 health personnel, we are ready to contribute
to the prevention of this disease. The medical brigades
that will be sent to Africa for the fight against Ebola
belong to the Henry Reeve International Contingent,
which was created in 2005 and which includes doctors
specialized in facing disasters and large epidemics.
This response on the part of the Government of Cuba
confirms the values of solidarity that have guided
the Cuban revolution: not offering our leftovers, but
sharing what we have.

Africa is awaiting an immediate response by all
Member States, especially those with resources. It is
urgent that we join this global effort against Ebola.
Humanity owes a debt to the peoples of Africa. We
cannot disappoint them.

