Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It is a great pleasure for
me to participate in this Security Council meeting on
the United Nations-African Union (AU) relationship in
matters of peace and security. In that context, I wish to
commend President Jacob Zuma of South Africa,
President of the Council for the month of January, for
making the partnership between the United Nations and
the AU the centrepiece of its presidency and for having
convened this meeting and deeming it fit to invite the
AU, in particular Kenya as Chair of the AU Peace and
Security Council, to join in this debate. I convey to the
members of the Council the very best wishes of my
President, Mr. Mwai Kibaki, who, owing to prior
commitments, could not join them at this meeting. He
asked me to express his full commitment to the
ongoing efforts to strengthen the strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations, in general,
and in peace and security matters, in particular.

Last Monday, 9 January, I chaired the 307th
meeting of the AU Peace and Security Council, in
Addis Ababa, on the AU-United Nations strategic
partnership in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Framed by the report of the AU
Chairperson, that discussion elaborated the form and
content of the desired partnership from an African
perspective. It is our hope that the recommendations of
the communique of that meeting will inform our
discussions today.

The quest for peace and security is a pressing
challenge in Africa today. Over the past two decades,
the continent has witnessed a number of crises and
violent conflicts, with huge negative consequences for
the African people, as well as our aspiration to a
peaceful and prosperous continent. We are therefore
faced with the tasks of resolving protracted conflicts,
such as those in Darfur and Somalia, and of facilitating
reconstruction and development in countries that have
emerged from conflicts, such as Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Cote d'Ivoire and, more recently, Libya, Tunisia and
Egypt - societies that have undergone radical
transformation.

The need to prevent conflicts and de-escalate
fragile situations calls for proactive engagement.
Additionally, growing threats of transnational crime,
including terrorism and piracy, especially off the coast
of Somalia and Western Africa, as well as the
trafficking of persons and contraband, increasingly
pose serious challenges to the consolidation of peace
and security.

In view of those conditions, for a considerable
time Africa has dominated the agenda of the Security
Council because such threats impact international
peace and security and their causes and dynamics
extend beyond the affected countries, regions and the
continent itself. In that regard, the need to maintain a
strong and well-structured strategic partnership
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council cannot be overemphasized.

While the Security Council has the primary
mandate for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the resolution of today's complex threats calls
for collective action. That reality underscores the
wisdom that underpins the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the United Nations Charter, which provides for
regional mechanisms to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts. From that reality, modalities of engagement
have evolved. That that relationship is gaining
momentum is commendable, and that both sides
demonstrate a willingness to improve the relationship
needs to be encouraged further.

Yesterday's Security Council meeting on Somalia
(see S/PV.6701) was instructive on the necessity to
enhance the relationship. Indeed, as most speakers
emphasized, the opportunity to turn Somalia around
depends almost entirely on the extent to which we can
elevate and improve the strategic and operational
relationship between the AU and the United Nations, in
general, and the AU Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council, in particular.

We commend the focused attention of the United
Nations on its partnership with Africa. The statements
by the President of the Security Council in 2009 and
2010 (S/PRST/2009/26 and S/PRST/2010/21), as well
as the reports of the Secretary-General to the Council
on both occasions (S/2009/47O and S/2010/514),
reaffirm the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

However, that relationship has not been without
challenges, especially in the past year. For that reason,
today we have the opportunity to reflect on innovative
ways of interpreting Chapter VIII that add value,
improve the relationship and optimize the chances of
achieving sustainable peace. In that context, I wish to
highlight several issues that require measures of
improvement.

First, the process of decision-making, particularly
in determining when and how to engage in specific
crisis situations, has been a matter of divergence at
times, with serious consequences. The practice in the
past two years seems to indicate an undesirable trend
that appears to be selective on the part of the Security
Council and that seems to disregard full consideration
of the position and/or recommendations of the AU or
its organs. We all recall the manner in which the
African position was either ignored or partially
considered in the cases of Libya and Cote d'Ivoire last
year. President Zuma has articulated that point much
more than I myself can. I fully agree with him, and
have nothing useful to add.

We have proposed a number of measures,
including regular consultations beyond the annual
meetings of the Councils, even before decisions are
taken. It would also be valuable to give meaning to the
principles envisaged in Chapter VIII, namely,
complementarity, subsidiarity and comparative
advantage. The caution here is to avoid a framework
that compromises the value of the African Union and
other regional organizations as first responders to a
criSis.

A second significant area is the gap between the
requirements of an operation and the resources
available, about which many delegations spoke
eloquently yesterday in relation to the African Union
Mission in Somalia. To the extent that Africa's peace
support operations are contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the
recommendations of the Prodi report (see S/2008/813)
echoed yesterday to guarantee predictable, flexible and
sustainable funding/resourcing for such operations is
imperative. That is so because poorly resourced
operations are unlikely to deliver sustainable peace.

We welcome calls by some speakers for an
increase in voluntary contributions without caveats.
However, those are unlikely to be sufficient given the
tasks on the ground. For that reason, a reflection on the
modalities of bringing the value of the United Nations
for sustained operations, particularly through assessed
contributions, to AU-led missions is an unavoidable
necessity.

Thirdly, institutionally, we have witnessed
progress between the United Nations and the AU at the
various levels: between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council, the departments of peace and security,
political affairs et cetera, as well as between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Those relationships
need further clarification, particularly with regard to
the roles and responsibilities of all actors involved.
Clarity will minimize duplication and enhance
coherence, synergy of action and comfort levels, and
bring focus to the efforts of both the AU and the United
Nations.

Fourthly, operationally, Africa is demonstrating
renewed determination and willingness to deploy peace
support operations in fragile, even insecure,
environments. That calls for a shift in the United
Nations doctrine on peace operations. The practice that

the United Nations can only engage where there is
peace to keep translates into the United Nations
abandonment of some of the most challenging crisis
situations. That leads to the trend observed in the Prodi
report where the most challenging crisis situations are
left in the hands of the least resourced and able
organizations. Such a situation engenders less, not
more, security in the world.

Fifthly, at the AU we recognize that the
improvement of the AU-United Nations strategic
relationship also depends on building the capacity of
our institutions. We are now exploring ways of
increasing the pool of resources available for AU
activities, and are calling upon all our partners to assist
us in that regard. We are also in the process of
strengthening the interface between the various AU
offices, in particular between Addis Ababa and New
York, to ensure common messaging of African
perspectives and positions, especially where decisions
have been made by the AU.

This meeting follows an unprecedented window
of opportunity to finally restore security, peace and
stability in Somalia. The Council will recall that in
October 2010 the AU Peace and Security Council held
a meeting, ahead of the renewal of the AMISOM
mandate, in which we asked the Security Council to
consider a number of recommendations that we viewed
as critical for the operation in Somalia. The Security
Council responded to them in a limited manner. This
time around, we have approached the Security Council
after significant progress on the ground and with a
strategic concept developed by a joint assessment team
comprised of the AU, the United Nations and troop-
contributing countries. That underscores the growing
cooperation and partnership. Our expectation is that the
joint efforts will translate into better international and
Security Council support, as well as an effective
operation. Equally, we hope that the decision on
Somalia will be expeditious, and in no way be
predicated upon the outcomes of any future meetings
and engagements on Somalia. We must note that time
is of the absolute essence. The Security Council must
therefore act swiftly in order to protect and expand the
current gains.

In the area of mediation, it is crucial that that we
draw upon lessons from successful mediation
processes - for example, in the case of the Sudan,
where we have attained a good mix of United Nations
material, logistical and political support, together with

political legitimacy and access of the AU and its
subregional organization, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. That is a vital lesson on
complementarity, comparative advantage and strategic
convergence.

In the light of those observations, the AU looks
towards a more innovative interpretation of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter and to the
development of consensus on a set of principles that
will underpin greater synergy between the AU and the
United Nations. Key among those principles are
support for African ownership and priority setting;
flexible and innovative application of the principle of
complimentarily; and mutual respect and adherence to
the principle of comparative advantage.

In conclusion, I wish to re-emphasize the
significance of this agenda and to underscore the hope
of Africa that today's deliberations will lead to greater
coherence between the United Nations Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council in the
areas of conflict prevention, management and
resolution on the continent. More important, I hope and
believe that the cooperation will be governed by the
basic and cardinal rules of mutual trust and respect.

Once again, I wish to express the gratitude of
Kenya for the invitation to attend and participate in this
historic meeting of the Security Council.

