Mr. Jalang'o (Kenya): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for facilitating this debate so that the
general membership of the United Nations can express
its views on the extremely important and serious
situation in Iraq.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to fully
associate itself with the statement made yesterday by
Ambassador Rastam Mohd Isa of Malaysia on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Secondly, my delegation wishes to commend
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his very important
statement during this debate and for the way he has
continued to handle this crisis. At a time when the
situation is escalating to engulf the well-being, welfare
and lives of non-combatants - especially women and
children - it is important that the Secretary-General's
voice of reason continues to be a beacon of hope.

My delegation has always been convinced that
the provisions of Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) were adequate to resolve the issue of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction through peaceful means.
Indeed, the arms inspectors reinforced that conviction
in all their reports. However, we are now faced with a
situation in which the role of the Untied Nations has
been rendered less effective. It is a situation in which
the roles of the arms inspectors and the humanitarian
workers have been suspended due to the dangers posed
by the ongoing war. Daily, we are witnessing an ever-
rising number of civilian casualties, some far removed
from the actual theatre of war. We also have a large
number of people without drinking water and food. It is
a situation that invites epidemics of catastrophic
proportions, bearing in mind that, even before the
outbreak of war, children were still dying of curable
diseases, hunger and malnutrition.

My delegation strongly urges that the
humanitarian situation in Iraq be addressed with the
urgency it deserves, as has been underlined in the
statements of the Secretary-General and of all other
speakers. My delegation also calls for respect for the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Iraq. It is our sincere belief that the people of Iraq
should have the freedom to enjoy the abundance of
their natural resources under the guidance of the
Government of their choice.

Finally, my delegation strongly urges the United
Nations to remain focused on the current situation in
Iraq, which is a threat to international peace and
security.

