Mr. Danon (Israel): I will begin today by sharing
the facts. For the past month, Israel has faced violent
riots at the security fence with the Gaza Strip. They
were not demonstrations or protests. They were violent
riots. Rioters have thrown Molotov cocktails, planted
explosive devices and rolled burning tires. They
have sent flaming materials over the fence, igniting
widespread fires on Israel's southern agricultural lands.
They have repeatedly attempted to forcibly breach the
fence and infiltrate Israeli territory, with the explicit
goal of killing Israelis.

Hamas, the internationally recognized terrorist
organization, has taken the people of Gaza hostage.
This past Friday, a Hamas-led mob set fire to the
Kerem Shalom border-crossing terminal and destroyed
large parts of it. That crossing is a major entry point
for outside goods to enter Gaza. The damage set gas
lines and electricity infrastructure on fire and will cost
millions of dollars to repair. But Hamas does not care.
It values destruction over prosperity and death over
peace. Israel has known that for a long time. We were
reminded of it just last week, when the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) found and destroyed the ninth Hamas
terror tunnel since last October. The tunnel started in
Gaza, running alongside the Erez pedestrian crossing
and ending just metres from a village inside Israel. Its
goal was terror - killing and kidnapping Jews in the
surrounding Israeli towns.

Hamas lives on death, but not just the death of
Israeli civilians. As we have reported time and again,
Hamas is guilty of exploiting the innocent people of
Gaza as human shields. Hamas terrorists hide behind
innocent young children and place them directly in
the line of fire. The facts and the footage do not lie.
Hamas is committing grave violations of international
law. Its terrorists continue to hide behind innocent
children to ensure its own survival, while its leaders
incite the people of Gaza to violence. Yahya al-Sinwar,
the head of Hamas in Gaza, recently said to a group of
Palestinian youth:

"We favor assassination over natural death and are
always willing to sacrifice our lives".

A few days ago, a Hamas member who was captured
after attempting to cross into Israel provided critical
insight into Hamas's plot. I will reveal some of what we
have learned.

First, Hamas is instructing its activists to cut the
fence and steal Israel's security cameras in order to
sabotage and topple the fence and disrupt IDF activity.
Secondly, Hamas wants the riots that it is instigating to
be seen in the international media as a popular uprising,
not as a Violent action led by its militants. And thirdly,
and most importantly, Hamas terrorists are hiding
behind civilians during the riots. However, if the fence
is breached, heavily armed Hamas terrorists will enter
Israeli territory under cover of the mob to carry out
attacks on Israeli civilians. Those are the facts.

When it comes to the mob rushing to the fence,
too many in the international community never miss
an opportunity to legitimize the Palestinian voice of
violence. But when it comes to the safety of the Israeli
public, too often the world is silent. This is one of the
leadership's most cherished tactics. Their cycle of death
works as follows: they incite people to violence; they
place as many civilians as possible, including women
and children, in the line of fire so as to maximize
civilian casualties; they blame Israel; and then they
come here to complain to the United Nations. That is
the deadly game the Palestinians play, and they play it
at the expense of innocent children.

Once again, the Palestinian leadership is using
every ounce of its energy to attack us and to attempt to
destroy us. One of the players in this game was sitting
right across the room: the Palestinian representative,
who left the Chamber, like Abbas, who came here,
spoke and left; it is a routine. Mr. Mansour and his
friends are guilty of placing young Palestinian children
in harm's way. They are killing their own people; they
are guilty of exploiting them for their disgraceful
public-relations game.

We predicted this situation many months ago,
because the Palestinians always employ the same
strategy of manipulation. Every time the Palestinians
have an opportunity to change the course of history - to
partner with us on the path of peace - they always
choose violence. They never fail to miss that golden
opportunity to build a better future for their children
and for ours.

But the Palestinian leaders are not the only
participants in this scheme. Some in the international
community are playing into their hands. They are
falling into the trap, giving the Palestinians the
attention they seek and legitimizing Palestinian lies
and violence. Israel has witnessed this pattern over and
over again, since our earliest days. Even in 1947, we
watched the Palestinians miss their first opportunity.
The United Nations had proposed the creation of both
a Jewish State and an Arab State in the land of Israel.
The Jews were given just a portion of our historical
homeland, yet we accepted it. But the Arabs said no.
The Palestinians could not bear the thought of sharing
what had been our land to begin with, so they launched
a war against us.

Israel ultimately won that battle, but the Palestinians
continued with their lies and relentless violence, and
too many in the international community let them
get away with it. They falsely equated Zionism with
racism. They saluted the Palestinian cause as Israelis
were murdered, kidnapped and forgotten. They sided
with Palestinian killers, often with no questions asked.

Fast-forward to 2005; you forgot about this. Israel
disengaged from Gaza. We left completely. No Jewish
communities - you call them settlements - or
occupation. We took the entire Jewish community out
of Gaza. We even took out the people who had been
buried in Gaza. No IDF, no checkpoints, no civilians,
nothing; we left. Prime Minister Sharon decided to
try. We left Gaza in 2005. Gaza could have become
a Palestinian success story, maybe the Singapore of
the Middle East. It had the potential, but it could not
reach it because Hamas took over in 2006. Instead of
investing in education, infrastructure and the economy,
Hamas lives and breathes death and destruction. Hamas
spends all of its energy and resources terrorizing Israel
and exploits the population of Gaza to meet that end.

Let me be very clear today: when the Palestinians
say "days of rage", they mean "days of terrorism".
When the Palestinians say "right of return", they mean
"destruction of Israel". And when the Palestinians say
"peaceful protest", they mean "incitement and violence".

The common denominator throughout our history
has been the following: the international community,
with a few brave exceptions, does nothing to stop the
Palestinians from trying to terrorize Israel on the
world stage. But the fact is that whoever supports
the Palestinian ploy becomes a player in the cycle of
death. Only by breaking this cycle of orchestrated
riots, planned casualties and pleas for United Nations
sympathy will justice truly be served.

Israel is marking two major milestones: we are
celebrating 70 years since our people re-established our
sovereignty and independence by founding the State
of Israel in the land of Israel, and we are welcoming
with gratitude President Trump's decision to move the
United States embassy to Jerusalem, our ancient and
eternal capital. This was a step towards peace, because
in any peace agreement Jerusalem will be Israel's
capital. Everyone who claims that the decision to move
the United States embassy is a reason or a justification
for Palestinian violence should take another look at
history. This is an excuse, not a reason for violence
against Israel.

If this body truly seeks to uphold security, justice
and truth, then it will stop right here and now, condemn
this terror and reaffirm Israel's right to defend itself.

The Security Council must set the standard of
behaviour. It must tell Hamas that violence is not
the answer. Members must ask themselves what they
would do - what each one would do - if a violent
mob of tens of thousands was threatening to cross their
sovereign borders to attack their people? What would
they do if their people were faced with terror attacks
day in and day out? The Council must not give in to
the cycle of death that the Palestinians have created; it
must call out lies when it sees them, condemn Hamas's
violence and place itself on the side of truth and the
right side of history.

The meeting rose at12.40p.m.
