Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would first of all
like to warmly welcome the president of Somalia his
Excellency Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We also
extend our appreciation to both briefers.

My delegation commends the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia and other parties involved in close
cooperation with the Federal Government of Somalia.
We welcome the progress achieved in the areas of
State-building, good governance and restoring peace
security and economic growth, which are crucially
important in the light of upcoming parliamentary
elections. We especially praise the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia in ensuring
security in the country and their significance for the
further establishment of peace and reconciliation. The
recent extension of the Mission's mandate underscored
the importance of UNSOM. activities in support of the
work of the Federal Government of Somalia.

Ukraine strongly condemns the recent suicide
bombings in the city of Gaalkacyo and the suicide
car bombing at the Banadir regional administration
headquarters in Mogadishu, which took the lives
of 14 people, including two children. Recalling the
Al-Shabaab attack in March on the coastal village
of Garad, on the shores of Puntland, which included
large numbers of children among the Al-Shabaab
militants, we want to express our deep concern about
the recruitment of children and their use in armed
conflicts, along with other violations of international
humanitarian law perpetrated against children in
conflict situations.

It is very troubling that the recruitment of children
and young people into AI-Shabaab is happening in
mosques and schools. We believe firmly that every
effort must be made to ensure that schools meet their
goal of being educational facilities first and foremost,
offering students a path to a better and more peaceful
future. The sanctity of places of religious worship
must also be respected, and they should not be used as
poaching grounds for finding foot soldiers to fill in the
ranks of terrorist groups. In our view, it is extremely
important to improve the provisions for child protection
in the mandates of the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia in order to strengthen the Missions' abilities to
effectively recognize, report and respond to violations
and abuses committed against children, including their
abduction by armed groups.

Ukraine acknowledges the positive impact of
the collective steps taken by the United Nations
and the Puntland authorities to make the necessary
arrangements for ensuring the proper treatment of
former child soldiers recruited by terrorists, in order
to rehabilitate and eventually reunite them with their
families. Such children and young people should have
an opportunity to complete their education and learn a
trade so as to be able to make a living and contribute to
their communities.
We commend the Federal Government of Somalia's
drafting of a national security policy and plans for a
consultative meeting in the regions aimed at advancing
its implementation. The deliberations on a new policing
model and updated Heegan plan for developing the
Somalia police at the Federal, regional and state levels
deserve special mention, as an essential element in the
provision of improved safety and security to the local
populations in every region in Somalia.

We also welcome the announcement, on 25 March, of
a comprehensive agreement on peace and reconciliation
among the peoples of Jubaland. We call on the Federal
Government of Somalia to continue to cooperate with
all the relevant stakeholders in order to resolve the
longstanding disputes between various communities
and administrations in the rest of Somalia. The
agreement reached between the Federal Government
and the Puntland Government with a letter agreeing
to Puntland's full participation in the electoral process
with the goal of forming a new Federal Parliament later
this year represents another positive step on the way to
achieving administrative unity in the country.

Considering that progress, the Security Council
should stay focused on maintaining the current positive
trends and securing the implementation of all of the
Federal Government's initiatives aimed at establishing
sustainable peace and completing the reconciliation
process. The President of Somalia can rely on our
continued support.

