Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I commend the
presidency of the United Kingdom for convening this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is most timely indeed. Kazakhstan
expresses its sincerest condolences to and solidarity
with the peoples and Governments of countries
suffering and affected by the brutal attacks, and stands
united with all for global security.

The series of terrorist attacks in rapid succession in
so many countries, combined with the displacement of
millions of refugees, pose the most prominent threats
to global peace today. We have to act promptly to avert
the actions of State and non-State actors that create
political, economic and social turmoil. This calls for
massive multidimensional strategies on all fronts, led
by the United Nations, together with Member States.

My delegation proposes that the United Nations
convene a global meeting on peace and security at the
highest level of Heads of State to evolve contemporary
means to fight and eliminate the root causes ofconflicts,
terrorism and extremism. We need to reinforce
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding, coordinated
with political mediation, the rule of law, human rights,
national reconciliation, and the improvement of living
standards. These have to be complemented by creating
public awareness, especially among our youth, of the
dangers of recruitment by extremist groups. They
must also foster a culture of peace, as Kazakhstan has
done by promoting inter-ethnic dialogue, creating the
Assembly of People of Kazakhstan, and hosting the
triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions.

The escalation ofviolence and bloodshed is alarming
and new approaches must be conceived. That is why,
in addressing the General Assembly in September this
year (see A/70/PV.13), President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan delineated some proposals, which I
submit for consideration today.

First, our thrust has to shift from routine
conflict prevention and post-conflict recovery to a
new development strategy that would considerably
eliminate or reduce the threat of war and conflicts. He
therefore proposed the launch of a new trend in global
development under the 2045 global strategic initiative.
The first step on this road could be the development
under United Nations auspices of a concept entitled
NEW FUTURE, which means nuclear, energy, water,
food security, understanding, trust and urgent reforms.

Secondly, we propose that the Economic and Social
Council be transformed into a global development
council, comprising United Nations Member States
elected by the General Assembly and the heads of all
United Nations specialized agencies, including the
International Monetary Fund. It would become a global
economic regulator promoting economic and social
growth worldwide.

Thirdly, Kazakhstan offers to organize at the
highest level a United Nations international conference
designed to reaffirm the basic principles ofinternational
law and good governance to combat the weakening role
of global institutions and international law.
Fourthly, Kazakhstan proposes to establish a
United Nations unified global network to counter
international terrorism and extremism, as an outcome
of the Secretary-General's forthcoming comprehensive
plan of action to combat terrorism.

Fifthly, the United Nations system, the Security
Council, the Department of Political Affairs, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
must work closely with regional structures to find
comprehensive strategic solutions as proposed above.
A better coordination should be established among
the United Nations system, international and regional
structures, parliamentarians, religious leaders, media
and civil society, all engaging in concerted global
efforts. These aim at overall national capacity-building
with the participation of women at every stage. We must
also go towards the larger concept of human security,
moving away from State security to people-centred
security.

Finally, my country stands ready to be a reliable
partner in the larger multilateral action to preserve
international peace and security.

