The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA);
Mr. Fedotov, Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well as Ambassador Djani, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their in-depth analyses of the current
situation in Afghanistan.

UNAMA plays an important role in coordinating
international assistance to Afghanistan. The security
situation in the country remains a source of concern.
Despite the efforts of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the country remains plagued by
brutal terrorist attacks. The countless victims of those
heinous attacks include civilians, above all women
and children, as well as military and police personnel.
We pay tribute to their courage and to their memory.
The situation is further complicated by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Its
fighters retain influence in the country. They fill their
ranks by adding foreign terrorist fighters with combat
experience in Syria and Iraq and by creating so-called
sleeper cells. As Mr. Fedotov rightly noted earlier,
the drug problem is inextricably linked to terrorism.
Narcodollars provide considerable financial support for
terrorism. We believe that it is extremely important to
continue and strengthen international efforts to counter
that scourge.

The Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) always stands ready to provide its assistance in
that regard, as it has extensive experience in combating
the drug threat, including through Operation Channel.
We intend to continue working with our Afghan friends
to eliminate the security threats, primarily those posed
by ISIL and Al-Qaida, and to build the capacities of
civilian, security and counter-narcotics agencies.

The Russian Federation consistently supports the
aspirations of the Afghan people for lasting peace in
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We are genuinely
eager to promote an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
reconciliation process and subsequent stabilization in
the country. We have said time and again that a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan is our common goal.

The Russian Federation has already done and
continues to do a great deal to establish peace on Afghan
soil. Examples of our efforts include inter-Afghan
contacts on the Russian platform during the Moscow
format of consultations, held on 9 November 2018,
and during celebrations of the 100th anniversary of
Russian-Afghan diplomatic relations on 28 and 29 May
this year. Such steps are based on the understanding
that national reconciliation hinges on inclusive
dialogue, leaving no social and political forces behind.
The intra-Afghan dialogue was launched in Moscow on
5 and 6 February. For the first time, it brought together
eminent politicians, women and the Taliban at the same
table and confirmed the fact that a broad discussion
remains key to achieving peace in Afghanistan. We
stand ready to continue to provide our full cooperation
in that regard.

Another channel for successful engagement on
Afghanistan is the trilateral consultations format on
the Afghan peace process at the level of the special
representatives of Russia, the United States and China,
with the participation of Pakistan at the meeting of the
troika in Beijing on 11 July.

We note the growing awareness of the importance
of the regional context of an Afghan settlement
and the need to harness the potential of established
structures in that regard, in particular the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the renewed SCO
Contact Group with Afghanistan, as well as the CSTO.
National reconciliation should be the result of an all-
encompassing inter-Afghan dialogue and a concerted
approach to uniting the entire country and all Afghans,
without exception. However, after years of conflict,
the path to peace in Afghanistan will be arduous and
require the consolidation of the efforts of all actors.
In addition, there will be a need for strategic patience
to ensure that the blueprint for a final settlement is
fully operational.

We deplore the suspension of talks between the
United States and the Taliban, a positive outcome to
which would have paved the way for further progress in
achieving a peaceful settlement, national reconciliation
and a comprehensive solution in Afghanistan. We
trust that the situation that has arisen will not lead to
excessive delays in United States-Taliban dialogue. We
call on the parties to return to the negotiating table as
soon as possible. The Russian Federation reaffirms
its commitment to facilitating the peace process in
Afghanistan and its willingness to act as a guarantor
of an agreement between the United States and the
Taliban, alongside other key States of the region.

Afghanistan is about to hold presidential elections,
scheduled for September this year. We trust that the
elections will take place in an atmosphere of calm
and be a powerful consolidating factor for the people
of Afghanistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.

