Mr. Patriota: Let me thank you, Sir, for the
invitation to address the Security Council this
morning in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Miguel Trovoada for his
insightful presentation and for sharing a vision of the
progress, challenges and opportunities that Guinea-
Bissau faces today. I am particularly grateful for
his readiness to cooperate with the Peacebuilding
Commission towards our shared objective of providing
the best support to the authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau.

Two weeks ago, the PBC Guinea-Bissau configuration
held its first meeting of the year, to which we invited
Special Representative Trovoada and Prime Minister
Simoes Pereira to brief from Bissau. We also invited
the Department of Political Affairs to debrief on the
strategic assessment mission that the Council requested
of the Secretary-General through resolution 2157
(2014), of 29 May 2014.

I would like to take this opportunity to attest to the
commendable achievements since the new authorities
came into power in Guinea-Bissau last June. I was able
to witness that first-hand last fall when I travelled to
Bissau. The careful analyses heard from the Prime
Minister, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
during our last PBC meeting, and again today from
Mr. Trovoada, are all in agreement. As the PBC engages
this year in an important review of the peacebuilding
architecture, I believe that Guinea-Bissau provides some
valuable lessons about the difference that a legitimate,
competent and inclusive Government can make when
combined with committed political accompaniment by
international partners.

What is different today from any other time in
the modern history of Guinea-Bissau is that, despite
the existing challenges posed by rampant poverty and
the legacy of decades of unsatisfactory governance, a
better and more stable future for the country and its
population seems to be within reach. With modest,
timely and well-thought-out efforts, the new authorities
of the country have put Guinea-Bissau on a promising
track, while showing their willingness to overcome the
dysfunction of the past and to do things in a democratic
and inclusive results-oriented manner. In the seven
months since the new authorities have been in power,
politics has been conducted wisely and courageously,
including on thorny issues such as the reform of the
defence and security apparatus, the need to rebuild
the social contract through national dialogue and
reconciliation, and improving the justice system.
This new era of progress has also been marked by the
delivery ofbasic services to a greater number ofpeople.

I am pleased that the Council is considering the

recommendations of the Secretary-General's recent
assessment, which provides a thorough and honest
diagnosis ofhow Guinea-Bissau's ills from the past could
be overcome. The report (S/2015/37) also emphasizes
the risks that lie ahead. It places responsibility on the
authorities to own and lead the reforms, paving the way
towards democratization and prosperity. However, we
know that, although this predisposition is essential, What
is also required now more than ever is that our words
of support translate into deeds. Our solidarity should
catalyse long-term sustainable engagement. I should
like, therefore, to urge regional neighbours, friends and
partners of Guinea-Bissau to actively participate and
ensure the success of the round table for Guinea-Bissau
to be held on 25 March in Brussels. Let me remind
the Council that we are dealing with a comparatively
small-scale challenge. If we cannot succeed in Guinea-
Bissau, how are we to contemplate success with regard
to more complex and bigger problems?

We have come a long way in a short time with
respect Guinea-Bissau, and opportunities to consolidate
peacebuilding gains rarely present themselves in as
promising a way as they do right now in the country. To
build the State sustainably, the country will still require
strong support from United Nations, especially the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The situation we are witnessing presents fertile ground
for both bodies to cooperate and focus international
support on the Government's priorities. That means
that we should continue supporting the work done by
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and thus welcome
the renewal and update of its mandate for one year.
We also recognize the valuable work done by the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in securing institutions
and advancing security sector reform in the country,
and we believe that the Security Council should
politically endorse it. Both UNIOGBIS and ECOMIB
are trusted partners of the Bissau-Guineans and have
shown solidarity, understanding and the ability to make
a significant difference during difficult times. Now that
the situation is improving, their assistance will be more
valuable than ever. Both institutions therefore require
the Council's continued loyal support.

I would also like to emphasize the need to reinforce
the role of civil society, especially of women and youth,
in decision-making processes designed to change the
paradigm of poverty and underdevelopment in Guinea-
Bissau. It is time to start changing the long-held view
that Guinea-Bissau is a chronic case of corruption,
impunity and drug trafficking. We should favour an
approach that maximizes the potential and promises of
a nation full of youth, energy and desire to turn the
page on its darkest history. For that, the State must
foster dialogue across society, leading by example
in ensuring that political actors continue to put their
differences aside with a View to advancing the interests
of the nation. We must redouble efforts, international
partners and Bissau-Guineans alike, to ensure that
sustainable progress and stability become the new
reality henceforth.

