Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, you have asked us today to give thought to
the topic "No exit without strategy". Your initiative is
very welcome, and I thank you for it. It comes at a
timely moment, timely because the United Nations is
involved in an unprecedented exercise of introspection
and of remaking peace operations in the wake of the
very useful Brahimi report, and also because the
Security Council has established some important, even
decisive, operations - I am thinking of Kosovo and
Timor in particular - and it must be able to terminate
them without risking the future of the peoples
concerned.

The document prepared by the Netherlands
delegation for our discussion studies three examples of
peacekeeping operations. It describes the conditions,
more or less successful, conditions for closure of the
missions and examines the reasons for these results. In
this spirit, I should like to make a few comments about
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA). From the standpoint that is of
concern to us today, we believe that some interesting
lessons can be drawn from this operation. I should like
to make five points.

First, the management of this case was the most
inclusive possible. Apart from the regular
consideration by the Security Council, a Group of
Friends was established consisting of members of the
Security Council that were particularly interested,
troop contributors, countries of the region and external
donors. This made it possible to ensure that not only
was there a good common understanding of the
Mission's objectives and conduct, but also that there
was, as much as possible, coherence in the action of the
international community beyond MINURCA itself.

Secondly, the Group of Friends established a
series of criteria, benchmarks to assess the Mission's
performance and, in particular, the effort made by the
Central African Republic authorities to match the
commitment of the international community. Even if
these criteria were imperfectly met, they provided both
a road map describing the objectives for durable
stabilization of the situation, and a kind of tracking
board making it possible to assess the results and adjust
the operation's duration and mandate.

ThirdIy, on this basis, the Security Council
extended MINURCA's mandate to ensure a safe
environment for the holding of the general and
presidential elections so that the country could have
political institutions that enjoyed democratic
legitimacy. Although this political condition was not
sufficient, it was essential in order to deal with the
other problems of the Central African Republic.

Fourthly, the United Nations actions through
MINURCA were not the only means by which the
international community supported the Central African
Republic's recovery. At the same time, international
financial institutions and donors were seeking to deal
with the economic and financial aspects of the
situation.

Finally, when MINURCA ended last February the
Secretary-General and the Security Council were
careful to maintain a support office in the field to, inter
alia, follow the implementation of reforms and to
promote an integrated approach to the elaboration and
implementation of post-conflict peace-building
programmes. The Council continues to be informed of
the office's activities and of developments in the
situation.

I now wish to make some general comments.

Having a strategy means, first, having a good
understanding of the problem in all its dimensions and
of the required substantive solutions. This is no easy
task, particularly for the Security Council, for two
reasons.

The first is that a proper understanding of the
situation requires knowledge of the underlying causes
of conflicts and the interests and motives of the
protagonists. But the Council is ill-equipped to
understand- correctly and quickly enough- this
dimension, and the Secretariat often does not have the
means if it does not have a presence in the field.

The second reason for lack of proper
understanding is that usually the Security Council
intervenes only when a conflict has begun and deals in
particular with the phases of restoring peace and
peacekeeping. However, without a clear understanding
of the fundamental reasons for the conflict, there is a
risk of only dealing with the symptoms and coming up
with temporary solutions.

The solutions to this shortcoming are not easy to
find, but some elements can be pinpointed: developing
a preventive approach; strengthening the Secretariat's
capacities for analysis and early warning, in the spirit
of the recommendations of the Brahimi report; giving
more attention to the underlying causes when the
Council is seized with a conflict; and, as far as
possible, making sure that the basic problems receive
appropriate responses in the peacekeeping phase, and
especially in the peace-building phase.

My second comment is that a strategy must be
based on clearly defined ultimate goals, which
essentially must be the establishment of conditions -
political, security and economic- for lasting peace.
This is possible in many cases, but is not totally
possible in others. One good example is the parallel
between the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), charged with
preparing and accompanying East Timor to
independence, and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), charged
with providing an interim administration while
establishing transitional institutions for democratic
self-administration in Kosovo.

In each case the Security Council must to have a
clear picture of what it can do and adapt its decisions
accordingly.

Thirdly, much depends on the local actors. If
there is clearly broad compliance with the rules of the
game, it is possible to define a strategy and to stick to
it. This is what happened in Mozambique and in the
Central African Republic, as I have just demonstrated.
However, Somalia and Rwanda highlight the difficulty,
or even the unfeasibility, of this job when there is not
even a minimum consensus between the parties to the
conflict. In this case, two opposite, and extreme,
approaches are available to the Security Council. One
is inaction or, if there is commitment on the ground,
simple withdrawal. That happened in Somalia and
Rwanda, and we know the political price that the
United Nations paid in both. The other is enforcement
action, which is what took place at a certain point in
Haiti, Somalia and East Timor. This last option,
however, presupposes maintaining a commitment for
the duration. In East Timor, once comprehensive
security was restored by the International Force in East
Timor, the United Nations deployed a large-scale
mission, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, charged with rebuilding
the territory. This determination is being demonstrated
today in Sierra Leone.

This last point brings me to the fourth lesson that
can be drawn from past experience. The
implementation of a strategy means that the United
Nations and its Member States must be prepared to
mobilize the necessary means for as long as necessary.
I have already said that despite the reservations
expressed by various parties, the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic was
maintained beyond the initial deadline. Persistence is
often a key element of success.

This means that adequate resources should be
available. Apart from the fact that we might be tempted
to carry out peacekeeping operations on a very tight
budget, post-conflict peace-building operations- I
refer to the building of a state of law, economic
reconstruction and restoring the social fabric- all
depend basically on voluntary contributions. Even if it
is not the Council's job to respond, this question should
be raised. Can there be continuity of effort in the
context of an exit strategy with such discontinuity in
the method of financing?

Fifthly, continuity does not, however, mean
inertia. To the contrary, the United Nations must be
able to adapt to changes on the ground and hand over
control at the right time. I will take just one example
here: the United Nations Transitional Administration
for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES). UNTAES successfully carried out the
peaceful transfer of state authority in Eastern Slavonia
to Croatia. Mindful of the need to continue in a lighter
and more specific way, the Security Council decided,
upon the expiration of the UNTAES mandate, to
establish for nine months a Civilian Police Support
Group. The assessments at the end of that period
recognized progress made without concealing reasons
for dissatisfaction, even of concern. This is why the
international community handed over control to the
Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) police-monitoring programme. An OSCE
mission is still in Croatia. This is an example of an exit
strategy that is very gradual and in keeping with the
complexity of the tasks to be carried out. But we
should also think about this as an example of a
successful transition between international
organizations that have managed to establish good
coordination between themselves.

Sixthly and lastly, an exit strategy must include a
set of complementary objectives and instruments
seeking the same goal. There is no point in seeking to
enforce a peace agreement if thought is not given to the
fate of the combatants. Hence, the crucial importance
of a demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programme for former combatants, which was one of
the keys to the success of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Mozambique and one of the reasons for the
failure of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola. This brings me back to the first question I
asked about the underlying motives of the parties to a
conflict. Why do people take up arms? What can be
done to prevent them from taking up arms again?
Depending on the situation, real alternatives need to be
offered in terms of jobs and resources, or effective
power sharing should be guaranteed. The effort to
restore peace and security could be futile unless we
tackle what feeds conflicts: traffic in precious
materials, which finances arms trafficking and could
well be one of the main reasons for the conflict.
The Council recently explored this dimension in
several African conflicts and took action accordingly.
These efforts should be continued and intensified. An
upcoming resolution of the General Assembly will
make it possible to deal with this aspect.

At the end of this long statement- and I do
apologize for its lengthiness - I am not going to draw
specific conclusions because, Mr. President, you asked
us all to draw conclusions jointly from this debate. But
I thank you again for having taken the initiative of
bringing us together on this important subject because
the very image of the United Nations depends on our
capacity to successfully manage exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations, which our Council is
mandated to lead to success.

