Mrs. P. D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): First, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February 2015.
I also thank all Council members for allowing my
delegation to come to the Council table.
At the outset, my delegation would like also to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, for the briefing he just gave on developments
in our country and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), as well as for all his dedication and
commitment to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau since
his appointment. We commend the work of UNIOGBIS
and welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to extend its mandate for 12 additional months.

Allow me also to express my country sincere
appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of
Brazil and Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his commitment
and personal engagement and for his clear advocacy
for concrete solutions for the consolidation of the
peace process in Guinea-Bissau. The PBC Guinea-
Bissau configuration has been an important partner
for my Government because of its fundamental role on
consolidating efforts by the international community to
support and assist Guinea-Bissau.

We also extend our gratitude to Her Excellency
Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for the statement
she will make later on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) and for the
willingness of the Community to support our country
on the new challenges for future.

After my country's long and struggle-filled road
since the restoration of constitutional order, I confess
to the Council that today I feel very optimistic as I take
the floor here. As underlined by the previous speakers,
the efforts and progress made by the democratically
elected authorities of Guinea-Bissau have contributed
tremendously to the improvement of the political
and socioeconomic situation in the country. An
environment with open communication, collaboration
and understanding among the main elected institutions
of the country also played an important role in the
positive results been seeing in Guinea-Bissau today.

Since assuming office, the new Government has
outlined three phases as part of a strategy to deal with
challenges of the country, as reflectd in the Emergency
Plan, the Contingency Plan and the Medium-Term
Development Plan. When the Government took office,
it was confronted with multitude of socioeconomic
problems, including salary arrears, strikes by
education and health-care professionals and difficulties
in providing basic services such as electricity and
drinking water. In addition to all those challenges, the
subregion confronted by the Ebola epidemic, for which
Guinea-Bissau needed to take preventive measures.
The Government's Emergency Plan was aimed at
focusing on tackling those immediate issues. Today
we can proudly say that the Government was able to
substantially reduce the arrears due civil servants,
save the school year, significantly improve electricity
and drinking water services and keep the health-care
system functioning, including maintaining the level of
no reported cases of Ebola in the country.

Within the framework of the Contingency Plan,
the Government has created a national commission
to verify all contracts previously drawn up by the
transition Government concerning exploration of the
country's natural resources, in the light of their legal
legitimacy as well as their benefits for the country. The
Government will submit its medium-term development
plan to the international community at the international
donor conference scheduled to take place on 26 March
in Brussels.

The authorities and people of Guinea-Bissau
are fully aware that the sustainability of peace and
the development of our country are our primary
responsibility. However, as a fragile country that has
struggled with enormous difficulties and challenges
for years, we are in serious need of the international
community's support and financial assistance if we are
to stay on the path to development. We need engagement
on the part of our partners more than ever now so that,
like the rest of the world, we can finally focus on our
sustainable development goals. In that regard, we hope
that all our partners and friends will stay with us on
our new course and participate in the aforementioned
donor round-table conference. We appreciate and
commend the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the CPLP, the International
Organization of la Francophonie and all of Guinea-
Bissau's other bilateral partners for their involvement
in the preparatory process for the conference.

Our Government is fully engaged in the process
of reform, and as Prime Minister Domingos Simoes
Pereira reassured the International Contact Group for
Guinea-Bissau at its last meeting, here in New York in
November, Guinea-Bissau remains strongly committed
to implementing all the reforms necessary to enable
the country to continue to move ahead. While we
are working on many important reforms, reform of
the security sector remains one of the Government's
priorities, and in fact has already begun, though slowly,
with contributions and support from ECOWAS and
other bilateral and multilateral partners. President
Jose Mario Vaz's appointment in September of a new
chief of the armed forces, the creation of a national
security-sector steering committee, the Government's
engagement through the Ministry of Defence and
the recent handover of our military infrastructure,
including four army barracks that are being refurbished
under the country's defence and security-sector reform
programme by the ECOWAS Commission, show that
reform is indeed under way.

For all those efforts, we commend and thank Ghana,
the current Chair of ECOWAS, for all its efforts and
for all that ECOWAS has been trying to do to maintain
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. However, for
those efforts to really be sustainably implemented,
Guinea-Bissau is counting on financial assistance
from all its bilateral and multilateral partners to enable
it to secure and maintain its pension fund for retired
military personnel.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that all the problems that Guinea-
Bissau has faced have been repeatedly reported on
in the Council and in various international forums
over the years. We believe the time has now come for
concrete action, and that is what the people of Guinea-
Bissau expect from the international community and all
those present here. Guinea-Bissau has so much to give
to the world, and with the support of the international
community and the will and perseverance of its humble
people, that will be possible.

