Mr. Andreassen (Norway): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
office of President of the Security Council for the month
of February, and to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, Sir
John Weston. I would also like to commend the Council
for convening this orientation debate.

Since the operations started, Norway has participated
in UNAVEM. II and III with military observers. We
support the renewal of the mandate and we will continue
our participation.

Much remains to be done within the framework of
the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in order to give full
effect to the peace settlement in Angola. We have noted
with appreciation the Secretary-General's observations
concerning the positive steps taken by the Government
side during the last few weeks. However, the numerous
delays in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
remain a matter of grave concern. It is now particularly
important to avoid further delays in the crucial areas of
troop disengagement and the quartering of former
combatants. We therefore urge the parties to the Protocol,
and in particular UNITA, to continue to commit
themselves fully and faithfully to implementing its
provisions and to respect and maintain the cease-fire
throughout the country.

Angola needs the support and the encouragement of
the international community. Norway has played its part,
and remains committed to continue to do so, through
substantial contributions both in terms of humanitarian aid
and long-term development assistance. The planned
contribution for 1996 is approximately $16 million, which
equals the 1995 contribution.

As far as possible, long-term development assistance
should be designed and managed with a particular view
to reinforcing the peace process. Continued support for
the reconstruction of the country is, however, contingent
on the demonstrated commitment of the Angolan parties
to resolve their differences peacefully and to achieve
national reconciliation. In the humanitarian field, mine
clearance will remain a priority area. The reports of
deteriorating security for humanitarian activities,
especially in UNITA-controlled areas, are disturbing. I

 

should like to stress the importance we attach to UNITA's
and the Government's continuing to cooperate fully with
the international humanitarian relief effort.

The international community will show its full
solidarity with Angola through the coming renewal of the
mandate of UNAVEM. 111. But this solidarity can only
support the efforts of the Government and UNITA, whose
will to implement the peace process and to engage in
genuine reconciliation will remain decisive.

