Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): You said, Sir, that
the United Nations should stick to facts. Today, Stephen
O'Brien stuck religiously to facts. The problem for you,
Mr. President, is that they are not facts that you like.
Let me just repeat three of the facts that I wrote down
from Stephen's statement. They are all facts, reality

and in stark contrast to the absurd and surreal fantasy
theatre that we are hearing from Russia.

The first fact is that Aleppo has become a kill
zone, with 400 people - too many of whom were
children - who have been killed since Stephen's latest
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7780). The second fact
is that Syrian and Russian forces have not protected
medical facilities and have, indeed, deliberately attacked
hospitals. The third fact concerns the infamous leaflet,
stating "This is your last hope; you will be annihilated".
Those are three facts. Everything else that Stephen said
aligns with my information and concerns facts, but
they are not facts that Russia likes. It is depressing to
see the level to which Russia is descending to defend
the indefensible.

What needs to happen now to allow humanitarian
access? Three things need to happen. Step one
requires immediately stopping the bombing - as
Stephen mentioned - everywhere: in Idlib, eastern
Aleppo and across Syria. Step two requires Russia
to use its influence with the Syrian regime so that it
cooperates with all those aid agencies seeking to bring
aid into Syria. Step three requires allowing genuine,
meaningful humanitarian pauses that are long enough
and coordinated with the United Nations so that aid
can go in and people requiring medical evacuation can
get out.

What should we, the Security Council, do about
it? I agree very much with almost everything the
representative of New Zealand said. Like Gerard,
I am appalled that Russia will not step back. I am
appalled that Russia used the right to veto a perfectly
reasonable and moderate draft resolution. I disagree
with Gerard on the point that there is some sort of sense
of symmetry between those who are blocking for one
reason and those who are blocking for another. There
is no symmetry between those of us who called for an
end to the bombing and those who say that the bombing
must continue. The United Kingdom will support any
effort to stop the bombing and any draft resolution that
is clear enough that step one has got to be an end to
the bombing. We should not try to find the midpoint
between the position of stopping and not stopping the
bombing. It is not possible to do that, and we should not
even want to try.

Finally, the one point on which I do agree with
Vitaly concerns fighting terrorism. I believe that we
all agree on that. We all want to see terrorism defeated
in Syria and everywhere else. That is not what divides
us, but that is not the real issue. In our view, there
are approximately 200 terrorists from Al-Nusrah in
eastern Aleppo. Russia has a slightly different view
and says that they number approximately 1,000. Let
us take Russia's number of 1,000. That is still only
one-hundredth the number of children in eastern
Aleppo. There are 100,000 children in eastern Aleppo.
If the genuine target of the military action is the 1,000
terrorists, why are the military bombs being used so
indiscriminately? Why are bunker-buster bombs, which
are designed to take out more than very precise targets,
being used? That is an indefensible military strategy in
eastern Aleppo. How many of the people in that school
in Idlib today were really terrorists? I suspect that the
answer is zero.

