Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thanks Ms. Sandra Honore for her
comprehensive briefing and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) staff,
the troop- and police-contribution countries, and the
United Nations country team and their partners. I thank
them all for their efforts to support Haiti and its people.

I would also like to offer our condolences to the
Brazilian Government on the passing away of the late
Lieutenant General Jose Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., former
Force Commander of MINUSTAH.

Thanks to the determination of its people and
the commitment of its leaders, Haiti has been able to
move towards democracy and to put an end to political
uncertainty by holding legislative elections following
a considerable delay. We trust that those legislative
elections will conclude peacefully and that they will
be free, transparent and inclusive. Above all, in those
constituencies where a second round of elections will
be held, there is a need to bolster trust in the electoral
process in Haiti. We need investigations into cases of
violence, and irregularities must be addressed.

We urge Haiti to hold local, municipal and
presidential elections in accordance with the timetable.
In that regard, we welcome the role played by the
Provisional Electoral Council, which has proven its
capacity to manage a very complex electoral process.
Moreover, we commend the Haitian Government for
providing the necessary resources to the Provisional
Electoral Council and to the Haitian National Police,
and we call on the international community to provide
Haiti with the aid necessary to conclude the entire
electoral process.

The security situation in Haiti is overall stable, but
peace and stability require consolidation of the rule of
law in that country. There is also the need to address
clear shortcomings in the judicial system, particularly
the inhumane conditions in the prison system, which is
overburdened. We welcome efforts made to strengthen
the police force and improve security in Haiti. We
reiterate the importance of providing aid and training to
enhance the presence of the Haitian police throughout
the country. Special attention must be paid to the
humanitarian situation in Haiti. Cholera continues to
rage throughout the country even though the number
of cases has declined. Moreover, Haiti is experiencing
drought, which has decreased its food supply. There is,
therefore, a need to bolster food aid to Haiti, as soon as
possible, to prevent rising levels of malnutrition.

Haiti, working together with the United Nations,
has made historic progress that must be built upon.
Once again, we call on all countries and organizations,
which have strong relations with Haiti, to provide aid to
the Haitian people throughout all stages of the political
transition process. In that regard, we reiterate that the
role played by the United Nations remains crucial in
Haiti and we support the renewal of MINUSTAH'S
mandate in order to preserve stability in that country.
In addition, that mandate must respect the situation on
the ground, especially the needs of the people in all
areas. There is also a need to guarantee peace, security,
stability and the success of future plans to build a
modern State.

