Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this important meeting. The protection
of civilians from the effects of war is at the heart of
international law. Experience shows us, unfortunately,
that the protection of civilians in areas that are theatres of
conflict and in difficulties is now being used selectively
and as a tool to serve interests that run counter to the
principles of international law. My delegation has seen
the concept paper that was circulated for today's meeting
(S/2013/447, annex), and would like to emphasize the
following major points.

First and foremost, the protection of civilians
from the horrors of war should mean ending armed
conflicts by peaceful means. It therefore entails strict
compliance with the principles of international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which include the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.

Secondly, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with the State in question.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians must not be
politicized or manipulated by making it an instrument
of foreign intervention or of efforts to effect regime
change, or in the interests of certain States alone. In
addition, the attempts of some member States of the
Security Council to impose their selective policies will
achieve nothing except further damage to the role the
Council is supposed to play according to the Charter.

Fourthly, with regard to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, my Government, in spite of
the economic war being waged against us, is doing its
utmost to meet the survival needs of its population. In
that respect, the Government of Syria has cooperated
with the various United Nations bodies, including
humanitarian assistance bodies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. We have provided all
possible support, including by increasing the number
of non-governmental organizations working in Syria
so as to enable them to work and to assist the Syrian
people, in the framework of respect for the sovereignty
of Syria and under General Assembly resolution
46/182. However, the provision of basic necessities for
the people of Syria such as food, medicine and fuel
is hampered by the unilateral measures imposed on
our State, threatening the survival of our people. We
therefore call on the Council to act.

Fifthly, certain States continue to exploit the
suffering of Syrian refugees out of ignorance of the real
reasons that led them to seek refuge abroad, namely, the
terrorist acts perpetrated by certain armed groups. Also
being ignored is the negative behaviour on the part of
the States receiving Syrian refugees. That is why we
call on those States that are hosting Syrian refugees
to stop trading on their pain and suffering, cease their
inhumane treatment of such refugees and allow them to
return to their country.

Sixthly, the Government of Syria is exercising its
constitutional duties with respect to the building of a
State based on the rule of law and the fight against in
impunity. The Syrian judiciary is sparing no effort to
consider all cases brought before it; for example, the
national commission established to investigate the
situation in the country is continuing its efforts to bring
to justice all those who have committed crimes.

Despite all of that, it is regrettable to see that some
States are continuing to take advantage of this meeting
to reiterate their untruths regarding the situation in my
country. Even though we are against this, we would
reaffirm that the State of Syria more than any other
State is committed to the well-being of the Syrian
population. That is why we are carrying out our
constitutional duties in connection with the protection
of our people from the scourge of terrorism.

We are working for a return to peace and security,
even as some Member States continue to ignore the
terrorist acts targeting the people and the Government
of Syria. We ask that the Security Council live up to
its responsibilities; condemn the terrorism that is
victimizing Syria; and demand accountability on the
part of those States that are lending financial and
weapons-related assistance and providing refuge to
transnational terrorist groups, in flagrant violation of
international law, in particular that relating to counter-
terrorism. We ask that the Council force those States,
especially Qatar, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, to cease
their activities and withdraw their mercenaries from
Syrian territories.

This question has been the object ofdiscussion in the
Council for 15 years now. During that time, the Council
must have heard hundreds of statements calling on
Israel to end its practices against the inhabitants of the
occupied Arab territories and the States of the region.
But the support given to Israel by permanent members
of the Council has demonstrated the fallacy of those
States' claims and of the policies they are pursuing,
which are based on a double standard. As a result,
Israel believes that it is sheltered from accountability
and can continue its criminal policies and aggression,
which threaten international peace and security, and
undermine the principles and norms of international
law, international humanitarian law and human rights
law.

Israel's policies, as we have seen in hundreds of
United Nations reports, involve acts of aggression,
genocide and crimes against humanity, which require
that it resolutely be held accountable. My delegation
reaffirms the need to provide security and protection to
civilians living under Israeli occupation in the occupied
Syrian Golan and in other Arab territories and to put an
end to Israel's aggressive practices.

In conclusion, consideration and analysis of the
situation prevailing in Syria must take place in a
very responsible, neutral and transparent manner, so
as to shed light on the realities on the ground - the
opposite of a narrow approach that would serve only
the interests of some parties. Therefore we reiterate
the need for the Council to support efforts to promote
a political settlement of the situation in Syria, under
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and the Geneva
communique.

