Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): We are very
grateful to the Secretary-General and to you, Mr.
President, for your introductory and really very
substantive remarks, as well as for the personal
attention that you are bringing to this question.

We warmly welcome the arrival of Ambassador
Legwaila and of Major-General Cammaert. We are
pleased that efforts by Algeria, the United States, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
European Union to restart the peace talks are beginning
to make some headway and that the process is
generally beginning to go in the right direction.

Both sides need to allow the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities to be implemented. Their
support for that suggests that the political will for
peace exists. It is that political will that will be
essential for the conclusion of a comprehensive peace
agreement. So we urge both sides to seize this
opportunity for lasting peace and not to delay to do so.

The deployment of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) will help the climate
for that, but, as you have said, Mr. President, it must
not be seen as a substitute for concluding a
comprehensive peace agreement. They must not go
down that cul-de-sac. They must concentrate on the
overall agreement. But with the deployment of
UNMEE, it is necessary that both sides give the
necessary freedom of movement to the force to enable
it to do its job effectively.

The other points I was going to make have been
covered, in particular by your five confidence-building
measures, Mr. President. The United Kingdom supports
those, so I will not go into further detail. We are also
pleased that a date is being set for a meeting of the
Military Coordination Commission, because contacts
between the parties are also an important part of
building confidence. But both countries do have to look
to the long term. The conclusion of a lasting peace
settlement will enable both sides to focus on
development, reconstruction and reconciliation, which
is what all this is about. My delegation looks forward
to discussing the draft presidential statement proposed
by the Netherlands. We agree that work on it should be
completed next week if possible.

