Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Over the past few
days and on several occasions here in the Council, my
delegation has expressed its profound concern over the
escalating violence in South Ossetia, Georgia.

Today, that concern has been greatly magnified.
We do not wish to repeat what is already widely known
of the serious deterioration of conditions, as reported
by the Secretariat. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Edmond
Mulet for their briefings, which were, as usual,
important and informative.

However, we wish to underscore one fact that is
giving rise to the deepest concern, namely, the
humanitarian consequences. The lack of a collective
Security Council voice on the conflict in South Ossetia,
Georgia, must not extend to silence on such a
humanitarian toll. Indonesia is deeply moved by the
suffering being experienced by innocent civilians -
women, children and the elderly - as fighting rages
around them. We wish to impress upon all conflicting
parties that they should carry out their obligations
under international humanitarian law. That universally
recognized body of law is designed precisely to protect
civilians, in particular women and children, in times of
armed conflict. Immediate practical steps are needed to
protect those people.

We must not allow the logic of war to prevail 4 a
vicious cycle of violence and more violence. Instead,
we must assure the ascendancy of diplomacy and the
power of reason and argument over the use of force.
We recognize that the inherent dispute over South
Ossetia, Georgia, may not be ripe for an instant
solution. However, ultimately, dialogue is the only path
towards a comprehensive and lasting solution. In the
midst of the grave situation in Georgia, Indonesia finds
some encouragement, however tenuous, in the
diplomatic efforts being made to de-escalate tensions
and bring the violence to an end. We strongly support
those efforts.

We wish also to emphasize the importance of
communication among Council members, especially
among the principals, in order to forge common ground
and consensus. Once again, my delegation would like
to reiterate the importance of a simple and early
collective message by the Council to all the parties,
unburdened by any other consideration except
humanitarian ones: end the violence now.

