Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea as
President of the Security Council, and are confident
that he will achieve every success in his work.

We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

With respect to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the State is solely responsible for guaranteeing
the protection of its civilians based on the obligations
enshrined in its national constitution and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
identified as non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, respect for national sovereignty, refraining from
the threat or use of force, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

We disagree with those who claim to ignore or
conceal the role of the sovereign State in the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Parties to conflict,
whether Governments or armed groups, are responsible
for preventing any harm to the civilian population
during a violent conflict.

In recent decades, we have witnessed with concern
how technical military categories are manipulated
to dilute responsibility for the disproportionate use
of force through indiscriminate bombing that kills
innocent civilians. The so-called collateral damage
punishes defenceless civilians and is used as a war
tactic. Venezuela condemns the use of indiscriminate
and disproportionate force in armed conflict situations
affecting civilians populations, especially vulnerable
groups such as women, children and the elderly. Such
actions, practiced in various part of the world with
impunity, violate international law, international
humanitarian law and in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

Venezuela stresses the need to promote the
peaceful settlement of armed conflicts, with a focus
on dialogue and negotiation among the parties that
leads to a political settlement ending these disputes
and addressing the root causes of the violence. Recent
history shows that military intervention and external
support for armed groups are not conducive to protecting
civilians or preventing armed conflict. Civilians cannot
be protected when weapons are provided to parties
attempting to overthrow a legitimate Government from
within.

Venezuela recognizes that peacekeeping operations
can serve as helpful tools in promoting a solution to an
armed conflict. Their guiding principles ofimpartiality,
the consent of the parties, and the non-use of force
except in legitimate self-defence purposes must be
strictly followed. Peacekeeping operations should be
deployed in full compliance with international law.
In that regard, respect for the principles of sovereign
equality, political independence, the territorial integrity
of all States, and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States is fundamental.

So-called counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency
plans often lead to the death of innocent civilians and
massive violations ofhuman rights. Mr. Ben Emmerson,
United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism, reported on
an investigation into the impact of unmanned aerial
vehicles, known as drones, on civilians and their
human rights. He denounced the drones, due to the lack
of transparency in their use.

Venezuela applauds that initiative. The
investigation, according to the Special Rapporteur, will
focus on 25 attacks in which drones were used against
civilian populations in Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia,
Afghanistan and the occupied Palestinian territory. In

Emerson's view, some of those attacks are particularly
cruel and could be considered war crimes.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is concerned about the fanciful idea of
incorporating, as a norm of the Charter of the United
Nations, the notion of the responsibility to protect.
Venezuela reiterates its firm opposition to that concept,
which has served to undermine the sovereignty and
independence of States and has been used to overthrow
legitimate Governments by imposing interests that are
expansionist, imperialist and colonialist.

The Bolivarian Government of Hugo Chavez
Frias reaffirms that the use of force should be avoided
at all possible costs and should only be resorted to
under extraordinary circumstances that are carefully
considered prior to its use. Venezuela believes that
dialogue and negotiation are the most appropriate
means of finding a solution to the current conflicts in
the Middle East, in order to end the tragic humanitarian
situation that is being experienced in a number of
countries.

If we look at the origin of the armed conflicts
affecting some countries, we will discover that in
most cases they stem from an underestimation of the
social dimension of development and the plundering
role played by international corporations that sack the
riches of countries of the South.

Venezuela believes that it is important to take into
account social as well as political aspects in a holistic
manner when addressing armed conflicts. Promoting
sustainable development, eradicating poverty and
overcoming inequality are, among other things, policies
that would contribute to international peace and
security by generating climate of stability in societies.

