Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The recent decision of the Israeli Government to
build Jewish settlements in East Jerusalem has received
considerable attention from the international community.
The Council's holding of a formal meeting today
demonstrates the seriousness of this question as well as the
deep concern of the international community.

The Chinese delegation expresses its grave concern at
this move by the Israeli Government. We are of the View
that it is bound to place serious obstacles in the way of the
Palestine-Israel peace process and to be detrimental tothe
Middle East peace process as a whole. We urge Israel to
call off its plan to build Jewish settlements in East
Jerusalem.

The Palestinian question is at the core of the situation
in the Middle East. An early, just, reasonable and lasting
solution to this question and the restoration of the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people are the keys to
peace, stability and development in the Middle East.

The question of Jerusalem should be settled by the
parties concerned through negotiations on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Any unilateral move
contrary to this approach should be avoided, since it will
only further complicate the question instead of contributing
to its proper settlement or to the Middle East peace process.

Peace has not come about easily in the Middle East .
and should therefore be deeply cherished by the parties
concerned. We hope that the parties will avoid making any
move that might aggravate conflicts and undermine the
peace process. We encourage all positive efforts that help

ease tensions, thereby creating a favourable atmosphere
for the further advancement of the Middle East peace
process. .
The Chinese Government has consistently supported
the Middle East peace process and stood for a political
settlement of the Middle East question on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principle of
land for peace. We believe that achieving peace in the
Middle East represents the common aspiration of the
peoples of all the countries in the region, conforms with
their fundamental interests and would contribute to peace
and stability throughout the world. -

