The President: I thank the representative of Guinea-
Bissau for his kind words addressed to me.

 

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Botswana.

The situation in Burundi continues to be a source of
deep concern for the international community. The political
and security situation have deteriorated steadily since the
assassination of the democratically elected President in
1993, resulting in a grave humanitarian situation. Acts of
violence and the general climate of insecurity are making
it difficult for the personnel of international humanitarian
organizations to continue their operations. This unstable
political situation has had a negative impact on the
productive sectors of the economy. The displacement of
tens of thousands of people has dealt a severe blow to the
agricultural sector, which contributes about 90 per cent to
the national economy.

The growth of extremist groups both inside and
outside the country is most worrying, to say the least. Even
more disturbing is the attempt to annihilate moderate
political forces that are prepared to seek a negotiated
political settlement in Burundi. The international
community has repeatedly called for negotiations, to bring
an end to the crisis. Unfortunately, extremists are
determined, increasingly, to engage in acts aimed at
destabilizing and deposing the Government and rendering
the country ungovernable. Concerted efforts have been
made by some to remove President Sylvestre
Ntibantunganya from office, while others have intensified
attacks on strategic installations in the countryside.

Botswana supports an early negotiated settlement to
the political stalemate. We urge the people of Burundi to do
all in their power to engage in negotiations aimed at
bringing an immediate end to the hatred festering in their
country's body politic. Their political leaders must rise
above their petty quarrels to save their beautiful country
from total collapse and chaos.

Botswana is strongly convinced that only a political
solution in which the rights of all the people of Burundi,
irrespective of ethnicity, will be protected and respected can
end the carnage and bring peace and stability to that hapless
country. My delegation appeals to the people of Burundi, of
all political persuasions, both inside and outside the
country, to begin, without delay, the process of negotiations
aimed at bringing about national reconciliation. We
especially call on all the political forces - all of them -
that are committed to a search for a solution through
political dialogue to gain courage from the fact that they
have the support of the international community. The
international community stands ready to assist all those
who are committed to a peaceful settlement.

While political dialogue is undoubtedly the option of
first choice, the international community cannot afford to
watch impassively as extremist elements become
emboldened and create conditions which are likely to lead
to a severe deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
Burundi. It is imperative therefore that the international
community should be united on the need for contingency
planning for a robust response in the event that the
humanitarian situation deteriorates further and violence
becomes widespread and uncontrollable. The international
community has learnt a bitter lesson from the genocide in
Rwanda. There can be no justification for lack of
preparedness in the event of an outbreak of violence on
a large scale in Burundi.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Norway. I
invited him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

