Mr. Oshima: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing me to make some brief
remarks at this juncture in the Council's debate. Let me
first state that I am deeply impressed by the importance
that the Council has attached to the issue, and by its
commitment to identifying practical steps to move
from expressions of intent to real implementation. In
particular, I note the emphasis that Council members
have put on the need to integrate better measures aimed
at enhancing the protection of civilians on the ground
by ensuring that these are considered in the design and
planing of peace operations. The development of a
checklist, as mentioned by several delegations, seems a
very practical and useful measure in that respect.

In the same context, I support the proposal made
by the President of the Council and by other
delegations on the establishment of a cross-cutting
team of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to ensure that issues
related to the protection of civilians are adequately
addressed in mandates of peace operations. As the
focal point within the Secretariat for the protection of
civilians, my Office, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, stands ready to assume a more
active role in that respect. I urge the Council to support
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in fulfilling that important role.

In its reporting and daily activities, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will seek to
mainstream and give prominence to issues relating to
the protection of civilians, and I will use the
opportunity of my briefing on the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
that purpose.

As many delegations have noted, the protection
of civilians caught in armed conflicts lies at the core of
the United Nations mandate and is the primary subject
of the daily struggle of numerous humanitarian
agencies and organizations in the field. Let me
therefore briefly reiterate some of the most important
points in that connection.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with States and their Governments.
International action can only be complementary and
can never be a substitute for that responsibility. Armed
groups have a direct responsibility under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and to refrain
from attacks on them. Given the predominantly internal
nature of today's armed conflicts, it is indispensable to
engage in a structured humanitarian dialogue with
armed groups, based on core humanitarian principles
such as impartiality, and without legitimizing the
claims of those groups. And finally, where conflicts
develop a regional dimension due to massive cross-
border movements of displaced populations, a regional
approach to crisis is necessary. These, I note, are some
of the main issues reflected in the Secretary-General's
report (8/2001/331).

I would like to take this opportunity to respond
briefly to some of the proposals of a practical nature
made in this morning's debate, and to outline a number
of practical steps that my Office and its humanitarian
partners are undertaking or envisaging to improve the
protection of civilians in practical terms. In that
connection, I would like to call for the Council's active
support for the implementation of those steps.

First, in order to develop better coordinated and
more creative approaches to access negotiations, to
which many delegations referred, the Secretary-
General has requested the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee to develop a manual of best practices and
guidance for access negotiations and strategies. It will
include benchmarks for the engagement and
disengagement of aid agencies, demands for
conditionality, clearance procedures, needs
assessments, monitoring of the delivery of relief and
assistance, and other principles. Drawing on past
experience, my Office will take the lead in this matter,
working closely with the members of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee. As a first step in that direction, a
group of key agencies has already been formed; it will
meet next month for an initial working-level session to
be followed by the endorsement by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee of an appropriate mechanism for
further efforts.

The Inter-Agency Standing Committee has been
working on the issue of strengthening the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel in the field. In that
connection, I would like to mention also that non-
governmental organizations are daily engaged in the
work of humanitarian assistance; non-governmental
organizations are indispensable partners of United
Nations agencies in providing humanitarian relief
assistance to vulnerable people. While their national
and international staff, like United Nations personnel,
are increasingly made the target of attack, the current
security framework does not adequately address staff
safety. Therefore, the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee has formed a working group to strengthen
collaboration between the United Nations and non-
governmental organizations on this issue at the field
level. As part of my regular updates on the protection
of civilians, I stand ready also to update the Council on
results and progress on these matters, as appropriate.

Secondly, effective coordination can significantly
enhance the protection of civilians, as well as the
provision of humanitarian assistance. To draw lessons
from recent field experiences with a View to
strengthening value-added features of coordination
arrangements, my Office has commissioned a study on
humanitarian coordination. The preliminary draft
points to the need for early on-the-ground coordination
among agencies, donors and other relevant actors.

I would also like to mention some other proposals
that have been made concerning the practical
implementation of the 54 recommendations of the
report on this issue. I welcome the idea of an informal
working group of the Council to facilitate a more
interactive process between the Council and the
Secretariat on the matter. As a first step, however, I
would like to encourage the Council to design a clear
road map for implementation of the recommendations,
as suggested by the Ambassador of Norway. In this
respect, my Office, OCHA, stands ready to work
closely with the Council in elaborating a road map with
clear time-lines aimed at identifying the respective
roles of Member States, the Secretariat and other parts
of the United Nations system and at categorizing and
prioritizing recommendations for implementation by
each entity. In my capacity as Emergency Relief
Coordinator, I also stand ready to update the Council
regularly on the progress made in this regard.

As for the next report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians, I was particularly struck by
the intervention made by the Norwegian Ambassador.
Such a follow-up report to the Council should focus
primarily on progress made in implementing the
recommendations. In this context, I would like to
express my readiness to report, as has been suggested,
within six months - by October 2001 for example -
on progress made in elaborating the road map. The
follow-up report could then be issued another 12
months later - for example in October 2002 -
reflecting the action taken to implement the road map.

In conclusion, I would like to express once again
my deep appreciation for the importance the Council
attaches to the issue of the protection of civilians. It
has proved a significant opportunity to give a voice to
the tens of millions of victims who are suffering in
silence in many parts of the world. The seriousness of
today's debate so far has further contributed to drawing
the necessary attention to the civilian victims and,
furthermore, to the need to effect real progress in this
very difficult area. Civilians in war need decisive and
timely action by the Council in implementing the many
pivotal recommendations contained in the Secretary-
General's reports.

