Mr. Motoc (Romania): Madam President, I
would like first to state our satisfaction at seeing the
personal involvement of the Foreign Minister in
steering this important meeting initiated by Denmark.
My delegation welcomes the earlier participation of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, and
the statements made by World Bank President
Mr. James Wolfensohn; the Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Trade of New Zealand, Mr. Phil Goff; and the State
Secretary of Switzerland, Mr. Michael Ambuhl.

Romania fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by Ambassador Hoscheit of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, and I
will therefore speak more briefly.

We are witnessing a growing perception that
traditional conflicts are on a downward trend in the
world. At the same time, challenges and threats to
peace, security and stability are multiplying, stemming
from a range of non-conventional sources, whether
related to frail States, severe poverty, organized crime,
terrorism or other factors.

Under such circumstances, post-conflict
peacebuilding is clearly an immense task, to be shared
by actors at the national level and - indispensably -
the international community.

On this topic, there are three points that I would
like to emphasize - and I must admit here that it
would have been difficult to find many others, given
the excellent and extremely thorough background
paper prepared by the Danish presidency.

First, Romania advocates strong and - as much
as possible - integrated peacebuilding efforts from the
early post-conflict stages. In this context, "integrated"
efforts refers to the need for coordinated responses
from the full spectrum of players involved: local
ownership, the United Nations and its specialized
bodies and agencies, the international financial
institutions and regional organizations, as well as
bilateral donors and troop-contributing countries.

The Security Council needs comprehensive and
strategic advice on the measures to take in order to
ensure the effective transition from peacekeeping and
peace support to sustainable peace and development, so
that it is in a position to perform its full roll with
regard to a conflict. In this respect, we welcome the
Secretary-General's proposal on the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission. We trust that that initiative
will be endorsed and that it will be implemented in a
manner that will allow the future structure to be
effective, meaningful and capable of delivering on the
objectives set forth and of avoiding overlap and
duplication.

Secondly, we believe that we cannot emphasize
enough the key role played by regional and subregional
organizations in peacebuilding. The mix of assets that
regional and subregional organizations possess -
targeted expertise, local knowledge and, in many cases,
more accessible capabilities - make those
organizations partners of choice for the United
Nations, including with respect to post-conflict
peacebuilding.
In the Council and elsewhere, Romania has
constantly promoted cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Enhanced
cooperation and, where appropriate, coordination and
consultation, between the United Nations and regional
organizations are particularly important in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. They should be
accomplished on the basis of a more integrated
approach, and with the aim of maximizing the use of
available resources and capabilities, which, if taken in
isolation, will always seem scarce but, if considered
jointly, are, possibly, more than adequate.

Furthermore, in line with Secretary-General's
recommendations from his "In larger freedom" report
(A/59/2005), particular attention should be paid to
supporting capacity-building by regional and
subregional organizations, especially on the African
continent, where such efforts are needed and would pay
off in terms of more effective cooperation in
peacebuilding.

Thirdly, from our experience in the Security
Council so far, it is possible to identify a number of
"red threads" - key aspects for a successful
peacebuilding approach. These have to do with the
development of reliable democratic institutions;
ensuring respect for the rule of law, justice and human
rights; involving and strengthening civil society; and
promoting economic and social rehabilitation and
reform. Each of those aspects has its own particular
merits in kick-starting a healthy post-conflict society.
They all eventually apply, irrespective of whether a
given post-conflict situation is or is not listed on the
Security Council's agenda, the crux of the matter
having to do, in our opinion, with the fact that no
conflict should be allowed to linger without being
addressed in a credible and effective way.

