Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I have the honour
today to introduce the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/446) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), issued on 1 September.
Since the last such report was issued on 22 April
(8/2010/200), progress has been made in moving the
political process forward, maintaining the security
gains of recent years, and supporting humanitarian and
recovery efforts.

In spite of a fragile political context and a
difficult humanitarian situation, I welcome the decision
of the Government of Haiti to call its citizens to the
polls on 28 November. The elections represent a
significant phase in the process of consolidating
democracy and re-establishing the State since the
earthquake. The elections are also extremely important
because they will lead to the election of those who will
guide the State during the rebuilding effort over the
coming five years. It is therefore critical that they be
credible and legitimate, leading to the formation of a
Government and National Assembly that will enjoy
clear and unchallenged mandates.

It is also critical to encourage as wide a national
participation as possible. I have already asked the
competent authorities to launch a public education
campaign to inform and mobilize the electorate.
Through its good offices, MINUSTAH has contributed
to the emergence of a political consensus on the
10-53060
elections, and I commend the 66 parties and coalitions
that will participate in the legislative and presidential
ballots. That figure includes political parties that
initially sought the early departure of President Preval
but have now joined in the constitutional electoral
process.

In collaboration with the Organization of
American States, the United Nations Development
Programme and other partners on the ground,
MINUSTAH will do its part by providing logistical and
security support and coordinating international
electoral assistance in order to ensure smooth elections.
However, I would underscore the importance of
Haitian leadership in this area, and have already called
on the Haitian political actors and authorities - in
particular the Provisional Electoral Council - to work
in transparency and in compliance with Haitian law
and democratic principles.

The security situation in Haiti remains generally
calm but fragile. Despite an upsurge in crime since
12 January, the number of incidents is comparable to
that of 2009. However, weak institutions, the presence
of camps for internally displaced persons, an increase
in gang activity and the instability that characterizes
electoral periods in Haiti contribute to creating a
volatile security environment. I remain concerned by
the situation in the camps, where vulnerable groups -
particularly women and children - are liable to be
victimized by sexual and gender-based violence.
MINUSTAH has therefore established a
multidisciplinary Internally Displaced Person Camp
Unit that will act in support of the Haitian National
Police in maintaining security in the camps.

I should like to note, however, that it is impossible
to guarantee complete security coverage in the 1,300
camps by the staff available to the National Police and
MINUSTAH. The Haitian States estimates the number
of displaced persons to be 1.3 million. The Ministry of
Public Works, Transport and Communications and the
United Nations Office for Project Services undertook a
structural assessment of 230,000 buildings that revealed
that half are structurally sound and one quarter need
some repair work, while another quarter are
recommended for demolition.

In spite of these results, the return of displaced
persons remains slow, and reconstruction is being
impeded by the presence of debris and the lack of a
land register. With respect to the latter, decisive
10-53060
national leadership will be necessary in addressing the
problem of property titles and right-to-housing law. A
balance will have to be struck between emergency
services to the population and the need to encourage
their return to the communities or neighbourhoods they
came from. That will require, inter alia, the provision
of adequate shelter and basic services, particularly in
health and education, to motivate returns. At the same
time, forced evictions of displaced persons are of
concern. The Protection Cluster Working Group has
called for an official moratorium on forced evictions in
order to protect the rights of the most vulnerable
victims of the quake.

Since 12 January, the immediate humanitarian
needs of displaced persons have largely been met. In
addition to significant distribution of essential
humanitarian goods, more than 150,000 persons have
been employed in various cash- and food-for-work
projects. The humanitarian community has begun to
build sound temporary shelters. The United Nations
and its partners hope to build 139,000 such shelters by
mid-2011.

The vulnerability to hurricanes of displaced
persons and the population in general is of concern.
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team have
taken measures in support of the Haitian authorities to
prepare a response to the hurricane season, in
particular by creating logistical centres, prepositioning
emergency food rations, and assessing the vulnerability
of camps. The MINUSTAH military component has
also launched exercises to prepare for new disasters
and to update its contingency plans.

The Government of Haiti has developed its own
capacity with respect to the coordination of
humanitarian and recovery activities. The President has
created the Presidential Commission on Resettlement,
which he co-chairs with my Deputy, Mr. Nigel Fisher.
The Commission is working with the humanitarian
community on the development of a strategy and
operational plans to guide the relocation of displaced
persons living in camps. The United Nations country
team and the Prime Minister's Office are working to
further integrate the existing humanitarian structures
into the national coordination architecture, led by the
Ministry of Planning. The Government has also
reactivated sectoral coordination groups (Tables sectorielles), based on the priorities identified in the
Action Plan for National Recovery and Development.
Moreover, the leadership of the majority of
3
humanitarian clusters has been transferred to
counterparts in ministries.

The Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
co-chaired by Prime Minister Bellerive and former
United States President Clinton, was established on
21 April. At its most recent meeting on 17 August, the
Commission approved 29 projects totalling $1.66
billion. Eight of these have been presented by the
United Nations system, which must now mobilize more
than $200 million to implement them. At present,
excluding debt forgiveness, $506 million, or 18.9 per
cent of the pledges for 2010, have been spent.

I would like to remind Council members that the
co-Chairs of the Commission have let indicated that
efforts to speed up its work are limited by the slowness
of the financing promised at the New York conference
on 31 March. Now that several projects await
financing, I call on the donors to disburse the promised
funds rapidly.

In resolution 1927 (2010), the Security Council
called on MINUSTAH to provide the Government of
Haiti with logistical support and technical assistance.
MINUSTAH intends to provide this support selectively
in order to allow for the arrival of donors' funding. A
plan has thus been developed to provide temporary
space and basic office equipment to the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security, to the judicial and
correctional institutions, to the National Police and to
local administrations so that they can maintain
operations. The cost of this logistical support is
estimated at $7.9 million for the current budget period.
That represents less than 1 per cent of MINUSTAH's
budget proposal, which will be presented to the
General Assembly in the autumn. At the same time,
MINUSTAH and the country team will assist these
governmental institutions in preparing to submit their
projects to the Commission.

After this short survey, I would like to inform the
Council of the most recent developments since the
Secretary-General's report was drafted in mid-August,
in order to give Council members as up-to-date an
overview as possible of the situation.

In the area of elections, MINUSTAH's support
for the Provisional Electoral Council has allowed us to
stick to the current electoral timetable. Nonetheless, it
is a very tight schedule and the Council must continue
to comply with it to ensure that elections will indeed be
held on 28 November. The next important stages will
be the launching of the electoral campaign on
27 September and the posting of the electoral list on
29 October. I wish to draw the Council's attention to
the complexity of the process of registering voters who
have lost their national identity cards, a significant
fraction of the displaced population. I have asked the
Office national d'identification and its partners to
redouble their efforts to allow the earthquake victims
to exercise their constitutional rights. The evaluation of
security has been completed in almost all the voting
centres. The National Police and MINUSTAH have
completed an integrated security and logistics plan, but
even if all the pledged fund contributions materialize,
we will still have a $2-million shortfall.

In the area of humanitarian issues, the
International Organization for Migration has registered
about 1.25 million displaced persons. Twelve thousand
temporary shelters have been built. A contingency plan
for the hurricane season has been prepared, including
pre-positioning supplies and food for about 600,000
people.

In regard to policing, I welcome the fact that the
National Police Academy's twenty-second class has
begun training. When it graduates in seven months, the
900 recruits will join the ranks of the Haitian National
Police - 500 as police officers, 300 as corrections
officers and 100 as coastguards. Furthermore, in the
context of our efforts to arrest prison fugitives and
gang members, United Nations police officers
(UNPOL) are supporting the Haitian National Police in
sweeps about three times a week.

Since the issuance of the report, the United
Nations in Haiti has established an operational plan to
address problems of sexual and gender-based violence.
Training in this area has begun in recent weeks for
personnel in the Haitian National Police, UNPOL and
the military component, who are often the first
responders. Measures have also been taken to allow
personnel to refer victims to available medical
services. We have also begun a public information
campaign on prevention and what to do in case of rape.
At the same time, the Internally Displaced Persons
Camp Unit, staffed by 200 UNPOL officers, continues
to provide a permanent presence in six high-risk camps
housing 135,000 people, and to conduct daily patrols
of 70 other camps identified as priorities. An initial
sub-commission of the National Police is now
operating in the Jean-Marie Vincent camp - one of the
camps posing the greatest number of public security
10-53060
problems. Moreover, the military component is
mobilizing between 350 and 500 soldiers a day in order
to protect displaced persons.

Some modest progress has been made in the area
of justice in the last few weeks. The Court of Appeals
in Port-au-Prince is in session again after an
interruption of more than seven months. In addition,
26 lawyers have been enrolled in magistrate training in
France. I am concerned, however, about the continuing
absence of the Conseil superieur du pouvoir judiciaire,
which, given its monitoring role, is a fundamental
element of judicial reform. I have requested the
Government of Haiti to formalize its establishment and
to name the President of the Cour de Cassation, which
oversees both the Conseil superieur and the National
Magistrates' School. It is important to emphasize that,
in the absence of meaningful progress in the area ofthe
rule of law in Haiti, MINUSTAH's efforts to
implement its mandate will be in vain.

The MINUSTAH programme for reducing
community violence has begun to focus on the issue of
violence in displaced persons camps, especially those
adjacent to neighbourhoods that are priority areas for
violence reduction and those that have a particular
problem with gang activity. The Community Violence
Reduction Section is also partnering with the military
component to study a model for the relocation of some
of these zones.

In regard to support for State institutions, from
15 to 20 August the Civil Affairs Section facilitated an
inter-parliamentary visit of high-level parliamentary
administrators to the Dominican Republic to observe a
training course on the modernization programme of the
Dominican Congress. MINUSTAH has also evaluated
the needs of the delegations and vice-delegations in the
departments. I am expecting a report on that evaluation
in the next few days. Additionally, several United
Nations agencies have made technical staff available to
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.

In spite of the devastation created by the
earthquake of 12 January, Haiti has not experienced a
second wave of epidemics or social unrest. This
relative success is nonetheless precarious. The Haitian
Government faces short- and long-term challenges,
such as organizing elections, maintaining order in the
camps, reconstruction and the issue of dealing with
rubble and debris, and relocating displaced persons,
which is largely dependent on the availability of
10-53060
temporary and permanent shelters. If it is to meet these
challenges, Haiti must be able to count on the decisive
leadership of its Government and the ongoing support
of the international community. Elections with results
that all Haitians can accept represent an important step
in that direction.

