We note that, since Russia and Turkey agreed on a ceasefire arrangement on 6 March, the security situation in north-west Syria has significantly improved. We appreciate their diplomatic efforts and encourage the relevant parties to continue implementing the ceasefire. It is our consistent position to support a political solution of the conflict in Syria. We appreciate the painstaking efforts by the Special Envoy and encourage him to continue facilitating dialogue between the Syrian parties, towards an inclusive Syrian- led and Syrian-owned political process in line with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate the future of the country must be decided by the Syrian people, without foreign interference. China also pays close attention to the humanitarian need of the civilians in Syria. The humanitarian issue in Syria is very complicated and must be managed in an integrated and impartial way. We are pleased to learn the positive developments in cross-line humanitarian assistance and call for enhanced coordination and cooperation between the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syrian Government, so as to find a lasting and sustaining solution. With regard to the cross-border arrangement of humanitarian assistance, China's position remains unchanged. We have been playing a constructive role. China did not block anything. Full respect must be given to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. The potential impact of COVID-19 on Syria is of growing concern, even though the current number of confirmed cases in Syria is comparatively limited. We note that the Syrian Government has taken a series of precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the virus. The World Health Organization is actively engaged. We appreciate those efforts. The Chinese Government has already provided a batch of testing kits for Syria. We are willing to continue providing assistance within our capacity to Syria. We call on other countries to do the same. We are seriously concerned about the negative impact of unilateral sanctions on countries' capacity in responding to the pandemic, especially for vulnerable countries like Syria. Civilians and innocent people are suffering severely from those sanctions. China supports the call of the Secretary-General in this regard. We call for the complete and immediate lifting of unilateral coercive measures. Our position is explained in detail in the recent joint letter to the Secretary-General, together with Russia, among others. We hope that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will join the voice of the Secretary-General and High Commissioner for Human Rights in this regard.
