Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
join others in congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for bringing this item to the attention
of the Security Council, and in particular for guiding
the process that led to the adoption of resolution 2365
(2017) f for your transparency and inclusiveness
and for providing early drafts of the text - which
allowed all delegations to share their observations and
contribute to the negotiation process. I hope to see
many more such matters conducted in a similar fashion
in the Council.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2365
(2017), given the matter's bearing upon the maintenance
of international peace and security. Uruguay
emphatically condemns the use of anti-personnel mines
and other weapons that cause indiscriminate damage to
large numbers of civilian victims by any actor and under
any circumstance. We also call for their prohibition
and elimination.

We would have liked the resolution just adopted
to have included language referring to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction - also known as the Ottawa
Convention - and, more specifically, to have called
for its universalization with a view to ensuring its
full implementation. Nevertheless, despite the efforts
of some delegations, that was not possible. Uruguay,
like all members of the Ottawa Convention, is firmly
committed to its full implementation and believes
that its universalization is of the utmost importance.
Promoting its universalization is a priority for
addressing the danger that such weapons pose to the
international community. There are approximately 30
countries that have not yet acceded to the Convention,
some of which are major players in the international
arena. Uruguay urges all States that have not yet signed
the Convention - especially those that manufacture,
sell and possess such weapons - to do so without
delay. We also encourage all Member States to honour
all the relevant international obligations and keep their
commitments under international law and international
humanitarian law.

