Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United Kingdom for its initiative to convene
today's meeting and welcomes Justine Greening,
Secretary of State for International Development,
to preside over today's meeting. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Zerrougui, for their briefings.

China extends its condolences to France for the
series of terrorist attacks that took place in Paris and
condemns, in the strongest terms, those barbaric acts
of terror. We wish to extend our deep condolences and
sympathy to the bereaved families of the victims and
those injured.

Over the past five years, the armed conflict among
the various Syrian parties has become ever more
violent. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist organizations are running rampant,
bringing deep suffering to the Syrian people. The
international community should continue its work in
a coordinated manner in all three areas, namely, the
political process, counter-terrorism and easing the
humanitarian situation, so as to find a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis.

Political settlement is the way to resolve the crisis.
There are key opportunities for a political solution at
the moment. Two meetings in Vienna, at the foreign
minister level, were successfully convened recently.
The participants at the meetings achieved important
consensus on a comprehensive ceasefire and on
initiating a political process to set up a Syrian transition
authority and hold general elections. The International
Syria Support Group was officially established, and
the political settlement has entered a new phase. The
key in the next phase is to ensure its implementation.
The parties concerned should divide labour among
themselves and coordinate efforts to initiate the process
of political transition, under the auspices of the United
Nations, and maintain the hard-won momentum.

Terrorism has become the most serious and
pressing security challenge faced by the international
community, which must attach great importance to the
impact terrorism has on the situation in Syria and on
the region. The Security Council has adopted a host
of resolutions on counter terrorism and on combating
ISIS and other terrorist forces and has reached broad-
based consensus. The international community must
join hands, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other generally
recognized basic norms of international relations, to
further strengthen cooperation in counter terrorism.
We must pay particular attention to addressing both
the symptoms and the root causes, and there must be
no double standards. The leading role of the United
Nations must be brought into full play so as to form a
united front on counter terrorism.

China, too, has been a victim of terrorism.
Combating the East Turkestan terrorist forces, headed
by the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, must also
become an important component of the international
fight against terrorism. Actively carrying out
humanitarian assistance activities is crucial to easing
the situation for the Syrian people.

China wishes to emphasize the following three
points.

First, China hopes that the United Nations, guided
by the principles governing humanitarian assistance,
will strengthen its cooperation and engagement with
the Syrian Government and, based on the consent of
the country concerned, scale up its assistance efforts.
We call upon the various parties in Syria to put the
future of the country and of the people first and to
actively cooperate with the United Nations and other
humanitarian actors, on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, China calls upon the various parties to the
conflict in Syria, based on international humanitarian
law, to fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, cease attacks, protect infrastructure,
medical facilities and personnel and honour, in their
actions, their obligations to protect civilians. To that
end, countries that have influence on the various parties
in Syria should do more.

Thirdly, China supports the international community,
based on the principle of shared responsibility, in its
efforts to scale up its support for Syria and neighbouring
countries, based on the specific needs of the countries
concerned, so as to ensure that aid reaches the people
who need it and that it is put to effective use. We call
upon donors to make pledges at the Syria humanitarian
assistance response plan, so as to alleviate financial
shortfalls. China has been helping to ease the situation
in Syria, and we have provided over ¥230 million in
aid to the Syrian people and to refugees outside Syria.
Not long ago, China decided to provide ¥100 million to
Syria, Jordan and Lebanon. We will continue to do all
we can to provide help, based on developments and the
actual needs on the ground.

