Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
associated countries of Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania and the Slovak Republic have aligned
themselves with this statement, as have Iceland and
Liechtenstein.

In the post-cold-war era, an era of bitter intra-State
conflicts, the international community has been confronted
with new challenges to provide humanitarian assistance
and protection to refugees and persons displaced within
the borders of their own countries. The United Nations is
making a concerted effort to develop a coherent approach
to dealing with the assistance and protection needs of
both refugees and internally displaced persons, 80 per
cent of whom are women and children. Outside the
United Nations, the European Union and other regional
bodies, as well as non-governmental organizations, are
also exploring new ways to alleviate these problems. The
international community is increasingly called upon to

 

provide comprehensive responses to crises which meet the
political, military and the humanitarian demands of the
situation.

Over the past few years, the nature of crises in which
humanitarian workers are engaged has changed
considerably. One of the most troubling aspects is the fact
that the safety of refugees and humanitarian workers -
indeed, one of the cornerstones of international
humanitarian law - has increasingly come under attack. In
some cases, such as recently in the Great Lakes area, there
is a deliberate targeting of refugees as part of the military
strategy of the parties in the conflict. As a result, civilian
refugees and humanitarian workers are also increasingly at
risk. It is important to distinguish between civilian refugees
and belligerents. It is unacceptable that one or more parties
to a conflict intentionally target refugees or the
humanitarian workers who are trying to provide relief or
protection to them.

In the intra-State conflicts with which we are so often
confronted, both the recipients and providers of
humanitarian assistance and protection can be at risk. It is
in response to those risks that a peacekeeping or other
military force is sometimes mandated and deployed. Such
was the case recently with the multinational force in
Albania. Experience has shown that forces operating under
a United Nations mandate are increasingly involved in
protecting humanitarian relief workers, such as those
representing international agencies and non-governmental
organizations, from attacks by belligerents.

United Nations peacekeeping forces have also been
mandated to be directly involved in humanitarian assistance.
They have delivered humanitarian food supplies to refugees
and established areas to protect those residing there from
the threat or use of force. In the United Nations Mission in
Haiti (UNMIH), as in so many other peacekeeping
operations, peacekeepers were involved in small-scale
humanitarian activities which contributed to the success of
the operation.

The presence of United Nations peacekeeping forces
whose mission is largely to support humanitarian assistance
has in several cases helped to establish more secure
conditions. In some cases it prepared the way for a peace
settlement by demonstrating the readiness of the
international community to assist and monitor such an
outcome. Nevertheless, it remains important to differentiate
clearly between peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance,
since too close a link between humanitarian aid delivery
and a military operation could, in some cases, endanger the
perception of impartiality associated with humanitarian
aid.

We increasingly face security situations which
hamper the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The
following issues should be given further attention to
address this situation.

The Council should insist that in concrete situations
safe and unimpeded access for international humanitarian
organizations, such as UNHCR, to refugees in and outside
camps is ensured.

Refugee camps should never be misused as military
bases.

All parties involved in a conflict should ensure the
safety of humanitarian personnel and human rights
monitors. The Council should emphasize, whenever
appropriate, the responsibilities of host States and parties
concerned in this respect.

No attempt should be made by warring parties to use
humanitarian assistance for political objectives that would
endanger the impartiality of the humanitarian assistance.

The mandates and nature of specific operations also
need to be clearly explained to local populations and to
the international media through a proactive and
coordinated public information strategy, including through
the deployment of United Nations radio stations.

Clarity and feasibility are essential to United Nations
mandates and missions, which should also be based on
accurate and up-to-date information to ensure the
protection of humanitarian assistance. Both the Security
Council and humanitarian organizations should not just
recognize the possible support and military protection a
peacekeeping force can provide, but should also realize
the limitations which the mandate of the military
operation entails. On the other hand, the peacekeeping
operation should be kept informed of the plans and
intentions of the humanitarian relief effort. This requires
effective and close coordination, both at headquarters and
in the field.

Greater cooperation in pooling and accessing
information between the humanitarian community, the
peacekeeping operation, other actors and the United
Nations as a whole will improve the precision of risk
assessments. Where present, the special representative of
the Secretary-General has a key role to play in this area.

 

It is clearly important to restore civil order in an early
phase and thereby decrease the risk of loss of life of
refugees, United Nations personnel and humanitarian relief
workers. This calls for an expanded role for civilian police
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, inter alia,
through assistance to local police forces, as well as in
contributing to the restoration of the rule of law, promoting
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law
and fostering civil reconciliation. For the same purpose, a
United Nations human rights field presence has been
established in a number of cases, often as an integral part
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

All parties to armed conflicts must respect human
rights and international humanitarian law. Those who
violate such law or commit war crimes must be prosecuted
actively and, if found guilty, sentenced accordingly. In
some recent instances, international tribunals have been
established. The EU reiterates its support of these tribunals
and reaffirms that all States concerned have an obligation
to cooperate fully with them. The statute of a permanent
international criminal court is being negotiated and the
European Union supports its negotiation and participates
actively in it.

Lastly, given the prominence of women and children
among refugees, special attention should be given to
preventing violence against women and children, as well as
raising more generally the awareness of international
humanitarian law and human rights among all relevant
personnel.

More generally, the need for full cooperation with
United Nations mechanisms was stressed by the European
Union during the fifty-third session of the Commission on
Human Rights. During that session, the Commission
adopted by consensus a resolution on the human rights
situation in Zaire, as that country was called at that time. It
was decided to carry out a joint mission to investigate
allegations of massacres, as well as other issues affecting
human rights in the eastern part of the country. The
European Union deeply regrets that this mission was
prevented from implementing its mandate; it calls upon the
new authorities in Kinshasa to enable the mission to fulfil
that mandate and encourages the Security Council to
maintain its interest in this issue.

Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is a basic precondition for the effective
protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees and others
in conflict situations. Greater cooperation between
peacekeeping and the humanitarian community is required.
Peacekeeping should focus primarily on contributing to
the creation of a secure environment, while humanitarian
organizations should concentrate on the effective delivery
of humanitarian relief assistance and the protection of
human rights and humanitarian law. When the provision
of humanitarian relief assistance is envisaged to be
provided within the context of a peacekeeping operation,
it must be based on a clear and feasible mandate from the
Security Council, and the international community should
provide the necessary resources for the successful
completion of that mandate.

