Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Hans Dahlgren, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden. We are familiar with his
great contributions to the work of this Organization. I
would also like to thank him for presenting the final
report on the Stockholm Process on the Implementation
of Targeted Sanctions - the result of intensive work
incorporating the ideas of people known for their
expertise in the field of the implementation of
sanctions. I would also like to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for the enlightening points that he raised in his
statement.

Sanctions have long been a priority subject for
many Governments, universities and research institutes
because of the absence of proof of their usefulness. At
times they have brought about the exact opposite of the
intended result. Those research institutes and other
parties therefore began to discuss ways and means of
making sanctions more influential by defining their
objectives. Switzerland was the lead country in this
effort. Germany then volunteered to continue the
process. The Stockholm initiative was the third step
towards bringing the process to fruition and suggesting
ways of enhancing the ability of the United Nations
system and of Member States to implement targeted
sanctions. Here, we must pay tribute to Uppsala
University for its valuable efforts, the result of which is
before us in the report under consideration today.

The Security Council has used sanctions as a way
of carrying out one of its main tasks: the maintenance
of international peace and security. It has become clear,
however, that at least some of the current sanctions
regimes, as well as the composition of the committees
entrusted with their implementation, have caused
humanitarian suffering in some societies, large sectors
of which - including women, children and the
elderly- are innocent. If we are talking about
improving the system of sanctions, we must address the
means to bridge that wide gap. The final report of the
Stockholm Process makes some important points,
relating to the selection of targeted sanctions, the
means necessary to enhance the role of the United
Nations in implementing targeted sanctions, and
support to enable Member States to implement targeted
sanctions. The report goes on to make a number of
policy recommendations.

Here, we would like to stress a number of
important points relating to this question. First, we
must recognize that targeted sanctions are more
difficult to implement than collective sanctions. We
must not lose sight of their collateral effects,
particularly on those sectors of the population that are
not being targeted.

Secondly, we must recognize that the political
will of Member States - beginning with that of
Security Council members - is instrumental for the
effective implementation of sanctions. That political
will must be reflected in a determination to establish
just and fair measures that respect human rights and
conform to international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, we emphasize that sanctions must have
time limits, to be renewed through resolutions adopted
by the Security Council should it become evident that
the targeted entity or State has failed to comply and
should their significance, effectiveness and impact be
deemed still relevant. It is essential that the Council
immediately lift sanctions once compliance - as
defined in the relevant resolution - is verified or once
they are no longer necessary. Sanctions should not
continue for decades as a people suffers - or as many
peoples suffer.

Fourthly, we must understand the difficulties
faced by States - particularly by those neighbouring
the targeted entity - especially with regard to their
ability to implement sanctions. That is particularly true
for States whose vital interests are compromised as a
result of sanctions, leading to grave economic damage.
Here, we should rule out any punitive or coercive
enforcement measures; these should be replaced by
cooperation and understanding. Lack of cooperation
and of understanding vis-a-vis affected countries,
countries lacking in resources and indeed neighbouring
countries will hinder the implementation of Security
Council resolutions and will undermine their
credibility.

Fifthly, with respect to reporting and monitoring,
monitoring groups and expert groups and mechanisms
are among the most important tools available to the
United Nations for the implementation of sanctions.
However, we must seek out competent individuals, and
we must avoid duplication and lack of continuity in
their work. Even more important, we must address
absence of independence on the part of those who serve
on the teams.

In conclusion, we should like to say that
sanctions are an important tool that has often been used
by the Security Council, but they are also a grave and
sensitive matter. The time has come for us to unite our
official and academic efforts to establish new tools that
are less harmful to people's humanitarian, economic
and moral welfare and more effective in carrying out
the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.

