Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to express
our gratitude for the briefings by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga;
Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic;
and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force
Commander of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, and we assure
them of our full support in the delicate and complex
tasks that they are carrying out.

The atmosphere of violence and insecurity created
by armed groups in the Central African Republic
continues to undermine the commendable efforts made
and achievements registered by the Government in the
areas of the protection of civilians, the strengthening
of State authority, inter-institutional cooperation and
the training of the Central African Armed Forces, inter
alia. None of these achievements should be overlooked.

The Central African Republic, together with its
regional and subregional parners and with the support
of the international community, must continue to work
in a unified manner in order to find long-term solutions
that stabilize the country and achieve a lasting and
sustainable peace.

We welcome and support the round of consultations
carried out with 14 armed groups by the panel of
facilitators for the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. This
undertaking promotes dialogue and serves to address
the root causes of the instability and armed violence
in the country. We call on all armed groups to
undertake once and for all the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We also call on them
to cease hostilities and to focus their efforts on activities
that will benefit the civilian population and promote the
stabilization of the Central African Republic.

We commend the support lent to the African
Initiative and to the Government by the International
Support Group on the Central African Republic and
urge it to continue to promote consistent and sustained
participation in order to contribute to the stabilization
and recovery of the country as well as to ensure
greater and enhanced coordination among regional and
international partners. In a similar vein, we welcome
the decision by the Government of the Central African
Republic to reactivate the bilateral joint commissions
with Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan, which we trust
will serve to limit arms trafficking and the movement
of armed groups.

The never-ending spiral of violence fuelled by
armed groups, asymmetric attacks and the ongoing
clashes between ethnic groups and communities are
factors that day in and day out exacerbate the critical
humanitarian situation. There are 670,000 displaced
persons in the Central African Republic, and 580,000
refugees have fled to neighbouring countries. That
situation cannot be ignored. We therefore call upon
the international community to continue to provide
support through predictable and sustainable financing,
particularly to the humanitarian response plan, with a
view to confronting the growing need for humanitarian
assistance that the people require.

Bolivia condemns all acts that incite
violence - especially those motivated by ethnic or
religious reasons - and undermine peace, stability
and security in the Central African Republic. In that
connection, we commend the religious leaders of
Bangui for having reached a preliminary agreement
with local militias, civil society and local authorities to
contain the violence in Bangassou.

We also condemn the attacks carried out by
armed groups against civilians, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
peacekeeping forces. We appreciate and welcome the
members of the Mission, as well as the military, police
and civilian personnel, who carry out their work in a
volatile environment of great risk. We regret the loss of
life among both Mission personnel and civilians, and
we take this opportunity to express our condolences to
the family members and Governments of the fallen.

We applaud the efforts of the Mission to identify
regions that lack additional capacity to protect their
civilian population and to support the Government
through peace and reconciliation initiatives, processes
that provide frameworks to reduce violence, build
trust among communities and facilitate the return of
displaced persons. We also welcome the new civilian
protection strategy and efforts to mediate among armed
groups. We support MINUSCA in its efforts to continue
promoting the participation of women in the African
Initiative and advocating for violence-reduction
programmes, which have proved to be effective in
the implementation of local peace agreements and the
voluntary disarmament of many young people involved
in militia and armed group activities.

Moreover, we encourage the joint five-year
agreement to support the Government in the immediate
and long-term deployment of internal defence and
security forces with the support of MINUSCA and in
coordination with the European Union Military Training
Mission, with a View to restoring State authority in the
Central African Republic.

In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing and active
engagement of regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the participation of African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the group of facilitators of the African Initiative,
whose political efforts towards peace and cooperation
are essential to the reconciliation process. All of that
is being carried out in full respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Central
African Republic, as it is the Central Africans
themselves who have the primary responsibility to
achieve peace and stability in their own country.

