Mr. Osman (Somalia): As this is the first time that
my delegation addresses the Security Council during
your presidency, Madam President, allow me to begin
by congratulating you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I wish you every success in your
leadership. Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Keating and Ambassador Madeira for
their briefings.

At today's meeting of the Security Council on
Somalia, I would like to share with members the fact
that it is also the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
founding, on 15 May 1943, of the first political party
in Somalia - the Somali Youth League, which has
done much to advance the Somali cause. Indeed, the
youth party was singularly instrumental in achieving
the independence and unity of the Somali people in
1960. In the process, it helped to create one of Africa's
first democracies. The optimism and hope created by
the Somali Youth League nearly a century ago are also
a major source of our current optimism for achieving
peace and prosperity, thereby leading towards a
resurgent Somalia.

On this occasion, I would also like share the sad
news of the passing away, at the age of 89 years, of
Ambassador Abdulrahim Abby Farah, one of our most
prominent Somali diplomats, who served as Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations. He also
held several high-level positions at the Organization. I
take this opportunity to also convey our thoughts and
prayers to his family and the Somali people around
the world.

We believe that supporting and safeguarding our
hard-earned political stability is a prerequisite for
the long road ahead in terms of security, economic
development and recovery. In the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/4ll) we are concerned
about the inclusion of some inaccurate statements
on the political situation, which could jeopardize
the legitimacy of the Government, as well as our
national reconstruction efforts. While the report
covers most developments that have occurred in the
period under review, we suggest that there is a room
to more adequately address the political progress and
developments on the ground. However, we are happy
to note that the tensions within Parliament mentioned
in current report have been resolved. That is clear
testimony to the resilience of the Somali people and
their capacity to absorb political shocks and to engage
in peaceful, lasting and democratic solutions while
respecting parliamentary rules of procedures, as well
as our Constitution.

A little more than a year ago, President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo joined our international
partners at the London Somalia Conference and made
a steadfast commitment to accelerating progress on
security sector reform and to setting security as a
priority for his Administration. Since the previous
meeting of the Council (see S/PV.8215), tangible
progress on that commitment has been made. Somalia
has developed a realistic, phased and conditions-based
transition plan, working closely and collaboratively
with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
the United Nations and the European Union, as well
as other key partners. That process was inclusive
and comprehensive and included field consultations
to incorporate the perspective of local stakeholders,
including federal member states.

The transition plan was endorsed by the Somali
Cabinet and by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. It sets out the strategic guidelines that will
enable detailed planning over the next few years. It
places a particular focus on the institutional capacity-
building of our forces, while at the same time outlining
the necessary security operations and supporting
stabilization efforts.

As we prepare for the transition plan, I take
this opportunity to thank the TCCs and PCCs that
have contributed their forces for their honorable
and courageous sacrifices. The support provided
by the United Nations to AMISOM. should also be
acknowledged and must be continued in order to
continue the momentum. My Government welcomes the
appointment of Ambassador Lisa Filipetto of Australia
as Head of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia. The gains made by AMISOM. and our national
armed forces against Al-Shabaab over the past year are
astonishing. Nonetheless, we recognize that Al-Shabaab
will not be defeated by military means alone.
The stabilization efforts undertaken with the
support of our international partners are just as critical
in helping us to adddress the roort causes of fragility
and conflict in our communities. It is our firm belief
that our credibility and legitimacy as a Government
hinge on our ability to promote social reconciliation
and good governance and provide public services to
help improve the lives of our citizens. We know that the
Somali National Army (SNA) faces challenges, but we
believe that the only way to implement the transition is
to commit the SNA to undertake joint operations with
AMISOM. and the support of international partners.
That would help acquire the requisite experience, self-
confidence and capacity to undertake major operations
and eventually assume the responsibility for the
security of the whole country.

President Farmajo and Prime Minister Hassan Ali
Khaire are sparing no effort to reconcile the people
of Somalia and provide a national vision that will
further enhance national unity and reconciliation. The
transition plan will therefore become the centrepiece
of security sector reform in Somalia, as it is rooted
in our national security architecture, which is closely
interlinked with the President's two other priorities,
namely, inclusive politics and economic reforms.

Following the World Bank and International
Monetary Fund spring meetings in Washington, DC,
this year, we, the Federal Government of Somalia, are
now closer than ever in our efforts to normalize our
relations with international financial institutions and
on a pathway to eventual debt relief.

Meanwhile, on the political front, the Federal
Government of Somalia, together with the federal
member states, continues to work to implement an
ambitious political road map that includes the revision
of the provisional Constitution and the preparation
for the next elections, in 2020, which will require the
renewed focus of Parliament in the swift passage of
key legislation that is currently pending approval. We
believe that the peaceful election of a new Speaker in
Parliament will enable this process and advance the
legislative agenda.

I would now like to turn to the statement made
by President Farmajo on the unfortunate flare-up
of hostilities in Tukaraq and El Afweyn, in the 8001
region of the Somali Republic. In that connection,
the President appealed to all the parties concerned
to stop all hostilities immediately. President Farmajo
urged leaders, elders and civil society to negotiate
for peace and an agreeable coexistence and to resolve
their differences through dialogue and respect for the
sanctity of life. He also expressed his deep regret over
the loss of Somali lives in this recent conflict, sent
his heartfelt condolences to the families affected and
prayed for the quick recovery of the wounded.

In conclusion, Somalia's challenges remain
significant, including our vulnerability to extreme
weather, the long-term demands of State-building and
tackling active and vicious terrorist groups. All of
that requires long-term work in order to address the
structural, political and legacy issues of corruption,
including the lack of oversight and accountability in
the status quo, and building and resourcing legitimate
institutions. But we are on the right path. The continued
support of the Council will enable us to continue to
make progress and to shift the perception of Somalia
from decline to growth and from weakness to resilience.

