It is a privilege for me to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). At the outset, the A3+1 extends its sincerest condolences to the families of the victims who have lost their lives to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We thank Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing. We also acknowledge the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and thank her for consistently making time to participate in Security Council meetings. The peace process in Colombia is at a very crucial stage. While it is concerning that the COVID-19 pandemic, alongside a plethora of other challenges, has delayed progress on the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, we welcome the positive developments, as outlined in the Secretary General's most recent report (S/2020/943). In that regard, Colombians must continue to forge ahead with the comprehensive implementation of the 2016 final peace agreement. The position of the A3+1 is informed by its principled stance that the only viable, sustainable solution for conflict remains the implementation of the peace agreement and an inclusive political settlement led by, and in the interests of, the people of Colombia. The Security Council has reaffirmed its steadfast support for the peace process and will continue to accompany Colombia in its efforts to fulfil the veritable goals of peace, stability and prosperity, as evidenced in the recent unanimous adoption of resolution 2545 (2020). The A3+1 therefore encourages all Colombian stakeholders to consolidate the gains achieved thus far and redouble their efforts to overcome lingering impediments. We also offer the following observations. First, on the issue of security, we remain deeply disturbed by, and condemn in the strongest terms, the meaningless killings of former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants, human rights defenders, indigenous people, women, children and Afro-Colombian leaders. The main drivers of those atrocities need to be identified and addressed and the perpetrators must be held accountable. The protection of those particularly vulnerable groups will be an important yardstick for the effectiveness of the security measures in general. In that context, we appreciate the decision in July by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to adopt protective measures in accordance with section 3.4 of the peace agreement. Additionally, we commend the steady progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace despite the impediments created by the pandemic. Furthermore, we urge the Government to bolster the State's security machinery in the departments worst affected by violence, such as Cauca, Antioquia, Norte de Santander and Narifio, and encourage the authorities to convene regular meetings of the National Commission on Security Guarantees. Robustly dismantling illegal armed groups and crime syndicates is also pivotal to ensuring the safety and protection of the Colombian citizenry - especially the most vulnerable groups, including women and children, who continue to be victims of sexual and gender-based violence. To that end, the National Commission on Security Guarantees ought to work assiduously alongside civil society to finalize public policies to disrupt and apprehend criminal organizations and their networks. The A3+1 notes the progress made on the demobilization and reintegration process of members of the FARC-EP, which should be commended, but is also concerned about the limited progress - due to the spread of the pandemic - on productive initiatives for former combatants. In that regard, we echo the Secretary- General's call to strengthen efforts towards longer-term reintegration, with reintegration benefits for all former combatants. That will ultimately determine the long-term sustainability of peace in Colombia. We urge the authorities to improve the implementation of the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders. Women and children have a fundamental role to play in ushering in peace in Colombia and must always be protected. In addition, the A3+1 reiterates its call for the cessation of hostilities, in strict compliance with resolution 2532 (2020). We remain hopeful that the Government and the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional will fully capitalize on this peacebuilding opportunity and engage in constructive dialogue in a spirit of cooperation in order to achieve stable and lasting peace in Colombia. Secondly, on the socioeconomic track, we recognize the Government's laudable efforts in authorizing peace-related funds from mineral royalties to facilitate the implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus. We are, however, aware of reports that those funds are inadequate and that there is a possibility that the investment budgets of certain entities that are essential for the implementation of the final peace agreement - the National Land Agency, the Agency for Territorial Renewal and the Agency for Rural Development - might be cut. In that vein, we encourage all stakeholders to strengthen their engagement and consolidate their efforts to resolve the financial difficulties in order to guarantee the full and timely implementation of the final agreement. The A3+1 applauds the continued implementation of the programme for the substitution of illicit crops despite the challenges posed by the pandemic. This agricultural reform programme remains critical to dissuading former FARC-EP combatants from re-entering the illegal economy and also plays a role in assisting former combatants to generate income to sustain their livelihoods and contribute to the formal economy. At the same time, we are mindful that some aspects of comprehensive rural reform that are inextricably linked to the illicit crop substitution programme, need to be effectively addressed. Accordingly, the A3+1 encourages all parties to further rectify the situation relating to fair access to lands and address the challenges facing former combatants residing outside of the territorial areas for training and reintegration. These long-standing issues are integral to the full reintegration of former FARC-EP combatants. Thirdly, the A3+1 welcomes and commends the progress made in the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, especially the decision of some former FARC-EP members to recognize and accept responsibility for their transgressions. Acknowledging wrongdoings during this peacebuilding stage, in compliance with the final agreement, paves the way for forgiveness and lays the foundation for justice, reconciliation and the full integration of former FARC-EP members into the Colombian society. The A3+1 emphasizes the fundamental importance of the reconciliation process, as many Member States have benefited from the positive aspects of such processes. Furthermore, we also continue to support the full implementation of all aspects of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, specifically aimed at ensuring that communities and victims affected by the conflict are priorities in the peace process. We also endorse the Secretary-General's views that parties should endeavour to overcome their differences by maximizing the use of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement to resolve disputes. To that effect, we encourage the Commission and the High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples to meet regularly to address the implementation of the Ethnic Chapter of the peace agreement. The signing of the 2016 final peace agreement has shown us that, when dialogue is constructive and results-oriented, and when convictions are strong and the objective worthwhile, the impossible becomes possible. It is time for Colombia to be transformed through this peacebuilding agreement and to fulfil its true potential. The A3+1 stands in solidarity with the Government and the people of Colombia in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as with the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and country team in the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement, as their efforts continue to be invaluable in supporting its implementation.
