Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
should like to join others in welcoming Special
Representative Steiner to the Council and also Deputy
Prime Minister Covie. It is good to have them here for
this discussion and to take note of the significant
accomplishments that Mr. Steiner has achieved in his
first 10 weeks in Kosovo. The formation of the
provisional Kosovo Government and the agreement
reached on Serb participation is welcome news and
provides a solid foundation for us to move forward.

In his excellent briefing, Mr. Steiner outlined
some impressive achievements that have been made in
the past months and set out some ideas about prospects
for the future that we find encouraging and strongly
support, although there is obviously much still to be
done. In particular, we applaud the concept of
benchmarks, and we support Special Representative
Steiner's efforts to promote objective standards of good
governance. In our view, those benchmarks are not tied
to a specific political outcome, but they should be seen
by all as the way to measure progress in building
democratic security and economic institutions and
processes that are fully representative and responsive
to the needs of all Kosovars. I agree with his
assessment that achievement of those benchmarks
should be an objective in and of itself, necessary for
the Kosovans and, indeed, necessary for stability and
success in the region, no matter what the outcome,
eventually and much later, of a final status discussion.

We are encouraged at the positive response to this
initiative from the new Government. Prime Minister
Rexhapi's forthcoming statements of support for
promoting Serb returns are promising signs of a
commitment among Kosovo's leaders to the sort of
multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo that is envisaged
in resolution 1244 (1999) and that my Government
strongly supports.

I also want to note Deputy Prime Minister
Covie's contribution and his important and constructive
role in representing his Government's views on
Kosovo. We ask that the minister convey back to his
authorities our assurance that we will continue to
support enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and Belgrade.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the working
relationship that has developed between Special
Representative Steiner and Deputy Prime Minister
Covic' in 10 short weeks. They have already met
several times to exchange views, and we hope that they
will continue that act of dialogue, which in our view is
the best recipe for avoiding misunderstandings and
helping all concerned to deal with the difficult issues
ahead.

The progress on the return of the detainees was
good news, and we expect that more will be done on
return of the displaced and on other priorities in the
Common Document in the months ahead. I noted
Mr. Steiner's intention to build on that progress and to
focus on returns.

Our desire to address Serb priorities in Kosovo
should not, however, suggest that we assume that there
is agreement among Serbs on how their priorities are
best addressed. There is a considerable range of views
within the Povratak Coalition on how best to respond
to Serb concerns. Some think they can achieve that by
actively participating in Kosovo's provisional
institutions of self-government, and others think that it
will happen only with parallel Serb institutions. Some
think that the only way to promote security is to adhere
strictly to the rule of law, and others think that they
should seek justice in the streets. Those are two very
different visions, and it is obvious which one we
support and encourage.

I raise that point in connection with the
disturbance in Mitrovica on 8 April, which left more
than 20 UNMIK police injured and at least one in a
life-threatening condition. We oppose any effort to
simplify events and to present what happened in
Mitrovica as representing a Kosovar-Serb point of
View. We think that it does not. The activity of the
bridge gang more likely resembles similar actions in
the past by Kosovar Albanian extremists, who have
also condoned or promoted violence and illegality. But
the situation highlights the need for the rule of law, and
while we understand the importance of the political
issues at play in Mitrovica, we have no tolerance for
any attack on United Nations personnel. Respect for
the rule of law throughout, by all parties, is
fundamental for the future, and we were pleased to see
a similar point of view expressed in Kosovo by both
Serb and Albanian political leaders.

My Government believes that resolution 1244
(1999) and the constitutional framework offer the best
guarantee for all Kosovars. Within those parameters,
we will continue to support efforts on the range of
issues - security, economic reform, minority rights,
the rule of law and freedom of movement - that must
be addressed. Interlocking progress on all those issues
is the best way forward for all communities in Kosovo,
and Special Representative Steiner will have our strong
support in pursuing that.

