Let me start by thanking our briefers today for their valuable inputs. We share most of the main observations and proposals enumerated in the latest special report (S/2020/202) prepared by the African Union and the United Nations. The security dynamics in Darfur have remained mostly unchanged. Isolated incidents, as well as sporadic but low-scale clashes in Jebel Marra between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army of Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who remains the main spoiler of the peace process, do not change the picture. Developments in those areas already vacated by the Blue Helmets are also not extremely worrisome. We remain convinced that the agreed phased reduction and withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) should be implemented in line with the relevant Security Council decision. We believe that a dialogue between the United Nations and the Sudanese authorities will contribute to the achievement of the necessary context and parameters for the follow-on presence. Today Darfur faces mainly peacebuilding challenges rather than peacekeeping ones. It is high time to focus on the restoration and economic development of Darfur. We once again insist on lifting all unilateral sanctions imposed on Khartoum. This would be extremely useful to the efforts of the Sudanese authorities to revitalize the country's economy. This step would be even more important and timely in the midst of a raging pandemic. We would like to emphasize that the opinion of the Sudan as the host country should in any case be decisive both for the drawdown and exit of UNAMID and in deploying a possible special political mission. Russia believes that any future special political mission should support Khartoum precisely where the Sudanese themselves need and expect this. From that perspective, it seems obvious that a future United Nations presence should be based on Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. Let us leave the task of the protection of civilians to the Sudanese authorities, which have repeatedly affirmed their readiness to assume those responsibilities. In that regard, the role of the international community would be to help Khartoum to build up the necessary national capabilities. It is also very important not to bypass the African Union in our efforts. Regional organizations, which made a significant contribution to the stabilization of Darfur, should also play an important role during the peacebuilding phase.
