Mr. Amil (Pakistan): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the skilful manner
in which you have conducted the work of the Security
Council during the month of August. Permit me also to
congratulate Ambassador Wang and the Chinese
delegation on a successful Council presidency last
month.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC) Group, on whose behalf this statement is being
made, fully endorses the practice of having periodic
open debates on the situation in the Middle East so that
the Council has a chance to hear the opinions of the
larger membership of the United Nations and, it is to
be hoped, benefit from the collective wisdom of
Member States when it considers the way forward on
this most important issue.

On 7 June this year, the United Nations marked
40 years of occupation by Israel of the Arab territories,
including the Palestinian territory, East Jerusalem and
the Syrian Golan. On 15 May 2008, the Palestinians
will observe the sixtieth anniversary of the Nakba, or
"catastrophe". It is indeed very unfortunate that, after
all this time, our quest for peace in the Holy Lands
remains elusive at best.

The OIC remains deeply concerned about the
continuing Israeli occupation of Arab lands and the
aggressions committed against the peoples of the
occupied Arab territories - an occupation that has
gone on far too long and has served only to cause
agony and anguish. The visible and often brutal
suppression of the Palestinian people is also a principal
root cause of the rise of extremism across the Muslim
world. This political reality, however unpalatable, can
no longer be ignored. It is not only the United Nations,
but also the entire international community, that should
denounce this violation of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

This year, like most others, has been one of
change and unrest in the region. While there have been
developments in the region - including the meetings
between leaders of Israel and the Palestinian Authority
and the Quartet's agreement to meet again in

September as part of the efforts to provide diplomatic
support for the parties in their bilateral discussions and
negotiations, in order to move forward on a successful
path to a Palestinian State - the continued use of
violence by Israel and inter-Palestinian divisions have
left the already weary Palestinian population insecure
and unsure of the future. It will be our most pressing
task to translate those developments into concrete
actions aimed at the realization of a comprehensive
solution to the many issues of the Middle East, based
on all the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.

It is a matter of concern that, despite the
developments of the release of 250 Palestinian
prisoners and of some tax revenues, the larger
problems in the occupied territories remain the same.
Settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories persists; the construction of the wall, in
contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, continues; and
roadblocks and checkpoints make everyday life taxing
for a population that is already living caged in its own
land. We urge the Israeli Government to put an end to
the illegal settlement activity and the work on the wall
and to halt all work near the sacred Al-Aqsa Masjid.

Whatever one's political perspective, it is clear
that there can be no military solution to the issue of the
Middle East and that peace can be attained only
through a complete and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from all Arab lands, including the
Palestinian territories, East Jerusalem and the occupied
Syrian Golan and Lebanese lands, and through the
creation of an independent and viable Palestinian State.
In the present atmosphere of quiet tension in the
region, it will be the challenge of the United Nations to
maintain the efforts to reach a just, fair and
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Indeed, the United Nations should play a more
active role in promoting a durable and comprehensive
peace.

The most urgent task is to halt the violence in the
occupied territories. While the efforts to secure the
release of the captured Israeli soldiers are still ongoing,
Israel must also release the remaining Palestinian
prisoners and do more to support the Palestinian
Authority and to end the economic and humanitarian
blockade of the Palestinians. Unfortunately, Israeli
actions on key issues such as the outposts, the

settlements in the West Bank, the construction of the
wall and the hundreds of checkpoints serve only to
intensify frustration within the Palestinian population.

Simultaneously, the efforts to promote inter-
Palestinian reconciliation should be continued. Policies
of division and isolation may prove counterproductive
to the cause of peace. In that connection, a step
essential to achieving reconciliation is to restore the
situation existing on the ground in Gaza today to that
which existed prior to the events of June 2007.

The OIC Group strongly urges the resumption of
peace talks without prejudice to the positions of either
side. Such talks should lead to an early agreement to
resume the implementation of the agreed peace plan
and the Road Map.

In that regard, we note the initiative to convene
an international conference on the issue in Washington
in November. It is our fervent hope and prayer that the
conference will lead to significant progress in our quest
for peace. We should, however, be mindful that the
conference can succeed only if it reflects a
comprehensive and sincere initiative for peace that
returns all Arab territories occupied since June 1967
and is able to address and show concrete movement on
the final status issues, namely, final boundaries in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the status of Jerusalem - al-Quds al-Sharif -
and the issue of Palestinian refugees and their inherent
right to return.

The structure of a durable peace in the Middle
East is already well known. To realize a just and
durable peace in the Middle East, the United Nations
must secure the non-selective implementation of its
own resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003) and General Assembly resolution 194
(III). A solution will also have to be based on the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet's Road Map.

To that end, the Islamabad Declaration and
Communique issued by the thirty-fourth session of the
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, which was
held in Islamabad from 15 to 17 May 2007,
unambiguously resolved to continue its relentless
efforts for the cause of peace in the Middle East and
welcomed the renewal of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the efforts of the President of Pakistan.
Let us hope that next year, when the Palestinians
commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the Nakba, it
will be accompanied by celebrations over the creation
of an independent and viable Palestinian State, at peace
with all its neighbours.

