Mr. Abbas (Lebanon): Lebanon welcomes your
introduction, Sir, of this important topic for open
debate at the Security Council this month. Conflicts
within and among countries have proliferated in the
recent decades in many parts of the world. We agree
with the notion advanced in the concept note for this
meeting that conflicts have become more complex in
the modern world, aggravated by driving factors such
as climate change, underdevelopment, poverty, forced
displacement, cyberwarfare and espionage, terrorism
and violent extremism. However, this should not
distract us from addressing the root causes of conflict,
many of which have become protracted, such as foreign
occupation and aggression.

Today Lebanon faces many of these complex
humanitarian, economic, social, political and security
challenges. In addition to the almost-daily Israeli
violations of our sovereignty and of resolution 1701
(2006), which continue to threaten Lebanon's stability
and security, since 2011 Lebanon has been host to more
than 1.2 million refugees from neighbouring Syria,
adding to more than 400,000 Palestinian refugees
who have come to the country at different intervals
since 1948.

This has compounded many ofthe challenges facing
my country and led to a significant decrease in the
country's gross domestic product (GDP) growth, higher
unemployment and poverty levels, and overstretched
infrastructure in multiple factors, including health,
education, housing, electricity, waters, sanitation
and transport. The World Bank estimates that the
cumulative cost Lebanon's economy of the ongoing
crisis in Syria stood in 2015 at around $18 billion in
terms of lower GDP growth in addition to $4.2 billion
in terms of lower revenues. Furthermore, Lebanon is at
the forefront of the global fight against terrorism - a
challenging menace that has undermined the security
and stability of my country for many years, but against
which the Lebanese Government and people have stood
firm and steadfast and were able to achieve a series of
resounding victories last summer.

The United Nations has been an important partner
in those efforts, whether through the United Nations
Interim Force, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the
United Nations Development Programme or other
entities of the United Nations development system.

In conclusion, we believe that it is worth sharing
the experience of Lebanon in that context. In October
2016, the Government of Lebanon and the United
Nations system signed a pioneering United Nations
strategic framework for the period 2017-2020 to replace
the previous United Nations Development Assistance
Framework. The new framework recognizes that, in view
ofthe multi-dimensional challenges facing Lebanon and
the multiple mandates under which the United Nations
operates in the country, the Organization must follow a
whole-of-Lebanon approach, which would leverage and
integrate the diverse expertise, capacities and resources
of the United Nations to support the Government of
Lebanon in meeting its priorities and managing security,
political, governance and socioeconomic challenges to
stability. That approach also aims to support Lebanon
on the path to longer-term sustainable development, in
accordance with the vision, principles and goals of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

