Mr. Bamba (Cote D'Ivoire): Let me at the outset
congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs for his comprehensive and
very encouraging presentation. Like him, we place
great hope in the upcoming high-level meeting on the
Sahel on 26 September.

I take the floor in my capacity as representative
of the President of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). I would like to focus on the
situation in Mali.

Since the Council was last briefed on the situation
in Mali (see S/PV.6820), noteworthy developments
have occurred. The interim President, Mr. Dioncounda
Traore, returned to Mali on 27 July, with the facilitation
of the ECOWAS mediator. On 29 July, he broadcast to
the nation, promising to facilitate the formation of a
national unity Government, and urging Malians to
welcome the support of ECOWAS, the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations in the resolution of the
double crisis in Mali.

On 10 August in Accra, on the margins of the burial
ceremony for the late President John Evens Atta Mills
of Ghana, the ECOWAS heads of State urged the Malian
authorities to form the Government of national unity
without further delay. In addition, they stated that the
presence of the head of the ex-junta in any Government
organ would be unacceptable to ECOWAS. The message
was passed on to Malian authorities.

On 20 August, the Prime Minister eventually
announced the formation of a 32-member Government
of national unity, as demanded by the Authority
of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government. The
composition of the new Government received mixed
reactions within Mali and the international community,
with regard to its true reflection of Mali in its diversity.

It should also be noted that little progress has
been made so far in the implementation of the road
map leading to the holding of free, fair, transparent
and credible elections in the course of the transition,
largely due to the precarious security situation in the
north and continued resistance in Bamako by marginal
forces to the smooth implementation of the transitional
arrangement.

With regard to the security situation, rebel and
terrorist groups in the north of Mali have taken
advantage of the near political paralysis in Bamako to
consolidate their positions. On 1 September, Islamist
extremists from the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa (MUJAO) captured the strategic town of
Douentza, about 170 kilometres from Mopti, the last
major Government-controlled garrison town before
entering rebel-held territory.

In another development, on 8 September, jittery
Government troops allegedly shot and killed 16
unarmed Islamic preachers of the Dawa sect, some of
whom were from Mauritania, in the central town of
Diabaly, mistaking them for MUJAO militants.

Following protracted deliberations among the
ECOWAS technical assessment mission, the committee
of chiefs of defence staff and the Malian military and
civilian authorities, on 1 September President Traore
finally addressed a formal request for assistance from
ECOWAS, the AU and the United Nations to restoring
the territorial integrity of Mali. That letter was
circulated to the members of the Council through its
President.

As welcome as that new development was, it fell
short of the anticipation of the ECOWAS Authority,
as the request ruled out the ECOWAS Standby Force
Mission in Mali (MICEMA) presence in Bamako in
phases I and II of the planned deployment, that is, to
assist with securing republican institutions during the
transition and to help to reorganize and train Malian
forces. Instead, the request limited assistance to only
the provision of equipment, logistics and intelligence
in those phases, and allows for the deployment of
troops only in phase III, namely, the reconquest of the
territorial integrity of Mali.

Meanwhile, the ECOWAS heads of State attending
the funeral in Ghana to which I referred requested that
President Alpha Conde of Guinea delay the release of a
consignment of military hardware imported by former
President Amadou Toumani Toure to Mali, pending
clarifications on the political situation in Bamako.

To that end, the Chairman of Authority dispatched
to Conakry a successful high-level ECOWAS military
and political delegation, led by the Commissioner of
Political Affairs and joined by military officials from
Mali in order to negotiate the safe transfer of the
consignment from the ship to a secure storage facility
under the control of the Guinean authorities, with
ECOWAS bearing the cost of the demurrage.

The more extremist elements within the ex-junta,
led by Lieutenant Amadou Konare and Captain Bakari
Mariko, and the marginal forces in Mali seized upon the
two developments to unleash a campaign of vilification
against ECOWAS and Guinea in the pro-putschist
media and civil society groups in Bamako.

It is against that background that the meeting
of the chiefs of defence staff was held in Abidjan on
14 and 15 September to consider the request from Mali
and review the security situation. The outcome of that
meeting, in addition to maintaining the three phases of
the concept of operations, stressed the following points.

Second, Mali should accept phase I with a
minimum deployment of troops/police to secure
logistic facilities, civilian and military/police staff
of MICEMA; ECOWAS should officially request the
Malian Government to sensitize the population and
the Mali defence and security forces to accept phase I,
as amended, as the other phases cannot be carried out
without phase I.

Third, phase 3 will be jointly planned between
the ECOWAS Standby Force headquarters and Malian
defense and security forces. This phase requires a great
deal of combat assets, including fighter jets for the
conduct of the operations. Such assets may be provided
by ECOWAS or development partners.

Fourth, ECOWAS and development partners should
provide the needed logistical and financial resources
for the conduct of all phases of the operation.

Fifth, ECOWAS should intensify political efforts
with Algeria and Mauritania with a view to securing
their support for the operation.

Sixth, ECOWAS should, at the earliest possible
time, organize a strategic planning meeting with
the African Union, in consultation with the strategic
partners, namely, the European Union, the United
Nations and the United States of America.

Seventh, Malian authorities should comply with
resolution 2056 (2012), on the total withdrawal of the
Comite national de redressement de la democratie et de
la restauration de l'e'tat (CNRDRE) from the political
arena.

Eighth, Malian authorities should intensify efforts
on an inter-Malian dialogue with the rebels through the
establishment of a national mechanism.

In conclusion, based on what I have set out, it is
obvious that although some progress has been achieved
on the political and security fronts, several daunting
challenges remain. In the light of this situation, I would
like to mention the following trends that are likely, to
a certain extent, to shape the current context of the
situation in Mali.

First, the ECOWAS decisions on Mali continue
to encounter fierce resistance from the more extreme
elements among former CNRDRE members, and a
vocal minority of so-called patriotic social forces who
have built a coalition around Oumar Mariko and the
Convergence patriotique pour le Mali.

Second, that situation risks diminishing the
chances for creating a permissive environment for the
deployment of MICEMA.

Third, furthermore, the request for military
deployment only for phase 111 can hardly be fulfilled,
because it will be extremely difficult and strategically
unwise to deploy troops in the north of the country
without a coordinating centre in Bamako.

Fourth, it appears that a sharp division has occurred
between two factions of the ex-CNRDRE, one led by
Captain Amadou Sanogo and the other by Amadou
Konare. That situation portends further clashes within
the military, and complicates the transition. Captain
Sanogo has declared his support for the request for
ECOWAS assistance, while Lieutenant Konare has
vehemently opposed it.

Fifth, the question of leadership in Mali remains
unclear and that is sending confused signals.

Sixth, the security and humanitarian situation in
the north of Mali is getting worse and continues to pose
a major threat to regional and international peace and
security.

Seventh, the commendable efforts of the mediator,
Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina Faso, with
regard to the rebels are yielding qualified results and
should be further encouraged.

Eighth, in closing, and as the Council knows, the
meeting of ECOWAS Ministers of Defence and Foreign
Affairs, held today in Abidjan in the framework of
the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, is still
in progress and should be concluded shortly. What is
noteworthy is that the meeting seeks to validate the
decisions reached earlier by the meeting of the Chief
of Defence Staff. In addition, those decisions will have
to be further confirmed at the level of ECOWAS Heads
of State and Government and endorsed by the relevant
organs of the African Union before landing at the
Security Council.

Finally, it is the intention of the Commission to
intensify contacts with the neighbouring States Algeria
and Mauritania to build a workable consensus on the
ECOWAS-led deployment of the stabilization force in
Mali. To that end, a consultative meeting of the support
group on Mali should be organized under the joint
chairmanship of ECOWAS and the African Union.

