The President (interpretation from Arabic): I thank
the representative of Poland for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Egypt.

At the outset, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
report of 7 June. Our gratitude also goes to the former
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, who carried out
his tasks in an excellent manner.

My delegation supported the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), for the following reasons.

First, the Egyptian Government is concerned over
the great deterioration of the situation in Tajikistan. My
Government is convinced of the urgent need for the
parties to abide sincerely and in good faith by the
commitments they have undertaken, and in particular of
the need for the prompt resumption, without any further
delay, of the inter-Tajik talks in order to reach a peaceful
settlement as soon as possible.

Secondly, all hostilities must cease immediately and
all parties must fully comply with the Tehran Agreement
on a Temporary Cease-fire and all other commitments
they have undertaken, in particular the extension of the
cease-fire throughout the inter-Tajik talks. These actions
will facilitate the achievement of a peaceful settlement
and the establishment of a climate of mutual trust
between the parties.

Thirdly, despite the restrictions imposed on the
freedom of movement of UNMOT personnel and the
threats to their safety, the Mission's ongoing
implementation of its tasks is essential to creating an
atmosphere conducive to the resumption of the talks and
the efforts to find a peaceful settlement. In this regard, we
reaffirm the need for both parties to ensure the freedom
of movement of and the highest degree of security for the
Mission's personnel.

Having supported the resolution on the extension of
UNMOT's mandate, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
importance of a thorough and comprehensive review of
the situation when the Mission's new mandate expires,
and in particular of an appraisal of the parties' serious
commitment to achieving a peaceful settlement.

In conclusion, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
thank Mr. Darko Silovic, former Head of Mission of
UNMOT,
 

for his remarkable efforts. We also welcome Mr. Gerd
Merrem, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and wish him every success in his tasks.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of

the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
