Mr. Blix: The thirteenth quarterly report of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) is before the Council in
document S/2003/580. It covers the period 1 March to
31 May. The Commission carried out inspections in
Iraq up to and including Monday, 17 March. The day
thereafter, Tuesday, 18 March, all international staff

were withdrawn, and the armed action commenced on
19 March.

We are gratified that the withdrawal took place in
good order and with full cooperation from the Iraqi
side.

I think that the UNMOVIC report speaks for
itself. It is a bit longer than usual, because we thought
it might be useful for the Council to get a fuller
perspective on some of the questions.

Let me highlight some points.

The first point, made in paragraph 8 of the report,
is that the Commission has not at any time during the
inspections in Iraq found evidence of the continuation
or resumption of programmes of weapons of mass
destruction or significant quantities of proscribed
items - whether from pre-l99l or later. I leave aside
the Al Samoud 2 missile system, which we concluded
was proscribed.

As I have noted before, this does not necessarily
mean that such items could not exist. They might -
there remain long lists of items unaccounted for - but
it is not justified to jump to the conclusion that
something exists just because it is unaccounted for.

In paragraph 11, we note that the long list of
proscribed items unaccounted for has not been
shortened by inspections or Iraqi declarations,
explanations or documentation. It was the task of the
Iraqi side to present items unaccounted for, if they
existed, or to present evidence - records, documents
or other - convincing the inspectors that the items do
not exist. If, for whatever reason, this is not done, the
international community cannot have confidence that
past programmes or any remaining parts of them have
been terminated. However, an effective presence of
international inspectors will serve as a deterrent against
efforts aimed at reactivating or developing new
programmes of weapons of mass destruction.

Although during the last month and a half of our
inspections the Iraqi side made considerable efforts to
provide explanations, to begin inquiries and to
undertake exploration and excavations, those efforts
did not bring the answers needed before we withdrew.
We did not have time to interview more than a handful
of the large number of persons who were said by Iraq
to have participated in the unilateral destruction of
biological and chemical weapons in 1991. Such
interviews might have helped towards the resolution of
some outstanding issues, although one must be aware
that the totalitarian regime in Iraq continued to cast a
shadow on the credibility of all interviews.

The report before the Council gives details of the
Commission's supervision of the destruction of 50 Al
Samoud 2 missiles out of the 75 declared to have been
deployed, and of other items in the missile sphere. As
the Council will note from the table in paragraph 115
of the report, the programme of destruction was not
completed at the time the inspectors where withdrawn.
Fifty per cent of the declared warheads and 98 per cent
of the missile engines remained intact. Also, there was
no time to assess whether the A1 Fatah missile
programme stayed within the range allowed by
Security Council resolutions.

In the context of the destruction of proscribed
items, I should also like to draw the attention of the
Council to the information provided in appendix I. It
shows that the weapons that were destroyed before
inspectors left in 1998 were, in almost all cases,
declared by Iraq, and that the destruction occurred
before 1993 in the case of missiles, and before 1994 in
the case of chemical weapons. The existence and scope
of the biological weapons programme was uncovered
by the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) in 1995, despite Iraq's denials and
concealment efforts. As to items, only a few remnants
of the biological weapons programme were
subsequently found. A great deal - Iraq asserts all -
was unilaterally destroyed in 1991.

Thus, in the main, UNSCOM's supervised
destruction of actual weapons and agents took place
during the early years of the Commission, and had
regard mainly to items declared by Iraq, or at least
found at sites declared by Iraq. Subsequent UNSCOM
disarmament activities dealt almost exclusively with
the destruction of equipment and facilities for the
production of weapons connected to past programmes.
In addition, of course, UNSCOM. was able, with great
skill, to map large parts of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction programmes.

While we are all aware of the large amounts of
proscribed items that still remain unaccounted for, we
should perhaps take note of the fact that for many years
neither UNSCOM. nor UNMOVIC made significant
finds of weapons. The lack of finds could be because
the items were unilaterally destroyed by the Iraqi
authorities or else because they were effectively
concealed by them. I trust that in the new environment
in Iraq, in which there is full access and cooperation,
and in which knowledgeable witnesses should no
longer be inhibited from revealing what they know, it
should be possible to establish the truth we all want to
know.

Let me further make some brief comments on
mobile facilities, as there is currently much media
attention devoted to this issue. Even before UNMOVIC
began its inspections, in November 2002, the
Commission had received information about such
facilities, and our inspectors were looking for sites
where such mobile units could be hooked up for
support services. Upon our request, the Iraqi side
presented some information about the mobile system
they possessed. As the Council will see from our
report, neither the information presented to us nor
pictures given to us by the Iraqi side match the
description that has recently been made available to us,
as well as to the media, by the United States. At
UNMOVIC, we cannot of course make a proper
evaluation of the depicted vehicles on the basis of
published material alone.

In resolution 1483 (2003), the Security Council
declared its intention to revisit the mandate of
UNMOVIC. The Council will be aware that
UNMOVIC remains ready to resume work in Iraq as an
independent verifier or to conduct long-term
monitoring, should the Council so decide. In paragraph
16 of the introduction to the report before the Council,
and in chapter VIII of the report, there are some
comments on UNMOVIC's readiness to resume work
in the field. Some reduction in UNMOVIC's staff will
take place. However, the core expertise and experience
available within UNMOVIC remain a valuable asset
that the Security Council could use where the services
of an independent body would be required for
verification and monitoring. That might be of particular
value in the field of biological weapons and missiles,
for which there exists no international verification
organization.

As this is likely to be my last briefing to the
Security Council as Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank each and every member of the Council for the
valuable guidance and support offered to UNMOVIC
and myself. I would also warmly like to thank the
Secretary-General personally and the Secretariat for the
excellent cooperation they provided since the creation
of UNMOVIC. I have had the opportunity to thank
UNMOVIC's College of Commissioners for the advice
that it has provided; it has been of great help
throughout our existence. I trust that the Council has
noted the excellent working relationship that prevailed
between Mr. ElBaradei of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and myself. We formed a good team of
long-standing friendship in which his knowledge of
Arabic proved more directly useful than my knowledge
of Swedish.

I want to end my statement by noting the strong
commitment among nations, both within and outside
the Security Council, to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, to terrorists as well as to
States, and to eventually to achieve the elimination of
those weapons. The case of Iraq has been a major
factor in forging that commitment. The wide support
that UNMOVIC has received from Governments and
from the public is further testimony to the strong wish
to reduce the dangers posed by weapons of mass
destruction and to the continued importance of
inspection.

