Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and thank the Lithuanian delegation for convening
today's debate and the concept note (S/2015/307, annex).
We also welcome the briefings by Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson, Director-General of Reporters
Without Borders Christophe Deloire, and Ms. Mariane
Pearl of the Daniel Pearl Foundation.

Today's debate concerns a central component in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and the need
for caution in the application of universal principles
and rights. Journalists and media workers require
special attention because of the growing dangers and
risks they face when they take on the responsibilities
of bringing critical information to the community and
of amplifying the voices of civil society. Resolution
2222 (2015) adopted today recognizes this concern
and stresses the importance of the work ofjournalists,
professionals of the media and associated personnel.
Accordingly, my delegation joined in co-sponsoring it.

The year 2014 was marked by the threat, kidnapping
and murder of journalists and the media workers in
practically all armed conflicts. These attacks must
not be understood solely as a violation of international
humanitarian law but as a direct attack on human rights
that seeks to curtail the right to freedom of expression
and the right of citizens to be informed. Impunity
for attacks on journalists and on the free exercise of
the profession is unacceptable. It limits access to
information, discourages work in conflict zones and
creates fear of journalistic research and expression,
all of which makes political and humanitarian crises
invisible in public discourse, hindering an early
response to conflict situations.

In addressing these scenarios and ensuring the
adequate protection of journalists and media workers,
we consider it important to increase international and
regional cooperation and coordination through the
exchange of best practices and technical assistance. In
this regard, the implementation ofthe UNESCO's United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity is crucial to promoting a safe and
free environment for journalists and media workers,
particularly in conflict situations, in order to contribute
to international peace and security.

The right to freedom of expression, especially
freedom of the press, is essential if there is to be
an informed and active citizenry committed to the
defence of democracy and peace. Similarly, freedom of
expression and information facilitates the empowerment
of women and their inclusion in various processes and
in decision-making, thereby promoting equality.

Developing a catalogue of best practices and
lessons learned for disseminating and exchanging
experiences with other regions on a voluntary basis
is a way to improve the security environment for
journalists. On the other hand, in those scenarios
where there are peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, we call upon them to incorporate,
in their periodic reports, monitoring and reporting on
violations and abuses committed against them. The
Organization can transfer, through its operations,
missions and specialized agencies, capacities for
adequately protecting journalists in conflict zones.

In conclusion, I reiterate our appreciation to the
Lithuanian presidency for bringing this issue back to
the Council for consideration, because in protecting
journalists and their role, we are promoting conditions
conducive to international peace and security, which is
priority task for the Council, and strengthening the rule
of law and democracy.

