We would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing today's debate. The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of Canada on behalf of 62 member States of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20) and with the statement submitted by the delegation of the European Union (see annex 25). As the world is facing a global health crisis with an unprecedented impact on all aspects of human security and with a disproportionate effect on women and girls in all their diversity, the Kingdom of the Netherlands remains ever more committed to supporting the United Nations efforts to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict. On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the present open debate on sexual violence in conflict provides an excellent opportunity to reiterate and strengthen our collective commitment to preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict. The Secretary-General provides us with a clear message in his present report (S/2020/487): we must not forget the profound human suffering that is at the heart of the sexual violence in conflict agenda. We are here today for the victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict. We are speaking about a crime that is widely invisible and underreported - hence the importance of letting disregarded voices be heard in the Security Council. In that regard, let me express my gratitude to Nadia Carine Therese Fornel- Poutou, from the Association of Central African Women Lawyers, and Khin Omar, speaking on behalf of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, for taking the time to share their experiences with the Council. Their concerns must be at the centre of our common effort to move from commitment to compliance. Let me also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for briefing the Council. Allow me to highlight three areas of action for strengthening efforts to prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict. First, with regard to sexual and reproductive health and rights, any response to sexual violence must prioritize the rights, needs and wishes of survivors. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) puts the implementation of a survivor-centred approach to addressing sexual violence in conflict under further pressure. It is becoming increasingly challenging for survivors to access essential life-saving services, including comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services. Sexual and reproductive health and rights is a fundamental part of a survivor- centred approach to sexual violence in conflict and must be put at the forefront of the response. Those organizations working in conflict situations where sexual violence in conflict occurs must provide adequate and comprehensive services to survivors in all their diversity, including sexual and reproductive health care, mental health care and psychosocial support, protection, legal services, access to justice and support for livelihoods. Concrete and sustained actions must be taken to ensure diverse survivors can claim their right to such services. Preventing and addressing sexual and gender-based violence, including sexual violence in conflict, is a prerequisite for the realization of women's rights and their ability to meaningfully participate in peace, political and security processes. Also, the inclusion of disrupted communities, of which survivors of sexual violence in conflict are part, in the response must ensure collective healing, as well as the reintegration of survivors. In that journey of healing, the importance of accountability and justice cannot be understated - which brings me to my second point. In terms of accountability for sexual violence, States have the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute violations and uphold international human rights standards. The lack of criminal accountability for sexual violence in conflict in countries affected by conflict is concerning. The international community must therefore play a role in supporting the delivery of justice at the local level. For justice to be truly survivor-centred, it must be holistic and comprehensive and occurat multiple levels. Next to international accountability mechanisms, a greater focus on survivor-centred national and local justice mechanisms for the prosecution of sexual violence in conflict must be ensured. National and local prosecution should be close and accessible to survivors, as this is where most perpetrators and survivors and their communities remain. We would like to emphasize the importance of the reconstruction of the rule of law as a central part of peace processes, with special attention to the local and national laws in which gender and the rights of women are fully anchored. When States are unable or unwilling to prosecute, the International Criminal Court (ICC) can play an important role in holding perpetrators to account. The Rome Statute of the ICC was the first international instrument to include various forms of sexual violence as underlying acts of both crimes against humanity and war crimes. We remind the Security Council of its power to refer situations to the ICC, and call upon all States to become a party to the Rome Statute and to adopt the most serious crimes into their national legislation. With regard to dedicated sanctions for sexual violence, beyond criminal accountability we must make use of other tools at our disposal to fight impunity. Targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict are one of them. The gap assessment presented in the latest report of the Secretary-General, pursuant to resolution 2467 (2019), makes painfully clear the impunity in which crimes of sexual violence in conflict remain steeped. It is telling and confronting that, of the 65 parties that have been listed since 2010, only one has been delisted. By contrast, 42 listed parties have not assumed any commitments, while they have been listed for over five years. As a world and as an international community, we are not doing enough to change this. A true survivor-centred approach takes root in prevention, as well as the assurance that those who have torn lives apart will not be allowed to continue doing so. Impunity is precisely one of the main drivers of sexual violence in conflict, further fuelling a cycle of violence. In 2018, when the Netherlands was an elected member of the Council, we pushed for the systematic inclusion of sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion for all existing sanctions regimes. We would like to reiterate the opportunity that we have to strengthen our joint prevention and response by systematically and explicitly incorporating and applying sexual violence as a stand-alone designation criterion in sanctions regimes. Recognizing the meaningful steps that have been taken in that regard, with specific designation criteria on sexual violence having been included in seven out of the current 14 sanctions regimes, we call upon the Council to extend this practice to all remaining relevant sanctions regimes and to ensure adequate follow-up. The Council should not hesitate to list individuals or entities solely for sexual violence. This sends a clear message to perpetrators that sexual violence in itself warrants United Nations sanctions. To conclude, we call upon the Council and all Member States to ensure that women and peace and security, in particular preventing and addressing sexual violence in conflict, is an integral part of country-specific discussions and mandates. We must not allow our common efforts to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict to be dwindled down to an annual discussion in the Council. We need instructive mandates on sexual violence in conflict in order to translate our common priorities into action.
