Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to welcome to the
Council the Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres. His statement today was very encouraging.
We also thank Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/765) and his up-to-date information.

The progress achieved by Timor-Leste over the past
13 years deserves our admiration. We are honoured to
share this historic moment with that friendly country.
We congratulate the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste and we thank bilateral donors and
the international security forces for their ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in that country.

We welcome the fact that this year, which marks
the tenth anniversary of the independence of Timor-
Leste, the Secretary-General visited the country, as
did a Security Council delegation as recently as last
week. In that connection, we would like to thank the
representative of South Africa for his report on that
subject (see S/PV.6858).

We are aware that consolidating democracy and
building a system of governance is a long-term process.
Although many challenges remain, the successes in
the political, economic and security situations and
in connection with the rule of law reflect the firm
commitment and goodwill of the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste.

This year, Timor-Leste succeeded in organizing
presidential and parliamentary elections in a peaceful
and orderly fashion. We welcome the fact that the
Parliament has become an important and inclusive
political forum. We also welcome the comprehensive
rebuilding of the Timorese national police and
acknowledge the progress made in allocating tasks
between the police and the army.

We would like to acknowledge the important role
played by the United Nations in Timor-Leste since
1999. Guatemala, as a country that has also benefited
from United Nations peacekeeping, emphasizes how
important it is for the new Government of Timor-Leste
to adopt a timely decision on the future presence of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste after the drawdown
of UNMIT. We believe that the United Nations will
remain an important partner in the country through the
Resident Coordinator's team.

We know that the support of the international
community will continue to be necessary after
UNMIT's drawdown, particularly in consolidating the
young institutions in Timor-Leste, such as those in the
security sector. We believe it is important to continue
and follow up on the outstanding tasks that will remain
after UNMIT's drawdown - for example, investigating

crimes against humanity and other serious crimes.

Like many developing countries, Timor-Lcste
confronts socioeconomic challenges, but it has
significant natural resources. Continued and proper
management of those resources will be vital for
the sustainable development of the country. More
investment in areas such as education and youth
employment is, in our view, necessary.

The leadership of Timor-Leste as Co-Chair of the
Group of Seven Plus fragile States and its status as a
troop-contributing country reflect the hope that this
young nation offers to the international community. We
are pleased to see that the endeavours of the international
community to bring about conflict resolution and post-
conflict peacebuilding are achieving positive results.
The situation in Timor-Leste is a very good example
of that.

Guatemala once again would like to commend
UNMIT peacekeeping forces for their work and
their contributions. We also thank the international
community for its multilateral and bilateral support of
Timor-Leste, as well as the Timorese people themselves
for their unwavering devotion to peace and security in
their country.

