Mr. Guterres: Let me begin by expressing my
sincere appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.

The past 12 months have witnessed many
momentous, often disturbing and sometimes inspiring,
events. On the one hand, many of those events have
confronted the Security Council with enormous
challenges in its efforts to maintain international peace
and security. On the other hand, they have required my
own Office to respond to a succession of emergencies,
providing protection and assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons, often in the most
hazardous operational environments. It is in that
context of mutual endeavour that I would like to turn to
the theme of the presentation that I was asked to give
today, which is that of human displacement and climate
change.

We live in a world that is on the move.
Information, ideas, capital, culture and people are all
crossing borders at a much greater speed than at any
previous time in history. Furthermore, with respect to
the movement of human beings, patterns of migration,
mobility and displacement are changing. Increasingly,
the traditional distinction between migrants, who cross
borders in search of a better life, and refugees, who are
forced to flee persecution and conflict, has become
blurred. More and more people are forced to flee while
remaining within the borders of their own country, or
do so for reasons that are not covered by the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. As they
lose their livelihoods and coping mechanisms to
environmental degradation, they often find themselves
with no option but to move on. In many parts of the
world, refugees, asylum seekers, irregular migrants and
the victims of human smugglers and traffickers are
following the same routes, are making use of the same
means of transport and are confronted with the same
risks and dangers, especially when travelling by sea.

The patterns of movement are changing, but
meanwhile, the scale of human displacement is also
growing. Looking at the statistics of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in themselves - and they refer only to
refugees from conflict and those internally displaced
by conflict - last year we witnessed a count of
43.7 million people, a record high that is, as I said,
only part of the picture of displacement. It is not
difficult to understand why so many people abandon
their usual place of residence and flee in search of
safety elsewhere: persecution, violence, authoritarian
rule, failures of governance, economic collapse and
natural disasters. One only has to look at the tragic
case of Somalia to see how all of those different factors
can coexist and combine, with the appalling outcome
that more than a quarter of that country's citizens have
now been uprooted.

In that context, a principal reality of the
contemporary world is the accelerating pace of climate
change, as well as the international community's
failure to address that issue in an effective manner.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our times,
one that interacts with and reinforces the other global
mega-trends, such as population growth; urbanization;
growing food, water and energy insecurity; and the risk
of pandemics. It is a challenge that is adding to the
scale and complexity of human displacement, and one
that has important implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Let me elaborate on
that statement.

Recent years have seen the publication of many
books and articles that speculate on the number of
people who will be forced to move in the next two or
three decades as a result of climate change. Twenty
million? Fifty million? One hundred million? There
seems to be no consensus on the matter. That is,
perhaps, because the wrong question is being asked.
Climate change is not an independent variable, a
phenomenon that can be examined in isolation from the
many other economic, social, political and ecological
processes that determine the level of human security
available to people in different parts of the world. In
that respect, there is little value in posing the simplistic
question of how many people are going to be displaced
by climate change. Instead, we should be addressing
the more complex issue of the way in which global
warming, rising sea levels, changing weather patterns
and other manifestations of climate change are
interacting with and reinforcing other global
imbalances so as to produce some very powerful
drivers of instability, conflict and displacement. I
would like to highlight four of those linkages.

First, the process of climate change is
constraining the amount of land available for
cultivation in many developing countries and is
simultaneously reducing agricultural productivity.
Confronted with growing levels of poverty and food
insecurity, more and more young people are making
their way from rural to urban areas, and massive youth
unemployment, together with volatile food and
commodity prices, is proving to be a clear source of
social and political unrest.

Secondly, climate change is reinforcing the
potential for conflict Within and between States by
intensifying the level of competition for scarce
resources, including water, grazing land and arable
land. Many commentators have pointed to the potential
for so-called water wars over transboundary freshwater
reserves, which could clearly uproot large numbers of
people. Researchers at universities such as the
University of California at Berkeley, Stanford, New
York University and Harvard, looking at rainfall and
temperature records in Africa between 1980 and 2002,
have indicated that global warming is strongly related
to the incidence of armed conflict, with a one-degree
temperature rise increasing the potential for conflict by
50 per cent. I believe it is probably too early to assume
that such scientific quantifications are foolproof, but
the linkage is clearly there.

Thirdly, there is increasing evidence to suggest
that the growing frequency and intensity of natural
disasters is closely linked to the process of climate
change. According to a recent estimate, more than
40 million people were uprooted by natural disasters in
2010 alone, most of them internally displaced in the
developing world.

Fourthly, as the representative of an organization
that has a mandated responsibility for both refugees
and stateless persons, I would like to mention the
linkage between climate change and citizenship. Some
small island States are confronted with rising sea levels
and are becoming highly vulnerable to extreme weather
events. Where will these people go if and when it
becomes impossible for them to remain in their own
country? Some may be able to acquire a second
nationality, once they have been obliged to move. But

how will they retain their national identity? Is the
world ready to accept the idea of a State without a
territory? These are questions that the international
community has only just started to consider and that
now require serious attention.

Although many might argue that climate change
does not fall within the competency of the Security
Council, the linkages I have set out here today cannot
be ignored when looking at matters of peace and
security. In a world that is becoming smaller and
smaller and is, for the first time, facing physical limits
to economic growth, those threats can only grow. The
strands that make up this complex picture - climate
change, population growth, food insecurity and water
scarcity - are the subject of many separate summits
and debates, but the international community has no
forum today that allows for a comprehensive
discussion of and comprehensive response to those
trends. I firmly believe that in one way or another that
governance gap has to be closed.

At the 2009 United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Copenhagen, there was broad consensus
that the communities most likely to be affected by the
consequences of climate change are those that bear the
least responsibility for its acceleration. Populations in
developing countries are also more exposed to disasters
and less able to cope with their effects. When we look
at today's bleak picture for mitigation efforts, it is
evident that a massive programme of support is
essential in order to reinforce the proven resilience of
their communities and citizens. Such action should
take full account of the fact that women, especially
poor women, are most seriously affected by climate
change and natural disasters.

But even if we mobilize the international
community in this way, it seems unlikely that we will
be able to do enough to avert human displacement
completely. Indeed, mobility seems likely to be one of
the adaptation strategies employed by populations
affected by climate change. That is why I believe that it
would be appropriate for the international community
to formulate and adopt a set of principles specifically
designed to reinforce the protection of and find
solutions for people who have been forced to leave
their own country as a result of catastrophic
environmental events but who may not qualify for
refugee status under international law. UNHCR will be
hosting an intergovernmental event at the ministerial
level in Geneva in two weeks' time, where we will
examine such protection gaps affecting the forcibly
displaced people of the world.

Finally, let me underline the importance of
integrating the issues of climate change and human
displacement into all of our conflict prevention,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding endeavours,
including the participation of the forcibly displaced in
both peace talks and political solutions. People should
not be obliged to abandon their homes in order to
survive. Once they have been uprooted, they must be
given our full support in finding sustainable solutions
to their plight. Providing such support is a
humanitarian imperative, but it is also in our common
interest. If climate change goes unchecked and if we
fail to find sustainable solutions for displaced
populations, we will be creating the conditions in
which further breaches of international peace and
security are certain to take place.

