Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this important
meeting. Kenya appreciates the global importance and
priority that the Security Council and the international
community continue to attach to the protection of
children affected by or involved in armed conflict.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2011/250) - which
enumerates the grave violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, the progress made in the
release of children from armed groups and the
challenges faced in dealing with some of the parties to
conflicts - as well as for the recommendations it
contains. We also very much appreciate the statement
delivered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and by the Executive Director of UNICEF.

Child protection should be part and parcel of any
conflict management and prevention strategy. In that
regard, we appreciate the progress made through the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Kenya welcomes the attention that is being drawn
today to the issue of children and armed conflict,
especially as it relates to attacks on schools and
hospitals. But it is Kenya's observation that, while
deplorable, attacks on schools and hospitals are
symptomatic of a deeper and more troublesome
situation of civil strife, abuse of human rights and
failure in governance, law and order. It is imperative
that the Security Council and the international
community at large address those fundamental causes
as well.

While Kenya recognizes the progress made over
the years, significant challenges remain. We recognize
the situation in countries listed in the Secretary
General's report. For Kenya, the situation in Somalia
presents a clear, persistent and continuing threat to
national security and to our economy.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
report, engaging armed terrorist groups, for example
Al-Shabaab, for purposes of curbing the involvement
of children in armed conflict remains a formidable
challenge. The consequences of the involvement of
children in armed conflict are devastating, not only in
Somalia but also beyond that country.

In Kenya, the burden of more than 20 years of
conflict in Somalia and the continued flow of refugees
is enormous and harmful to our society and economy.
Kenya is host to the Dadaab refugee camp, which is the
world's largest such camp. With more than half a
million refugees, the camp is stretched beyond its
capacity. As we speak, more than 1,000 new refugees,
consisting mainly of women and children, including
ex-soldiers and children who have been in armed
conflict, cross into Kenya every day. That is more
30,000 new refugees every month.

Following terrorist acts committed by
Al-Shabaab, the World Food Programme was forced
out of Somalia. This is a cause for grave concern, as
we know that the availability of food is a powerful
deterrent in the recruitment of child soldiers.

We therefore urge the Security Council to
redouble its efforts to help the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and neighbouring countries,
including ours, to put down these terrorist groups. We
must not attempt to placate or engage in dialogue with
terrorists. Only this will help to normalize the situation
in a country such as Somalia, bring an end to the
recruitment of children and facilitate the resumption of
emergency assistance to the Somali population.

Kenya recognizes the decades of civil war that
the new Republic of South Sudan has suffered, with
many children involved either as child soldiers or as
victims of the conflict. Kenya carried a heavy burden
with regard to those children during the years of the
civil war. There is an urgent need for heightened
support in dealing with post-conflict trauma for

affected children and families, including in South
Sudan. As we join others in congratulating the
Republic of South Sudan on attaining its independence
and becoming the newest State, we encourage States
and other international actors to support the new
Government in promoting the physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of
children and families affected by the armed conflict.
The measures adopted should not only realize their
medium-term development but also their long-term
aspirations.

In conclusion, as a troop-contributing country,
Kenya welcomes the Secretary-General's call for a
specific provision for children's protection to continue
to be included in the mandate of all peacekeeping
operations, as well as for the inclusion of child
protection in pre-deployment training. That will no
doubt enhance the broad and effective protection of
children in armed conflict, including protecting those
in schools and hospitals.

Having said that, we should never loose sight of
the fact that the most effective way to protect children
is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts and to
prevent conflicts from escalating by addressing the
multiplicity of causes of conflicts, including climate
change, hunger, disease, exploitation and under-
development.

