Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman and Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam
for their briefings.

We welcome the holding of this meeting, which
once again allows us to exclusively address the
situation in the Lake Chad basin. It undoubtedly gives
greater Visibility to a grave crisis with relatively little
media coverage. The multidimensional character of the
Lake Chad basin crisis forces us to address all of its
causes simultaneously, jointly and in an interconnected
manner. The security, humanitarian and human rights
situations, as well as the effects of climate change
and socioeconomic stagnation in the region, call for
comprehensive attention if we are to responsibly tackle
the crisis. We commend the efforts of the Lake Chad
basin countries to address these challenges even with
limited capabilities and resources. In that regard,
we acknowledge the important role of international
partners and United Nations agencies that promote the
mobilization of regional resources.

The security efforts of the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the fight against Boko Haram, which have
made important progress, are laudable. They serve
as a clear example that coordinated regional efforts
are crucial in crises of this nature, where those who
undermine stability know no borders or countries and,
worse still, Violate the fundamental human rights of
whole communities - particularly women, girls and
children. Similarly, the creation of the Group of Five
for the Sahel joint force will also provide a significant
boost to regional efforts in the fight against terrorism.

However, there is concern about the repeated
allegations of human rights Violations committed by
the Task Force and the security forces of the Lake
Chad basin countries. In that regard, Uruguay urges
that all security activities, including those in the fight
against terrorism, be carried out in strict compliance
with the standards of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law, and calls for all
due process guarantees to be provided to the alleged
victims of such Violations.

The situation of women in the Lake Chad basin
merits particular attention given their vulnerability,
mainly due to Boko Haram's actions. We note with
great concern the systematic use of sexual Violence as
a terrorist tactic, as evidenced by the abduction and
sexual abuse of thousands of women and girls at the
hands of that terrorist group, as well as the increasing
use of female suicide bombers, infamously known as
women bombers or girl bombers.

On the other hand, very little information is
available regarding the impact of gender in a complex
humanitarian crisis, nor regarding the role that
women's participation and leadership and gender
equality considerations play in peace efforts, such as
the struggle against Violent extremism, the restoration
of State authority and the protection of human rights. In
that regard, my delegation identifies several key areas
that require special attention, such as assistance in
addressing the stigma of Victims of sexual Violence and
their children; the provision of sexual and reproductive
health services and education in the field; and ensuring
that national and regional strategies recognize survivors
of sexual violence as victims of terrorism so that they can
benefit from comprehensive and adequate assistance.

The Lake Chad basin has for many years witnessed
a multifaceted and structural crisis, which must be
addressed by identifying activities that not only
mitigate the terrorist threat and provide food to the
needy population, but also promote long-term stability.
That message was clearly transmitted to Heads of State,
ministers and senior officials during the mission of the
Security Council in the Niger, Cameroon, Chad and
Nigeria in March.

It is therefore crucial and imperative that the
Governments of the four countries implement public
policies that prioritize the allocation of resources to
address the structural causes of the crisis and promote
activities aimed at improving health services, education,
job creation and the resilience of communities with a
View to improving their ability to adapt and respond to
such disastrous developments.

