Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), and to convey the Movement's
appreciation to the Uruguayan presidency for
convening this open debate at this critical juncture for
the Palestinian people and the Middle East. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

We regret that the Palestinian people have begun
yet another year under Israel's belligerent occupation.
We are fast approaching the forty-ninth year of that
illegal and brutal occupation, which is causing so much
suffering for Palestinian civilians, further inflaming
tensions and provoking more anger and frustration, with
far-reaching and serious consequences for peace and
security in the Middle East and beyond. The dangerous
prevailing circumstances reaffirm that this issue must
remain a priority for the Security Council, in line with
its duties outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Action is urgently required to halt the deterioration,
protect the Palestinian civilian population and salvage
the prospects for peace.

Yet the Security Council continues to be paralysed
and, since the international community fails to hold
Israel accountable, the situation in the occupied State
of Palestine, including East Jerusalem, continues to
deteriorate at an alarming rate as a result of Israel's
crimes and violations. NAM. once again urges the
international community, particularly the Security
Council, to take a decisive and historic step towards
ending the occupation of the Palestinian land and
paving the ground for the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to independence and for a just and
peaceful settlement to the conflict. The status quo is
unsustainable and we cannot accept another year of
stagnation in the political process and the continued
suffering and hopelessness in the lives of an entire
people.

Reflecting on the current period, NAM. deplores
the depraved killing and injuring of so many innocent
civilians, which have inflicted so much loss and grief on
Palestinian families, as well as the occupying Power's
continued demolition of Palestinian homes and seizure
of land, depriving Palestinians of their property and
shelter. Such acts of collective punishment constitute
blatant breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Moreover, the humanitarian disaster deliberately
inflicted on the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip by
the occupying Power remains without redress. Since the
Israeli military aggression in the summer of2014, nearly
100,000 Palestinians remain displaced and homeless as
the illegal Israeli blockade continues to obstruct the
reconstruction of thousands of damaged and destroyed
homes, and socioeconomic conditions continue to
deteriorate as Gaza continues to be suffocated by the
blockade and isolated from the rest of Palestine and the
entire world. The situation of young people in Gaza is
especially critical as they have no hope or opportunity,
with over 63 per cent youth unemployment, as reported
by the World Bank, with all of the attendant social,
economic and psychological consequences.

The Security Council must also act to address
Israel's ongoing illegal colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council's own resolutions. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel deliberately and
systematically continues its settlement activities, wall
construction and confiscation and de facto annexation
of Palestinian land, including its most recent announced
intention to declare 370 acres in the West Bank as so-
called State land, which has been globally condemned
as violating international law?

Those and other systematic violations - including
the demolition of homes, the forced displacement
of Palestinian civilians, the arrest and detention
of Palestinians, including children, and incessant
violence, terror and provocations by Israeli settlers
and extremists, including at sensitive religious sites,
particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque in occupied East
Jerusalem - have persisted unabated, worsening the
extremely fragile situation on the ground, and must be
addressed immediately and seriously to avert further
destabilization and salvage the two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders. It is unacceptable that Israeli
impunity should persist without consequence. There
can be no justification for such criminality. The time is
past due to act in line with United Nations resolutions,
international law and our moral responsibilities towards
the question of Palestine.

The NAM. position vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, as reflected in its summit and ministerial
declarations over the decades, is crystal clear. It is high
time to end the abhorrent Israeli occupation and impunity
that have brought too much suffering, caused so many
crises and so much instability and anger throughout the
Middle East, and continues to undermine regional and
global peace and security. We call upon the Security
Council to act in accordance with its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations, its resolutions and the
applicable provisions of international law that provide
a solution to the conflict.

At a time when the Palestinian people are facing
rising Israeli aggression and rapidly declining hope in
the possibility of peace and justice, the Non-Aligned
Movement seizes this opportunity to reaffirm its
long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
recognizing their decades of resilience despite so much
suffering and injustice, and reiterates its support for
the realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including to self-determination
and freedom in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for a just
solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese air space, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant Violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

Let me add a few words in response to the basest
of allegations by the representative of Israel against
my Government. Those allegations were made by the
representative of a regime that has been the major root
cause of instability in the region for more than six
decades. It is a regime that, through its onoing policy of
occupation and its criminal policies and practices in the
occupied territories, has always been a major root cause
that has driven people towards violent extremism. It is
also ironic that a regime that threatens its neighbours
and remains the only obstacle to the establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East should
call on the Council to be brave and vigilant concerning
Iran's nuclear programme. That is nothing other than
a new line of sabotage that Israel has undertaken
following the resounding defeat of its all-out attempts
to derail the talks between Iran and the P5+1 on a
nuclear deal.

