Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

At the outset, we would like to thank the United
States presidency for the continued focus of the
Council on this important issue. We would also like
to acknowledge the crucial role played by Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and her Office, as
well as the important work of the United Nations
Children's Fund and other United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations in the field. In that
regard, we would like to thank all of today's briefers for
their valuable contributions to this debate. We would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and his staff
for an excellent report (S/2014/339).

Armed conflict is devastating for children. Today,
1 billion children live in areas affected by armed
conflict, and 300 million of those children are under
the age of five. New crises overshadow some of the
previous gains we have made with regard to protecting
children. The substantive increase in the number of
children killed and injured in conflict in 2013 was
alarming, and reminds us again of the grave impact on
children of the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas and of the indiscriminate use of violence by some
non-State armed groups. But we must also consider
the large-scale indirect effects of conflict on children,
namely, the vast number of them who perish from
effects such as disease, starvation and dehydration.
Child mortality at birth is twice as high in conflict-
affected States as compared to developed countries
where peace prevails.

Some 77 per cent of children in conflict-affected
and fragile States never enter primary school, and
malnourishment attributable to conflict imperils their
learning capability. Of course, the majority of the
world's malnourished children live in conflict-related
areas.

This November will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the signing of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, but we still continue to see
atrocities against children. The protection of children
in armed conflicts is a moral imperative and a matter
impacting our credibility as representatives of the
international community. One step we can take involves
the predeployment training of peacekeepers on child
protection, as mentioned by Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous in his briefing earlier in the meeting. Last
month, Sweden hosted a United Nations child-protection
training-of-trainers course at the Swedish Armed Forces
International Centre, in which 27 experienced trainers
from 23 different countries participated. The course
benefited from the participation of child-protection
advisers from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, who shared their
experiences with the national trainers. Those trainers
are now ready to conduct predeployment training of
peacekeepers on the issue of child protection in their
respective countries. It is important that United Nations
troop-contributing countries maintain the highest
standards in that regard.

The Nordic countries would also like to stress the
importance of children continuing to have access to
basic services, including education and health care,
during conflict and post-conflict periods. Attacks on
schools and hospitals deprive children of their basic
rights and may amount to war crimes. The use of schools
by armed parties as bases, barracks, weapon-storage
facilities or for other military purposes, as detailed
in the Secretary-General's report, disrupts access to
education and learning and poses a grave threat to the
lives of students and teachers. We have seen appalling
examples of attacks on schools in recent months. We
call on all States to take concrete measures to refrain
from using schools and similar facilities for military
purposes and from carrying out attacks on facilities
used for hosting children. Protecting schools and access
to education in conflict settings is not only a matter of
protecting lives but one of minimizing the long-term
impact of conflict on children and their communities.
Schools simply must be safe havens.

The Nordic countries are deeply concerned
about the many cases of indiscriminate violence and
killings in Iraq. We condemn the killing and maiming
of children, as well as the rampant use of abduction
and sexual violence in attacks against civilians and
minorities, including children. Likewise, the situation
in Syria remains extremely serious, with the killing
and maiming of children and attacks on schools and
hospitals occurring at very high rates. The fact that
children constituted almost a quarter of those killed in
the recent Gaza conflict is simply horrifying.

As pointed out in the report, developments in
several African States, as well as in Afghanistan,
also constitute cause for serious concern, not least
with regard to the abduction of children by non-State
armed groups, notably Boko Haram. We strongly urge
all actors to immediately cease all grave violations
of international humanitarian law with regard to
children, including sexual and gender-based violence.
Perpetrators must not go unpunished. We must fight
against impunity and support national and international
accountability mechanisms such as the International
Criminal Court.

We reiterate our support for the Special
Representative's Children, Not Soldiers campaign to
end the recruitment and use of children by Government
security forces by 2016, as endorsed by the Council
on 7 March. We welcome the commitment by eight
concerned Governments to protect children, and
we acknowledge the efforts by the Government of
Chad to fulfil the requirements of the accelerated
implementation of its action plan to end the recruitment
and use of children as soldiers. We share the view that
more resources will have to be devoted to the healing
and reintegration of former child soldiers.

