Ms. Keita: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General's
30-day report and on the situation in South Sudan.

I am pleased to report that the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force is making good progress,
with the main body of the Rwandan infantry battalion
expected to complete its deployment by the end of
the year. The deployment of the Ethiopian battalion
advance party was completed on 22 October and the
transportation has commenced for the contingent-owned
equipment of the main body of the Ethiopian infantry
battalion, passing through Kenya on its road move from
Addis Ababa to Juba. While there has been tangible
progress in the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and the technical discussions are ongoing with
the Government on its concept of operations, I also
have to report that certain operations of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) continue
to be impeded by the national authorities.

The security situation in South Sudan remains
precarious. I am particularly concerned by the real
risk of an escalation in violence with the onset of the
dry season, as well as the Government's push to assert
military dominance across the country, notably when
faced with continued resistance from armed opposition
groups. New military offensives would seriously
undermine the political process and cause further
civilian casualties and displacements.

During the past month, the security situation in
the Equatorias has remained volatile, with reports of
continued clashes betweenthe Sudan People's Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the pro-Machar forces of the Sudan
People's Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO).
Between 9 and 13 November, the two forces clashed
in Kariba on the Maridi-Mundri road, south-west of
Mundri town, Western Equatoria. The subsequent
SPLA clearing operations on the road reportedly led
to the killing of six civilians, the burning of houses
and additional civilian displacement. Armed elements
allied to different opposition coalitions also fought one
another. Clashes were reported between the SPLA-
I0 and elements of Thomas Cirillo Swaka's National
Salvation Front around Kajo Keji on 31 October.

In Greater Upper Nile, fighting continued between
the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces in Guit,
Koch, Rubkona and Mayendit Counties in central
Unity. The fighting has led to the curtailment of
humanitarian operations in the area. On 26 October,
UNMISS extracted five humanitarian workers from
Kuerguini caught in the fighting between SPLA and
pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces in Nimni, Guit county.
On 27 October, UNMISS facilitated the further
extraction of an additional 13 humanitarian staff
members and two children, from Nimni west to
Nyathol. One national staff member of an international
non-governmental organization was killed during the
clashes. On 22 November, 21 humanitarian personnel
were evacuated from Leer to Rumbek, following an
exchange of artillery and heavy machine gun fire
between the SPLA and pro-Machar SPLA-IO forces.

Meanwhile, the increasing insecurity around
the UNMISS protection-of-civilians site in Bentiu is
very worrying. On 4 November, during an exchange
of fire between armed groups in proximity to the site,
shots were directly fired at UNMISS troops, who
subsequently returned fire, repelling the attackers, and
apprehending one individual attempting to breach the
perimeter of the site.

Finally, on security, I am pleased to report that
the tensions arising following President Salva Kiir's
issuance ofa republican decree on 30 October, ordering
the arrest and disarmament of the bodyguards of the
former SPLA Chief of General Staff, Paul Malong,
were handled without violence in Juba. However, while
the dispute surrounding General Malong's house arrest
may have been resolved, these tensions point out to the
risk of fragmentation within the security apparatus,
which could further threaten the stability of the
country. This trend will need to be closely monitored.

As transmitted to the Security Council on

16 November, despite repeated assurances from the
highest levels of Government, UNMISS uniformed
personnel patrols and human rights officers continue
to face frequent restrictions on their freedom of
movement. On 15 November, a dynamic air patrol on
its way to Aburoc, Upper Nile, through Kodok, had to
return to Malakal from Kodok as a National Security
Service Officer objected that the patrol did not have
an SPLA Liaison Officer on board, warned the team
against proceeding and threatened the air crew.
The patrol was allowed to proceed a week later. On
22 November, an integrated UNMISS patrol from Yei
to Lasu, Central Equatoria, was stopped at an SPLA
checkpoint on the Yei-Lasu road, officially due to
insecurity in the area. The patrol team then observed
large movement of SPLA forces on the Yei-Lasu road.
These obstructions de facto prevent the Mission from
fully implementing its protection-of-civilians mandate.
I would like to request the Security Council to impress
on the Government to uphold its obligations under the
status of forces agreement and cease such obstruction.

The humanitarian situation in South Sudan
continues to be dire, compounded by widespread armed
conflict, intercommunal violence, large displacements
of the civilian population and access restrictions,
which prevent the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
I am encouraged that the President issued a new order
dated 9 November calling for unhindered humanitarian
access. This must now be backed by a genuine and
concerted effort to ensure that that order takes effect
at all levels, down to the lowest levels on the ground,
where obstructions frequently occur, to facilitate
meaningful improvement in the humanitarian operating
environment. The catastrophic consequences of the
humanitarian crisis are borne out by shocking statistics.
Four million South Sudanese are either internally
displaced or have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries; an estimated six million people, half of
the population, are severely food insecure, including
1.7 million on the brink of famine.

Against this backdrop, the increasing number of
incidents targeting humanitarian actors is cause for
serious concern. Reported monthly access incidents,
which include issues of criminality, armed conflict,
targeted violence or bureaucratic impediments, totalled
101 in September and 116 in October, of which 44 and
57 per cent were attributed to State actors, respectively.
Two more aid workers were killed in November,
bringing the total number of humanitarians killed in
2017 to 19. Clashes between armed groups and other
sources of insecurity also continued to negatively
impact the timely delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In September, for example, at least 89 aid workers were
forced to relocate, hindering humanitarian operations.

Let me proceed with a few remarks on the political
process. On the national dialogue, subnational
consultations continued in the Government-controlled
areas of Central Equatoria, Northern Bahr El Ghazal
and Upper Nile, with plans to continue consultations
in other parts of the country in the upcoming weeks.
Consultations are also being carried out for South
Sudanese living in refugee camps in Uganda. I must
reiterate that it is of utmost importance that the national
dialogue be complementary to the implementation
of the peace agreement, transparent and genuinely
inclusive of all political viewpoints, including those of
other key political actors and parties to the conflict.
Provided that it adheres to these principles, the national
dialogue could serve as a useful forum for addressing
the underlying conflict drivers of intercommunal
violence and root causes of other grievances.

Meanwhile, political forces also started to organize
themselves ahead of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) high-level revitalization
forum. On 16 November, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) in Government and the SPLM
former detainees issued the Cairo declaration, in
which they committed once again to take all possible
measures to end the war and support the peace
process. On 18 October, six political movements,
parties and fronts from the opposition also issued the
Nyahururu declaration, following their deliberations in
Kenya, which formally established an alliance. These
opposition forces also agreed to participate in the
IGAD high-level revitalization process through a joint
delegation evincing a common position.

The forum itself is now entering its final phase
of preparations. Based on initial statements issued
by IGAD on the progress of the consultations, all
groups consulted to date appear to have stated their
full and unconditional support to the IGAD initiative
and affirmed their readiness to engage in principle in
the high-level revitalization process. It is also clear,
however, that they have raised a number of procedural
and substantive questions to influence its outcome in
their respective favours and we should be ready for a
very difficult and arduous discussions. The summary
of findings that the IGAD task force has been working
on has now been submitted to the IGAD Council of
Ministers, which as we speak is meeting informally in
Abidjan and will formally discuss its recommendations
during a formal Council of Ministers meeting on
11 and 12 December. The forum is expected to begin
soon afterwards.

Let me conclude by underlining the importance of
having unified and unconditional international support
for this process. As has been mentioned so many times
in the past, there can only be a political solution to end
the conflict in South Sudan. It will be crucial for the
Government and all political parties to constructively
engage in the peace agreement revitalization process and
start by immediately ceasing all hostilities and taking
a defensive military position. I would thus encourage
the Council to unanimously express its support for the
urgent revitalization of the peace process, so that the
suffering of all South Sudanese civilians can come to
an end.

