Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency for this
month, representing a major Power in the area.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
Kai Eide for the briefings given this morning in this
Chamber. Specifically, my delegation would like to
thank you for convening this important meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan. Today's meeting provides a
timely opportunity to review the overall situation in
Afghanistan, a country steeped in blood where
geography jostles with ethnology and strategy with
history, especially in the context of President Karzai's
success in the recent Afghan elections and the Security
Council's forthcoming consideration of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), due to expire in March 2010.

Pakistan, as one may well imagine, has a vital
stake in the peace, stability and economic development
of Afghanistan. In human conflict, no neighbour, no
other country has suffered more than Pakistan from the
consequences of conflict and human tragedy in
Afghanistan. But the people of Pakistan share these
sorrows of their Afghan brethren. In their prosperity we
see our prosperity; in their progress, we see our
progress; and in their woes, we see our woes.

We value the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2009/674) on the situation in Afghanistan. It
provides useful information on the Afghan electoral
process and the difficulties encountered in that regard;
the nature and complexity of the security situation in
Afghanistan; and aid effectiveness, donor coordination
and development.

The insecurity driven by the political-economic
insurgency and its exploitation by criminals and drug
traffickers are the main factors impeding progress in
Afghanistan. This insurgency needs to be eliminated as
a priority, without externalizing the problem. By
externalizing the problem, as Sir Henry Durand
commented wryly more than a century ago, "these
instructions from afar are a phantasm of remote danger
that tend to warp judgement". This is an issue linked to
the inadequate capacity to enforce law in the
treacherous landscape of Afghanistan.
We agree with the Secretary-General that we
must resolve to implement

"a political reform that addresses the root causes
of the insurgency, including through efforts aimed
at improving governance and an Afghan-led
political process to re-establish peace"
(S/2009/674, para. 25).

Outsiders, as former British Prime Minister Disraeli
predicted to the House of Lords, can only be bogged
down in financial convulsions while the war in
Afghanistan would exhaust the resources of any
country. And I think we should remember that as a
lesson.

We have always believed that peace and
economic development in Afghanistan can be brought
about only by a stable Government in Kabul, enjoying
the majority support of the Afghan people. The
presidential and provincial council elections held last
year showed the commitment of the Afghan people to
democracy and the rule of law. The Government of
Pakistan extends its full support to President Karzai's
agenda and road map, as articulated in his inaugural
speech.

Pakistan acknowledges the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, particularly that of UNAMA,
ably led by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. Security Council resolutions 1806
(2008) and 1868 (2009) clearly lay down UNAMA's
strengthened and expanded presence throughout the
country and outline its central role in aid coordination,
providing political outreach and promoting
implementation of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy. Resolution 1868 (2009)
specifically spells out expansion of UNAMA's
activities and programmes at the provincial level.

Accordingly, UNAMA plans to open new
provincial offices in 2010. We have supported the
budget proposals that entail such expansion, including
the Secretary-General's request for the immediate use
of $7.9 million for security requirements. The United
Nations has an important responsibility in coordinating
a comprehensive international effort in Afghanistan.

Pakistan is further committed to strengthening
our friendly bilateral ties with Afghanistan, in the spirit
of the joint declaration on the directions of bilateral
cooperation, signed by our two Presidents in 2009. Our
assistance package for Afghanistan is the biggest
cooperation programme Pakistan has had with any
country. We have elaborate human resources
development programmes in various fields for our
Afghan friends. Afghanistan is also our third largest
trading partner and is soon likely to become the second
largest partner.

We are also engaged in security and intelligence
cooperation with Afghanistan, including through the
Tripartite Commission, which also includes the United
States and the International Security Assistance Force.
The last highest-level meeting of the Commission, held
on 29 December, reviewed the overall coordination in
the security area specifically. We are also looking
forward to constructively participating in the meetings
being organized by the Turkish Government in Istanbul
during the last week of this month and in the London
Conference on Afghanistan to be held on 28 January
2010.

But let us signal a cautionary note. As Lord
Curzon, Viceroy of India, said, anyone who has read
the history of the area will not prophesy the future.
Suddenly the status quo changes. Whether it be 100
years ago or the Mad Mullah of Swat or the Mullah of
Pawinda - also emulated recently - you suddenly see
them lead thousands of Lashkars down the mountain.
Prior to the first Afghan war, McNaughton signalled
the Governor in Calcutta, "All is well"; he was
murdered the next day. In the period of the second
Afghan war, Cavagnari cabled the same to Delhi; he
was also killed the next day. And when Commissioner
Undy in Peshawar spoke of the calm, tribal Afridi
Lashkars came out of nowhere to attack Peshawar. This
is Afghanistan.

We are committed to a voluntary, gradual, safe
and dignified return of the over 3 million refugees that
still live with us in Pakistan, but there is a need for
more diligent and sustained efforts at creating
necessary pull factors in Afghanistan. We would stress
the need for strengthening reintegration programmes
for these refugees within Afghanistan's development
strategy. We expect the United Nations and the
international community to be more forthcoming in
assisting in this endeavour with the necessary
resources.

The international community is nearing
completion of a decade of engagement with
Afghanistan. That calls for introspection and a genuine
reappraisal of achievements and failures. There is no

doubt that Afghanistan stills needs international
assistance through sustained, pragmatic and prudent
engagement. Non-intervention and non-interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan must however be a
cardinal element of this engagement. No regional or
extra-regional State should be allowed to manipulate
the situation. The long-term objectives of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan can be
realized only by respecting its sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.

In 1907, two empires met and signed the Saint
Petersburg Convention; both are now sitting in the
Security Council. Russia agreed to channel its foreign
policy on Afghanistan through Whitehall, and the
British agreed not to invade, annex or occupy any part
of Afghanistan, having just ceded the territories of
Kandahar and Herat to Amir Abdur Rahman Khan.
There is a lesson of history in this pax. Let us hope that
this Council is listening.

