Mr. Frlec (Slovenia): I wish to start by congratulating
you, Sir, on organizing this timely discussion on the subject
of small arms. The issue of small arms and light weapons
should be the focus of international attention, since these
weapons are most often the primary cause of violence,
death, suffering and destruction in armed conflict. Also, as
you rightly suggested, this debate should specifically
address the problem of the excessive accumulation and
availability of these weapons and their grave effects on
international and regional security, stability and
development. This is a global problem from which no
region or society is immune.

The way towards effective management of the issue
should be to define the problem clearly and identify
possible measures for solution. In this we should rely on
the large body of expertise already available. I should like
to mention especially the influential report (A/52/298)
prepared in 1997 by the United Nations Panel of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms, which has charted
much of the way. More recently, in December 1998, the
European Union ministers adopted the joint action on small
arms and light weapons. Slovenia fully shares the position
contained in that declaration. We are willing to be actively
engaged in this area, and in this connection we look
favourably upon the draft convention, prepared by Canada,
on the issue of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. We sincerely hope that by the year 2001 it will
be possible to conclude an effective international legally
binding instrument on small arms. Slovenia also participates
with Canada and others in the initiative on human security,
of which the question of small arms is an integral and
important part.

I would like at this point to stress some aspects of the
problem of small arms which in our view deserve special
attention in the ongoing processes in this field.

First, the surplus of small arms and insufficient control
over this surplus are usually at the source of the small arms
problem. Due attention should be paid to effective stockpile
management and disposal of these surplus weapons so as to
prevent them from feeding the illicit arms flows. In most
cases, such disposal requires financial and technical
assistance. Those countries which have the resources and
expertise should therefore be called upon to provide such
assistance whenever necessary.

Secondly, small arms play an important part in
international arms transfers, both legal and illicit. There
seems to be a lack of efficient transparency in this area.
These weapons do not fall within the scope of the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms. In addition, there
are wide differences between countries of the world in the
effectiveness of their export control regimes. In order to
improve this situation, we believe that the Disarmament
Commission's Guidelines for International Arms
Transfers, adopted in 1996, should be applicable.

Thirdly, recent experience of United Nations
peacekeeping shows that large quantities of small arms
and light weapons that remain in the affected areas after
the conflict represent a serious impediment to post-
conflict peace-building and reconstruction. Lessons
learned in places like Bosnia and Herzegovina are a clear
reminder that disarmament is often one of the most
crucial components of post-conflict activities. This has a
special meaning for the Security Council, which most
often defines the mandates of such activities and should,
whenever necessary, pay due attention to disarmament
and weapons collection and their disposal and/or
destruction.

Another area of direct importance for the Council is
the role of small arms and light weapons within the
implementation of arms embargoes. At this time there are
several arms embargoes in place, imposed by the Council.
The Council and its sanctions committees will have to
address this issue more thoroughly. In particular, effective
monitoring mechanisms should be developed and put in
place so as to prevent violations of arms embargoes. Also,
the Council should call for greater observance by Member
States of their obligations, including reporting on national
implementation measures.

Before concluding, I should like to refer to the
subject of anti-personnel mines, which, according to the
definition by United Nations experts, fall within the
category of small arms and light weapons. This subject
deserves to be mentioned on this occasion, as it has a
very strong humanitarian connotation. I wish to mention
specifically the positive experience that we have had with
the International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance, which is based in Slovenia. This
Fund is concrete evidence of our Government's
commitment to contribute to strengthening peace and

 

security in south-eastern Europe through mine action
programmes, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Fund has expanded its activities to Kosovo and Croatia. In
this way, the Fund can serve as an example of regional and
international cooperation for addressing the landmine
problem. It could also serve as a model for cooperation in
other areas concerning the question of small arms and light
weapons, a model of how to assist affected countries with
knowledge of local situations, expertise and resources.
Mutual action by like-minded countries and non-
governmental organizations can ensure broad support for
raising donations, and can provide transparency and
efficiency of financial management.

Slovenia hopes that today's debate will give further
impetus to the ongoing efforts to deal effectively with the
challenge of small arms and light weapons, and, for the
reasons mentioned before, reiterates its support for the
presidential statement to be adopted today.
