Mr. Dejammet (France)(interpretation from French):
The situation in Kosovo in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia calls for a response from the Security Council.
The tragic events that have marked the former Yugoslavia
in recent years have indeed demonstrated the need for a
rapid and appropriate response to crisis situations in the
region.

The States that make up what has been called the
Contact Group, as well as the European Union, the 26
countries that participated in the European conference
held in London and the neighbouring Balkan States, have
been involved since the beginning of the crisis. They have
emphasized the need for a cessation of violence and the
Withdrawal of the special police forces, their
condemnation of terrorism and the importance of
achieving a political solution to the Kosovo crisis through
dialogue and with respect for the territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. That solution should
include substantially greater autonomy for Kosovo.

During the London Contact Group meeting, on 9
March 1998, specific requirements were defined,
deadlines were set and measures for immediate
implementation were decided on. Meeting again on 25
March at Bonn, the States of the Contact Group noted
that progress had been achieved since the London
meeting.

The joint visit of the German and French Foreign
Ministers to Belgrade on 19 March made it possible to
appreciate positive developments in the position of the
authorities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
agreement reached on 23 March between the parties
regarding measures to implement the 1996 Education
Agreement also demonstrates that it is possible to achieve
a negotiated solution to delicate issues.

That progress, however important, is still not
enough. Additional steps must be taken by the Belgrade
authorities and the representatives of the Kosovar
Albanians in order for substantive dialogue to commence
without preconditions.

The draft resolution before the Security Council
today is part of this context. By this draft resolution, the
Security Council would decide on an embargo on the sale
or supply of arms to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
including Kosovo. France already supports such a
measure, in accordance with the embargo decided on by
the European Union in 1991 and reconfirmed on 19
March 1998.

The measures stipulated in the draft resolution
should first and foremost be seen as a means to achieve
a negotiated settlement of the current crisis. The text
provides that the Security Council will review the
prohibitions that have been decided on and will be able to
lift them as soon as the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has met the conditions set out in

 

the draft resolution. The prohibitions can thus be lifted
when the Secretary-General, in one of the periodic reports
he must submit to the Security Council every 30 days,
deems that the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has fulfilled the specific requirements set by the
Security Council.

The draft resolution also provides that specific
progress on certain difficult issues related to Kosovo will
make it possible for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
improve its prospects for normalizing its international
relations and for full participation in international
institutions.

My country therefore considers this draft resolution to
be a balanced text that can contribute to a peaceful political
settlement of the current crisis in Kosovo. That is Why
France will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

