Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States appreciates the commitment of Portugal
to improving the working methods of the Security
Council, as shown by your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this fourth open debate on the topic.

Additionally, we recognize Ambassador Ivan
Barbalie of Bosnia and Herzegovina for his work as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
the excellent management of those issues by the
Bosnian Mission.
Our discussions of the working methods of the
Council are important in order to ensure that the
Council remains able to address the challenges of the
twenty-first century. Acting on behalf of the
membership of the United Nations, the Council bears
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. It is essential that, in carrying out
this role, its work be as effective, efficient and
transparent as possible. Article 30 of the Charter
mandates the Council to adopt its own rules of
procedure. In doing so, the Council recognizes the
need for other United Nations Members who are our
partners in the maintenance of international peace and
security to be informed of and appropriately involved
in the work of the Council.

To that end, the Council some years ago
revitalized its Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Our
discussion today builds upon the Group's extensive
work and the recommendations outlined in the annex to
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2006/507. In that regard, we would like,
once again, to thank Japan for its efforts to develop
updates to that note.

We should bear in mind the steps taken thus far
by the Council to implement those recommendations.
With respect to transparency, Council Presidents brief
non-Council members shortly after the adoption of the
programme of work each month. Each Council
President further prepares a published assessment of its
month-long term, thereby expanding the information
available to all Member States on the problems facing
the Council and how those problems have been
addressed.

The Council has increased its interaction with
non-Council members by holding open debates and
informal discussions. We are encouraged by the
growing number of Member States that choose to
participate in open meetings, such as today's, and look
forward to subsequent open sessions on a range of
issues that are relevant to the Council's agenda.

The Council has further welcomed the Chairs of
the various country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission, inviting them to
participate in Council deliberations. The subsidiary
bodies of the Council, such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, have held more open meetings, and
sanctions committee Chairs have organized more open
briefings for the broader United Nations membership
to discuss sanctions regime objectives and committee
activities. Sanctions committees have also invited
representatives of Member States to brief them on
issues of mutual concern, and we encourage interested
Member States to pursue such opportunities.

Troop-contributing countries play a critical role
in the development of peacekeeping operations. The
Council has sought to increase the role that troop-
contributing countries play in discussions of the
mandates of missions to which they contribute. To
highlight the importance that the United States assigns
to troop-contributing countries, President Obama met
with top contributors in September 2009 to hear their
perspective on ways to improve United Nations
peacekeeping.

The Council has also increased its interaction
with non-Council members through informal
processes, such as groups of friends. The Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, for instance,
informs the Council's actions through inclusive and
transparent dialogue between Council and non-Council
members.

Making the work of the Council more efficient
requires constant effort. In that regard, we all face the
challenge of balancing the substance with the length of
our remarks. All of us, Council members and
non-Council members alike, should aim to convey our
message succinctly, so that as many Member States as
possible can speak with the many other States that are
present to hear them.

Today's debate offers members the opportunity to
share views on whether the practical applications of the
innovations listed in the 507 note have helped them to
better follow and participate in the Council's work. The
United States welcomes constructive comments that
will inform future efforts of the Working Group and
allow it to assess the effectiveness of measures to
enhance transparency, dialogue and efficiency. We look
forward to continued discussions on those issues and
thank the Portuguese presidency once again for this
initiative.

