Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): At the outset, let me
tell you, Madam President how pleased we are to
see Lithuania presiding over the Security Council. I
thank you for convening this open debate on an issue
that is of considerable importance and great concern
to many Member States. My delegation also joins
previous speakers in thanking the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-
Secretaries-General for Humanitarian Affairs and for
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
for their briefings, which very informatively shed light
on the topic before us today.

We share the concerns raised in this Chamber
regarding the innocent civilians who, sadly, often
constitute an overwhelming majority of the victims
in armed conflict. In particular, women and children
continue to be the most vulnerable groups, subjected to
various forms of extreme Violence, resulting in grave
humanitarian crises with huge population displacement
in various parts of the world.

It is encouraging that the Council has made
several important decisions relating to the protection
needs of vulnerable groups during armed conflicts. It
is also important that we recognize the humanitarian
challenges in post-conflict situations. The effective
implementation of protection tasks involves a broad
range of actors. Local authorities must be engaged in
mediation and resolution talks. It is equally important
that those authorities fully engage with the United
Nations and other humanitarian actors.

The unimpeded access of international aid actors,
including the ICRC, non-governmental organizations
working on demining and charities tending to
vulnerable and needy populations, is a matter of vital
importance and must be unconditionally guaranteed
and sustained. The parties to a conflict should ensure
that the most efficient means are available for reaching
people in need with humanitarian assistance and
protection, including in situations where thiat involves
humanitarian and/or monitoring operations that cross
lines of contact or international borders.
As a country that has suffered aggression and
imposed war, we fully recognize that protecting people
from mass atrocities and violence is an overarching
responsibility that must bring together all of the critical
functions of the United Nations and other international
organizations.

Today, we remain gravely concerned by the
humanitarian impact of the use of force. As a result of
this unacceptable policy and practice, the situations of
civilians living near borders and lines of contact are
being further compounded. During previous debates on
this subject, my delegation raised concerns regarding
the border impact of snipers on civilian populations
and facilities. Violent incidents affecting the lives of
civilians must cease immediately.//Armenia advocates
the need to end...

Armenia advocates the need to end all violence and
provocations, including the kidnapping of civilians. We
strongly believe that fundamental and lasting solutions
to conflicts can be achieved only through peaceful
means, based on the principles ofinternational law and
within internationally agreed formats. We emphasize
once again that military force will not resolve conflicts
and only prolong the suffering and hardships endured
by people living in regions blighted by conflicts. Only
a peaceful negotiated settlement can allow an entire
region to move beyond the status quo towards a secure
and prosperous future.

It is important that the Council be focused on the
protection of civilians within the overall process of the
peaceful resolution of disputes. Our approach must
be built on the understanding that any comprehensive
resolution should impartially and fully address the root
causes ofa conflict under discussion in order to prevent
its renewal in the future and should provide reliable
and adequate security protection guarantees to the
populations concerned, thereby ensuring sustainable
peace and development.

Therefore, Armenia welcomes Lithuania's initiative
to hold this debate, which offers a valuable opportunity
to evaluate the progress on the implementation on
previously adopted resolutions dealing with the issue of

protection of civilians and highlight the core challenges
and priorities for further united actions.

