Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Uganda is pleased to see
you, Mr. Minister, chairing this important meeting. I
wish to thank you for organizing this meeting, given
the situation in the Middle East.

At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the presence
in our midst today of His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas and the Foreign Ministers of various
countries. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement.

Uganda has followed with deep concern the
escalation of violence in the region. This has had a
disastrous impact on the civilian population, with many
lives lost and livelihoods disrupted. The humanitarian
tragedy is shameful and must be put to an end. The
Violence further complicates efforts to reach a
negotiated and peaceful solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, even more so after the Council, a
few weeks ago, unanimously adopted resolution 1850
(2008).

Much as we are appalled by the ongoing violence
and counter-violence, I do not think that we will do
justice if we do not also address what was the
immediate cause of this escalation. So, we must not
keep silent on the issue of rockets being fired at Israel,
injuring civilians. At the same time, we must not turn a
blind eye to what Israel's response has been in relation
to the unfolding tragedy. In other words, we should be
balanced and look at the picture in toto.

That said, the escalation is a reminder that the
international community, and the Council in particular,
should remain firmly engaged, working with the parties
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
That will be achieved only through negotiations
between the parties with the support of the
international community. It is for that reason that
Uganda welcomes this meeting, as it serves as a
reminder to the Palestinians, the Israelis and the
international community of our obligation to support
peace. To that end, we call for and support intra-
Palestinian reconciliation, national dialogue and unity.

Given the current escalation, the first priority is
an immediate end to the violence. My delegation has
called for an immediate and permanent ceasefire whose
implementation must be monitored to ensure full
compliance. Uganda would like to express its support
for those who have called for a ceasefire that is durable
and sustainable. The Council would be engaged in a
futile exercise if we called for a ceasefire only to return

to the situation that prevailed earlier. In other words,
the ceasefire must not be abused by those who might
wish to cause violence. Thus, it must be sustainable
and durable and must be monitored effectively.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for access to
Gaza for humanitarian assistance. The ceasefire will
facilitate that, but the border crossings should also be
opened in order to improve the humanitarian situation.

Uganda will continue to support all efforts aimed
at reducing tension and achieving a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, consistent with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. We commend all those
countries and organizations, particularly the Arab
League, that have worked tirelessly in recent days in
pursuit of that goal.

