Mr. Al-Istrabadi (Iraq): At the outset, I should
like to take this opportunity, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to commend
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his efforts last month. I thank
each of the members of the Security Council for
allowing me the great privilege of addressing the
Council today.

Since I last sat here on 8 June 2004, I can say that
we have made genuine progress in re-integrating Iraq
into the community of nations. Despite an
unprecedented rise in terrorist violence, whose aim was
to impede the transfer of authority to a sovereign
Government, such a Government took office ahead of
the schedule set by the Law of Administration of the
State of Iraq for the Transitional Period (TAL).
Pursuant to the annex to the TAL, a national
conference was held in August, and an Interim
National Assembly has been formed. Today, its
government is truly the most representative in Iraq's
history, not merely in terms of ethnic or confessional
make-up, but - equally importantly - in terms of the
broad range of political ideologies and beliefs held by
its members. It is truly a Government of national unity.
While there are difficulties - of which this Council is
aware - we are, brick by brick, rebuilding a cohesive
Iraqi State based upon the consent of the governed.

A principal function of the interim Government is
to provide for elections, as required by the TAL and
affirmed in resolution 1546 (2004). As in the past,
terrorists are determined to frustrate this progress. As
Iraqis meet each landmark date - and particularly as
we approach and hold elections - the terrorists know
that, increasingly, their days are numbered. They are
now working, in a frenzy, therefore, to delay elections.
How else do we explain the most recent violence,
particularly events such as the barbarous bombings of
Christian churches on a Sunday evening, while men,
women and children were in the very act of
worshipping God? I must also note the events that took
place today. This is not the first time that those who are
attempting to participate in rebuilding the security
infrastructure of Iraq have been targeted. Just as the
efforts to dissuade Iraqis from participating in forming
the security structures have failed in the past, I am
convinced that they will fail today, as well.

It is, no doubt, those events which the Secretary-
General contemplates in his report, whose most
consistent theme is the extant security situation. Those
events, recalled in light of the heinous murder of
Sergio Vieira de Mello - a man I had the privilege of
getting to know and to whom Iraq will long owe a debt
of gratitude - are no doubt factors in the apparent
reticence of the United Nations and some countries to
engage fully in Iraq. Yet keeping the United Nations
and the world out of Iraq is one of the tactical goals of
the terrorists - and they have, unfortunately, already
met with some success in that respect.

It is a fact that Iraq needs the technical support of
the United Nations in order to hold elections. We know
that. The United Nations knows that. The countries
represented at this table and beyond know that. And so
do the terrorists. They are determined, at any cost, to
prevent that vital assistance from going forward. They
must not succeed.

It is also a fact that the number of United Nations
workers now in Iraq is inadequate. The Secretary-
General notes that the total number of United Nations
employees has been limited to 35. Yet for the United
Nations to have adequate teams of elections experts in
Iraq, it must increase that number. More is needed on a
going-forward basis than the administrative expertise
provided up to this point, however invaluable it has
been. The daunting job now begins, for instance, of
doing the fieldwork to set up registration sites and to
register voters. Iraq's sons and daughters, scattered in
diaspora for too long, desperately and universally wish
to participate in these elections. Countless other such
issues in need of discussion and solution exist, and the
expertise of the United Nations in resolving these
issues is indispensable. There is simply no other place
for us to turn; no one does a better job than the United
Nations of assisting in organizing credible, honest
elections in emerging democracies. Here, I must
commend Ambassador Qazi for his efforts in Iraq in
the time that he has been there.

We understand the concern for security, however.
We have appealed to the United Nations, as a body,
fully to engage in Iraq. And we appeal to the world
community to do the same - for Iraq needs you, as
well. In the brief time since I assumed my
responsibilities here in New York, I have been
heartened to learn that several countries have agreed
either to provide security forces to protect United
Nations workers or to provide funding for such
operations. We are grateful to those States, but more is
needed. We urge other countries to pledge forces and
funds to assist in securing the safety of United Nations
workers in Iraq. Security is, of course, the ultimate
responsibility and duty of the Iraqi Government - a
fact affirmed in resolution 1546 (2004). Recognizing
the exigencies, Iraq has turned to the multinational
force to assist in these vital responsibilities. But the
multinational force is now engaged in activities far
different than the security forces about which I am
speaking. The purpose and function of this force, as we
see it, would be, in the first instance, to provide
protection for United Nations workers as they engage
in the essential activities of assisting Iraqis in holding
true, fair and clean elections throughout Iraq, perhaps
for the first time in our history.

Let me say a word about the political process in
Iraq in the light of the security situation. We are
determined to rebuild our country. We are determined
never again to be subject to government by coercion
and oppression. We are determined never again to be
ruled against our will by men who came to power
without our consent. It is to that end that our
Government has announced a two-track approach to
the current violence. On the one hand, we are
determined that no one will achieve political
ascendancy - much less legitimacy - through force
of arms. Those determined to impose themselves on
Iraq's polity through violence in order to return us to
tyranny will find Iraqis ready to join the battle to
prevent their doing so.

On the other hand, we encourage those
individuals and movements who are willing to lay
down their arms and abide by the rule of law and by
the terms set forth by Prime Minister Ayad Allawi to
enter the political process, to engage Iraq's electorate
and to abide by the results of forthcoming elections.
The Prime Minister has been in dialogue with groups
that have hitherto not entered the political process. We
are hopeful that many will chose to join us in
rebuilding Iraq, rather than continuing to obstruct the
effort.

Allow me one final observation, Mr. President.
Although peace has not yet obtained throughout
Iraq - due mostly to the intervention of foreign
religious militants and extremists and remnants of the
previous regime - Euro-American pundits who
predicted inter-ethnic or inter-confessional strife in
post-war Iraq have been proven wrong. Whatever other
problems Iraqis may now be experiencing, a civil war
like that in the former Yugoslavia is not one of them.
Unchastened by their prior error, many of those same
pundits now call for the de facto dissolution of the
country along ethnic and confessional lines. They were
wrong before, and they are wrong now.

It is significant that no Iraqi today calls for the
dismemberment of Iraq. We are united in our
determination to forge a federal, democratic and
unified Iraq. We need the help of every Member State
and of the Organization to achieve these goals. The
consequences of failure are too great - not only for
Iraqis but for the region and, indeed, the world. No one
sitting at this table needs to be reminded of the
strategic significance of Iraq and the dangers such a
failure would pose. With the help of the United Nations
and of those generous Member States who join the
process, we pledge to strive to vindicate our goal of
building the Iraq I have described. We are confident of
success.

