The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The British Government, too, wants to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General, the Special Envoy and
their teams for the hard work that they are doing. We
join others in welcoming the Riyadh agreement and
the vital role that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia played
in brokering it. We share South Africa's point and
emphasis on inclusivity.
With regard to momentum and making the best use
of next year, our colleagues from Indonesia, Germany
and Cote d'Ivoire put it very well, and we, too, share
that sense of hope that something truly meaningful can
be done. I wanted to tell Special Envoy Griffiths that
we welcome his continued facilitation of consultations
between the parties. It is important that the Riyadh
agreement and de-escalation efforts are integrated
into a wider inclusive political process, and we urge
Mr. Griffiths and Saudi Arabia to work closely to
ensure that the respective initiatives are integrated and
enable a holistic approach. The Council and the wider
community need to be ready to support a renewed peace
process, and the Special Envoy can count on the United
Kingdom to do its utmost in that regard. We hope for
broader implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
to continue in parallel with these efforts.

On the humanitarian front, as the Assistant
Secretary-General said, the situation is a very sobering
one. I share the German representative's concerns on
these issues. The United Kingdom has committed nearly
$1 billion in assistance since the conflict began, and
more than of quarter of this sum has been in the current
financial year. We are contributing to the immediate
food needs of more than 1 million Yemenis each month,
treating 70,000 children for malnutrition and providing
more than 1 million people with an improved water
supply and basic sanitation. We therefore in no way
underestimate the scale and the enormity of the task,
and we applaud all those who work on the ground to
deliver aid to vulnerable people in such difficult and
dangerous circumstances.

The Council needs to be confident that the
assistance provided by the international community is
indeed reaching those in need, and that means that it is
in turn vital that humanitarian access improve across
the entire country, including in Houthi-controlled
areas in the north. The United Kingdom takes this
opportunity to call on the Houthis to engage urgently
and constructively with the United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator on the
ground, Ms. Lise Grande, to ensure that vulnerable
people can be reached and to comply immediately with
resolution 2451 (2018) by facilitating swift, unhindered
and safe humanitarian access.

We know that the operating environment for
humanitarian organizations is almost impossible in the
north - 60 per cent of humanitarian sub-agreements
this year have not been signed by the Houthis, and that
affects 4 million people. This situation is obviously
something that cannot continue. Humanitarian
organizations are ready to save lives. They must be
allowed to do theirjobs.

With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, an issue
that has been mentioned by a number of representatives
today, we share those concerns. We think that the
inaction of the Houthis on this issue is reckless. We call
on them to allow the United Nations team access to the
tanker before it is too late.

I also want to say a quick word about the economy.
The progress that has recently been achieved between
the parties in facilitating fuel imports through the
Red Sea ports is very welcome. It is now vital that
the Government of Yemen and the Houthis engage
constructively with the United Nations to agree on an
effective mechanism for port-revenue sharing. A long-
term solution needs to be secured so that sufficient
levels of fuel can enter the Red Sea ports each month.

Finally, I wish to conclude by echoing what the
representatives of Germany and of Belgium said about
the importance of unconditionally implementing
international humanitarian law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

