Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Italy for convening this meeting. We also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners ofthe United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti and African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for
their briefings.

Today, more than 11,000 United Nations police
officers are deployed in 11 peacekeeping operations
and four special political missions. They perform their
duties with devotion in trying and complex situations,
and China pays tribute to their spirit of dedication
and sacrifice.

The international situation is currently undergoing
profound changes; conflicts and disputes are becoming
more diverse. The context for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the tasks they set out to
achieve are increasingly complex, and United Nations
peacekeeping police mandates have been on the rise.
The international community should consider in depth
the circumstances facing peacekeeping police, their
mandates and the way forward, and explore ways they
can improve their work. China would like to make the
following observations.

First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the basic principles of
peacekeeping - the consent of the host countries,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence or in fulfilment of the mandate - must be
observed. These three peacekeeping principles are the
cornerstone of peacekeeping operations and provide
an important guarantee for the effectiveness of United
Nations policing. It is important to fully respect the
sovereignty of host countries, listen to their views and
communicate better with them regarding the duration
of deployments, the adjustment of mandates and other
such issues. If, as a result ofchanging circumstances, the
host country demands the exit of United Nations police,
the Secretariat should develop a clear exit timetable
under the political guidance of the Security Council.

Secondly, the mandates of police deployed in
peacekeeping operations must be unambiguous,
feasible tailored to the context and focused. Mandates
are the basis of and guidance for the work of missions
and the very foundation of effective peacekeeping
operations. Each mission faces different situations
and tasks. When designing policing mandates, the
situation on the ground, the priority needs of the host
countries and the capacity of the police-contributing
countries, among other factors, should be considered
in an integrated manner. Their mandates should be
unequivocal, targeted, highly actionable and subject to
timely assessment in the light of dynamic changes, so
that their priorities and focus may be constantly adjusted
to serve the central objective of the peacekeeping
operation concerned. Host countries have the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, and the task of
peacekeeping police is to assist them in capacity-
building and under the leadership of the host countries.

Thirdly, the Secretariat should provide higher
quality and more efficient support and guarantees to
the peacekeeping police in performing their duties.
The Secretariat should take fully into account new
contexts and situations encountered by the police
in order to make peacekeeping more effective and
resilient in the face of complexities, particularly by
boosting coordinated actions between the police,
civilian and military components of missions. It is
important to highlight the safety and security of
peacekeeping employees. Strengthened coordination
with police-contributing countries (PCCs) and host
countries improves early warning capabilities and the
internal sharing of information so as to raise the level
of safety and security across the board.

Fourthly, we must attach greater importance
to the role of PCCs. Troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and PCCs are the main players undertaking
peacekeeping operations. It is imperative to improve
communication between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and TCCs and PCCs, fullyleverage the role
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
and enable TCCs and PCCs to have a greater voice.
Adequate attention should be given to the needs of
developing countries as PCCs, and they should be
encouraged to boost their capacity through bilateral
and multilateral cooperation.

China is the largest PCC among the permanent
members ofthe Security Council. Chinese peacekeeping
police officers have earned many accolades from
various parties thanks to their diligence and excellence.
China began sending police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in 2000; since then, we have
sent some 26,000 police officers to missions in Timor-
Leste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, Kosovo,
Haiti and elsewhere. At present, more than 150 Chinese
police officers are serving missions in South Sudan,
Cyprus and Afghanistan.

China is now in the process of fully implementing
the commitments made by the Chinese leader at the 2015
Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping to further support
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including by
taking the lead in the creation ofa standby formed police
unit and training peacekeeping police officers for other
countries. Two of China's standby peacekeeping police
units are already formally registered with the United
Nations peacekeeping standby mechanism, parts of
which are already at the rapid-deployment level.

China stands ready to work with the international
community and make its positive contribution to the
development of United Nations peacekeeping policing
and the maintenance of international peace and security.

