Mr. Jessen-Petersen: Let me first thank the
members of the Security Council for their many very
useful and important observations and statements. It
goes without saying that I have listened very carefully.
In particular, I would like to thank members of the
Council for the many encouraging and supportive
words directed at the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMMIK) and at
my colleagues, who, as all the members of the Council
are aware, are working in difficult conditions in
Kosovo.

I listened with some perplexity, and even real
sadness, to the two statements made by Mr. Covic'. I
must say that, in listening to Mr. Covie, I did not quite
recognize the situation he described in Kosovo as the
one I know after more than six months on the ground. I
will not take up the Council's time to go into details
about the many things that Mr. Covie said. I think that
the technical assessment and the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/88) are clear, as Mr. Covie
just recognized. I believe that, as we presented it this
time, the technical assessment has the merit of being
based on facts, containing many statistics and being
based on reality. I am glad that Mr. Covie recognized
that.

As all the members of the Council have stated -
and I agree - the report of the Secretary-General is
very clear in stating that there has been tangible
progress but that there are still many shortcomings and
deficiencies. Our focus over the next several months -
working with the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and, I certainly hope, with the minority
communities and the Kosovo Serbs - will be on
addressing all the deficiencies and shortcomings,
which are mainly linked to improving the conditions of
the minorities.
As I said, I cannot go into all the details. I would,
however, just like to give the Council a couple of
examples of what, I must say, I find totally out of touch
with reality on the ground. Mr. Covie spoke about the
lack of basic security. We should not get carried away
by statistics, but statistics are important. It is a fact -
and we have said it many times - that there has not
been one single serious ethnically related incident
since last June. The perpetrators in that case were
arrested immediately and are now before a court. With
all due respect to Mr. Covie, that is not because people
are simply not moving about. Many Kosovo Serbs are
moving about. Many in fact enjoy freedom of
movement. However, we must now focus on those who
do not enjoy freedom of movement. They exist; and
there are far too many of them. I have made it clear
that we cannot talk about sufficient progress in terms
of implementing standards so long as some minorities
are still forced to live behind barbed wire and are
unable to move. But the vast majority of Kosovo Serbs
are moving about freely. However, as I said, the fact is
that there has not been a single serious ethnically
related incident since last June.

Let me correct myself. That is not quite true.
Unfortunately, two of the Kosovo Serbs who
courageously stood in the election were both victims of
serious incidents. After the elections, one candidate
was attacked in Belgrade and is now seeking refugee
status in a European country. Another Kosovo Serb
leader was attacked recently in the northern part of
Kosovo. That attack was immediately condemned by
all political leaders. Again, it is not correct to say that
there are incidents and that they are not condemned. If
there are no condemnations it is because there have not
been any incidents. In the single case where there was
an incident - which, regrettably, was against a very
important Kosovo Serb leader - there was an
immediate condemnation.

Let me give the Council just one more example,
and I could give many. As to the lack of access to the
media, the easiest thing for me is to quote from a
recent report by the independent Temporary Media
Commissioner. It is a direct quote; these are not my
words: "Minority access to the media compares
favourably with the diversity and breadth of access
found elsewhere in the Balkans and, indeed, in much of
Europe". I could continue, but I would like to point out
that it is important that we base our dialogue on
honesty and on facts. Then, I think, together we can
move forward.

That is also the reason I welcome the readiness
recently shown by Belgrade to resume the dialogue. I
have been pushing for that ever since my first visit to
Belgrade, at the end of August last year, two weeks
after I began my mission. I am very pleased that, as a
result of my constant pushing on the importance of a
dialogue and of Belgrade's being actively involved, we
now have an invitation from Belgrade to resume the
dialogue. There have been several references to that. I
think that is very important, and I welcome it, because
it goes without saying - and I have said it so many
times - that Belgrade has a key role to play in this
process.

I have just two more comments on Mr. Covie's
references to telecommunications and to electricity.
The reason that UNMIK, acting in full accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and based on
a statement from the United Nations to the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
supporting that request, has pushed for that is that right
now, with the telephone lines being under the control
of entities other than Kosovo, Kosovo is losing around
€50 million in revenue a year. In addition to that, I can
talk about telecommunications being, of course, a very
important engine of the economy, and, as I have said,
we need to get the economy moving.

So, we are not in any way intending to prejudge a
final status. That is not our mandate; that is not my
responsibility. We have simply asked for that telephone
code to be assigned on a temporary basis to the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in
the interests of the clients and the customers
throughout Kosovo. It is a technical issue on a
temporary, interim basis - nothing else.

As to the electricity issue, I will not devote too
many words to it. Far too much has been said about it.
Let me just say that this is a problem that,
unfortunately, is affecting some 60,000 people right
now, of whom 95 to 97 per cent are Kosovo Albanians.
It is a result of the legacy of an absolutely dilapidated
infrastructure that UNMIK inherited in 1999, and in
order to simply have enough revenue for repairs, we
have to insist on customers' paying their bills. That is
what we are doing, irrespective of ethnic background.
Again, it is a purely technical issue, but we have to
generate enough resources to keep the two power
plants going.

I do regret that it has affected those people whose
power supplies broke down - as a result of
deficiencies, not of any policy - and I do regret that,
for some people who are not prepared to pay their bills,
it is has not been possible to reconnect. I have one
single message for those people, including to the very
few Kosovo Serbs among them: Pay, and you will have
electricity this afternoon.

Let me say that I also welcome recent statements
that the Serb Orthodox church now seems ready to re-
engage so that we can get on with the urgent work of
repairing and restoring the religious monuments. That
is a top priority and I am very pleased that, as a result
of many initiatives that we have also taken to engage
those in the Serb Orthodox church who want to move
forward - and there are many, a large majority - and
also with the very important help of Belgrade, we have
now found a solution, and I believe that we will be able
to re-engage and start repairs very soon.

Finally, let me say that I will return to Kosovo
determined to continue our close partnership with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and to
support them in their determination to address all the
shortcomings in standards implementation. They know
that they have a lot of hard work ahead of them. They
are committed to engaging in that hard work. We will
continue our daily efforts to reach out to the Kosovo
Serbs and to bring them into the processes, and we will
continue the very important dialogue with Belgrade
and with other States in the region.

We have a clear agenda ahead of us. We have a
clear timetable. We know what we have to do. The
Provisional Institutions, as I say, know that only hard
work and a strong commitment to the implementation
of the priority standards will get them there. They are
determined to succeed. We are determined to support
them, and I do look forward to meeting with the
Council again three months from now. I hope I will
then be able - and I believe I will - to report on
further progress, so that we can move Kosovo and the
region forward towards the normalization and the
standardization that they need.

