Mr. Zinsou (Benin): At the outset, allow me, Sir,
on behalf of the African Group, to congratulate South
Africa on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency and on its wise leadership of the Council.
Allow me to also acknowledge the presence of South
Africa's Deputy Minister of International Relations and
Cooperation, who is presiding over this important
meeting today. The African Group would also like to
express its appreciation to the Russian Federation for
its proficient stewardship of the Council during the
month of December. The African Group furthermore
expresses its warm congratulations to the new Security
Council members and conveys its appreciation to the
members whose terms ended in December.

The African Group remains deeply concerned by
the grave situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as a
result of the continuation and escalation of illegal
Israeli policies and practices. Israel's unlawful actions
and illegal practices have contributed to the worsening
of the humanitarian situation and to economic
deterioration in the occupied Palestinian territory. In
this connection, the African Group calls for an end to
all of those illegal practices and policies, and for the
immediate and complete lifting of the illegal blockade
imposed by Israel on the Palestinian people in the Gaza
Strip.

The African Group is especially concerned by the
continued construction and expansion of illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in East Jerusalem. The African Group
reiterates that all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, constitute grave breaches of international
law and a grave danger to the viability of the
internationally agreed two-State solution of Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security.

The African Group calls on the international
community, including the Security Council, to act in
unison to compel Israel to cease forthwith its
construction and expansion of settlements and to abide
by its obligations under international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions. That is imperative for
salvaging the prospects for realizing the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.

The African Group regrets the lack of progress in
the peace process and calls for the resumption of peace
talks between the Palestinians and Israelis. It reaffirms
its support for a peaceful solution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the principles of international
law and all relevant United Nations resolutions, with
an emphasis on the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is high time for the international community to
act decisively, guided by the rules and principles of
international law and justice, in order to finally bring
an end to the Israeli occupation. It is high time to
enable the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable right to self-determination and freedom. It
is high time to resolve all other final status issues in
accordance with international law and United Nations
resolutions.

(spoke in French)

Having made that group statement, I would like
to make some remarks and comments in my national
capacity. At the outset, I wish to say that recent history
teaches us that the greatest threats to international
peace and security come from peoples who have long
been frustrated. The Palestinian question makes of the
Arab community a frustrated community. Benin
believes firmly that the United Nations, with the
dynamism that characterizes it today - and which
Benin greatly appreciates - has the resources to find a
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question,
and that it should not shirk its historic responsibility to
do so.

Benin has always supported and continues to
support a free and independent Palestinian State living
in peaceful coexistence with Israel. Benin lends its
unflagging support to the two-State solution and calls
on the Security Council to facilitate the prompt
execution of that solution in order to offer the
Palestinian people relief from the compound sufferings
that mark their daily lives.

We believe in the virtues of mediation and of
choosing that option as the means to resolve disputes in
today's world. We therefore urge the Quartet to step up
its efforts to quickly restore dialogue between the two
parties in order to find a lasting solution to this
situation, which has gone on far too long.

A settlement to the Palestinian situation should
go hand in hand with the settlement of all the pending
issues in the Middle East, including the establishment
of a nuclear-weapons-free zone, respect for human
rights and the promotion of gender equality in all
countries of the region, respecting the fundamental
principles and values contained in the United Nations
Charter.

