Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to update the Council on the latest
developments in Yemen and challenges facing efforts
to ensure the country's return to peace and stability.

Recent developments in Yemen run counter to
the commitments to peace made by the parties to the
United Nations and the international community.
The security situation is dire, and the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate despite the efforts of
the humanitarian agencies.

With regard to security, on 8 October the Grand
Hall in Sana'a was subject to a tragic and painful
attack, where nearly 1,000 Yemenis were gathered to
pay their condolences at a funeral, killing more than
140 and injuring 550. I visited the site of the attack
several days ago, together with family members of
the victims, and saw for myself the shocking scale
of destruction. The Mayor of Sana'a, Abdel Kader
Hilal - a seasoned politician known for his bravery
and commitment to peace until his very last day, and
two members of the De-escalation and Coordination
Committee (DCC) - were among the victims of the
attack.

The bombing ofa funeral is contrary to all Yemeni
norms and traditions, as well as to international
humanitarian law, and the perpetrators must be held
accountable. I extend once again my deepest condolences
to the families ofthe victims and wish a speedy recovery
to those who were wounded in this attack. I commend
the statements issued by the families of the victims,
calling for restraint and a thorough investigation of the
incident. This is a clear demonstration of their sense of
nationalism and commitment to peace.

The Arab coalition has taken responsibility for
the attack and its joint incidents assessment team
conducted a rapid preliminary investigation, which
recommended action against those involved and a
revision of the coalition's rules of engagement. It will
be very important to complete the investigations and to
ensure the accountability of those involved.

Sadly, the 8 October attack was not the only incident
in which civilians and civilian infrastructure were
targeted in the past weeks. On 3 October, the shelling
of the Bir Basha district of Taiz from areas controlled
by forces of the Houthi and General People's Congress
(GPC), resulted in nine civilian deaths, including three
children. Taiz has been subject to the indiscriminate
and lethal shelling of its residential areas that has
caused great damage to the city and its population and
must stop. These incidents are a horrific reminder of
the consequences of a war that has blighted the country
during the past 18 months of conflict.

The conduct of the parties on the ground is
contrary to their prior commitments to engage fully
and constructively in the United Nations-mediated
peace process. I called on the parties to recommit to
the 10 April terms and conditions for the cessation
of hostilities. Although I would have preferred an
open-ended cessation of hostilities, I was able to gain
agreement on a 72-hour pause, which entered into force
on 19 October.

I regret to report that both sides were involved
in significant violations of the cessation of hostilities
from its very first day. I am deeply concerned by
the escalation of hostilities, which has continued at
an alarming rate in the past few weeks. Fighting has
escalated in Taiz, Mareb, Al-Jawf and Haj jah and along
the border with Saudi Arabia, where ballistic missile
attacks have increased in frequency and range. The
targeting of the area of Mecca al-Mukarramah and
Jeddah was a dangerous development that may affect
the course of the war and the feelings of more than
1.5 billion Muslims worldwide.

I am also concerned that, according to reports,
international vessels travelling off the coast of Yemen
have come under fire from Houthi-controlled territories
in recent weeks. A United Arab Emirates vessel was
targeted in the Strait of Bab El-Mandab. United States
destroyers travelling through international waters
were reportedly targeted by direct missile attacks and
reportedly responsibilityonded by firing on Houthi
radar sites. These incidents risk causing a more acute
escalation of the conflict and threaten the security
of international maritime movement. I thank the
Council for its call on 4 October for such attacks to
cease immediately.

In southern Yemen, Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) and the so-called Islamic State
continue to attack State institutions and civilian
targets. In Aden on 1 October, a suicide bomber killed
one civilian and injured three others, and on 29 and
30 September gunmen affiliated with the Islamic State
assassinated a retired intelligence officer and a security
officer. As part of their counter-terrorism efforts,
Yemeni security forces raided the house of a prominent
Islamic State leader and confiscated a variety of
weapons and explosives. In Abyan, counter-terrorism
forces killed three militants, including a high-ranking
AQAP affiliate, and arrested two others.

The escalating military situation continues to
exacerbate a very dire humanitarian situation, which
requires far greater attention from the international
community. Local authorities in Yemen are unable to
provide basic social services for the population. This
is particularly true in the health sector, Where only
45 per cent of facilities are functional. In addition to
the growing difficulty Yemenis are experiencing in
obtaining medical treatment at home, many Yemenis
are also unable to seek treatment abroad due to the
prohibition of commercial flights from Sana'a. In
that context, I call for the immediate resumption of
commercial flights to and from Sana'a. I also call on the
Houthis and GPC to ensure that access for humanitarian
agencies is free from bureaucratic impediments and
intimidation so that all who need assistance can receive
it. My colleagues Stephen O'Brien, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Mohannad Hadi, Regional Director of
the World Food Programme for the Middle East and
North African region, will provide the Council with
a more detailed briefing of the humanitarian situation
and the United Nations efforts to provide assistance.
I should add that the deteriorating economic
situation threatens to create a far greater humanitarian
crisis in the coming months if urgent action is not
taken to save the day. Salary payments for most civil
servants - a primary source of income for much of
the population - have already ceased. Unless they
are resumed quickly, many more Yemenis will face
destitution and be forced to rely on humanitarian aid
to survive. All parties, including the Government
of Yemen, the Houthis and GPC, must commit to
cooperating to ensure the continued functioning of
the Central Bank and a rapid resumption of salaries
throughout the country.

Despite the international community's calls for the
Yemeni parties to fully commit to the peace process,
the parties have continued to take unilateral actions
that risk undermining the prospects for peace. On
2 October, the High Political Council established by the
Houthis and GPC asked the former Governor of Aden
to form a new Government. President Hadi Mansour's
decision to replace the Governor of the Central Bank
and relocate the Bank to Aden has created further
economic uncertainty at a time when urgent measures
to save the economy are necessary. Prime Minister
Ahmed Bin-Dagher announced via social media plans to
convene a national body to ratify the draft constitution.
I again urge the parties to refrain from taking any
further measures, which will only complicate reaching
a negotiated settlement to put Yemen on the path to
peace.

I have conducted extensive consultations with
the Yemeni parties and members of the international
community over the past few weeks, and presented the
parties with a comprehensive and detailed road map
to end the conflict. The road map is consistent with
resolution 2216 (2015) and other relevant resolutions,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, and the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference. The road map contains a
set of sequenced political and security steps, conducted
in parallel, that would help Yemen return to peace and
orderly political transition.

The road map foresees the creation of military and
security committees that would supervise withdrawals
and the hand-over of weapons in Sana'a, AI-Hudaydah
and Taiz. The committees would also be tasked with
ensuring the complete end of military violence and
the safety and security of the population and State
institutions. The road-map also lays out interim
political arrangements, including the appointment of a
new Vice-President and the formation of a Government
of national unity that would lead Yemen's transition
process and oversee the resumption of political
dialogue, the completion of the constitutional process
and, ultimately, elections. I have been informed
unofficially that the parties have rejected the road
map. This demonstrates that the political elite in
Yemen remain unable to overcome their differences
and prioritize national, public interest over personal
interests. It is time for the parties to realize that there
can be no peace without concessions and no security
without agreement. They should base their positions on
the question of how to ensure security and stability for
the Yemeni people.

I will return to the region immediately following
this briefing to start consultations with the parties in
Sana'a and Riyadh with the aim of reaching a detailed
agreement based on the road map. It is now the
responsibility of the delegations to prioritize peace and
stability. The road map and the agreements discussed in
Kuwait should allow the peace process to move towards
a comprehensive settlement in the coming weeks if the
parties engage in good faith and demonstrate a sense of
political and national awareness.

I am grateful for the international community's
continued support to my proposal for a comprehensive
agreement and calls for a cessation of hostilities. The
quadrilateral meetings of the Foreign Ministers of the
United States, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates in Jeddah, New York and
London have supported these efforts, along with their
counterparts from the remaining members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council. I also thank the Foreign Ministers
of the Sultanate of Oman, France, Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar
and Bahrain and the Deputy Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation, for their support. I am also grateful
to the Council members for their unwavering support
for the efforts to restore peace in Yemen.

After 18 months of horrific fighting, thousands
of deaths, injuries, unspeakable human suffering and
total economic collapse, we all need to ask how long
Yemenis will remain hostages to personal and reckless
political decisions. What are the parties waiting for to
sign a political agreement? Have they not understood
that there are no winners in wars? The road map I
have proposed to the parties is widely supported by
the international community because it provides a
comprehensive solution and includes guarantees for the
political representation of all political groupings.

I would like to ask the Council for its full support
of the peace plan, an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the release of all prisoners and detainees. And to
the Yemenis I say that the dawn of peace could be near
if those responsible decide to prioritize the national
interest and start working on rebuilding a stable
State that guarantees the rights of all of its people
without discrimination.

