Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): At the outset, let me join previous speakers in
expressing my gratitude for the successful efforts made
by the Spanish presidency in convening this meeting.

First of all, I strongly and totally reject the remarks
made by some delegations - including Japan France
and South Korea - who have picked up the issue of
self-defence and nuclear deterrence of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, an act of encroachment
upon the sovereignty of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. As far as I know, the main agenda of
this meeting is stopping the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. Notwithstanding
the disregard of that agenda, some delegations have
picked up the issue of the nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea once more. It does nothing but show the sinister
political aims to increase the pressure against the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in this forum.

The issue of nuclear weapons on the Korean
peninsula is the product of hostile policies of the United
States towards the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. As we have stated previously, if the United
States had not been hostile to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and threatened our country with its
nuclear weapons, then the issue of nuclear weapons on
the Korean peninsula would not exist. Additionally,
the Korean peninsula would not have turned into a
global hotspot.

The nuclear threat and blackmail of the largest
nuclear Power against the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is reaching an extremejuncture. Joint military
exercises by the United States and South Korea took
place recently in the southern half of the Korean
peninsula, simulating a real war with the participation
of hundreds of thousands of armed forces, including
special forces an strategic nuclear assets, aimed at
decapitating the leadership of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and occupying Pyongyang, as well as
introducing nuclear strategic bombers to Guam in the
wake of the official decision on the development and
deployment of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
anti-missile system in South Korea and after bringing
them into the Korean peninsula and its vicinity. With
strategic assests that include nuclear-powered aircraft
carriers and nuclear submarines, the United States is
driving the situation on the Korean peninsula towards
an extremely explosive situation.

It is the consistent stance ofthe Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to fundamentally remove the danger
of nuclear war posed by the United States by relying
on its own powerful nuclear deterrence and defending
regional and global peace and security. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea possesses nuclear deterrence
as a self-defence measure to protect its State and social
system in the face of the constant nuclear threat that
emanates from the United States. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea will hold steadfast in its
strategy of bolstering up its own nuclear forces.

Finally, as a responsible nuclear-armed State, and
as we have already declared, our Republic will not use
nuclear weapons first, unless the forces of aggression
that are hostile towards us violate our sovereignty
with their own nuclear weapons. We will faithfully
observe our commitment to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, which we made before the
international community. We will continue to strive for
global denuclearization.

