Mr. Brahimi: I am deeply grateful to the President
for his kind invitation. I am greatly honoured to be back
in this Chamber, this time as a member of The Elders.

Our founder, Nelson Mandela, was passionate about
Palestine. He spoke about it repeatedly and always
forcefully. He discussed his views with Jewish leaders
in South Africa and the United States, and he thought
he had convinced some of them that his support for the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and freedom was politically and morally right. When
he launched The Elders, he gave our group three
priorities. Palestine was one of them. In response, The
Elders visited Palestine and Israel four times in the
past eight years. Neither Prime Minister Netanyahu
nor any member of his Government has ever agreed
to meet them. We fully share Mandela's view that the
Palestinians should have their State, that the two States
of Israel and Palestine should live side by side in peace
and that the security of all States in the region should be
assured. The sad reality, however, is that 50 years after
the start of Israel's occupation of the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, little of consequence
has been done to bring about a viable Palestinian State
on those territories.

I am sure that many Council members read Nathan
Thrall's 2 June article in The New York Times. With
regard to the ongoing occupation, he says that this

"resilient and eminently sustainable arrangement
has stood on three pillars: American backing,
Palestinian weakness and Israeli indifference.
Together, these three ensure that for the Israeli
Government, continuing its occupation is far less
costly than the concessions required to end it".

I believe that the article implies that there is a fourth
pillar sustaining the situation, and that is the near-
total paralysis of the Security Council. Which of those
pillars might change in order to break the deadlock?
Apparently, not America's unconditional support for
Israel. Thrall says,

"Americans are told that Israel will have to
choose, and very soon, to give Palestinians either
citizenship or independence, and choose to either
remain a democracy or become an apartheid State.
Yet none of these groups calls on the United States
to force this supposed imminent choice, no matter
how many times Israel demonstrates that it prefers a
different, far easier option: continued occupation."

Since 1967, the Palestinian people have endured
grave acts of oppression, violence and collective
punishment. During that time, Israel has built
approximately 125 settlements and more than 100 so-
called outposts on occupied Palestinian land, all in
violation of international law. They have placed roughly
650,000 illegal settlers in Palestine, with 350,000 in the
West Bank and 300,000 in East Jerusalem. They have
imprisoned 800,000 Palestinians and destroyed 48,000
homes. They have revoked the residence permits of
250,000 Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza
and more than 14,000 in East Jerusalem. The West Bank
is fragmented by the separation wall and a multitude of
other Israeli-imposed controls that affect Palestinian
dignity and prevent the people from going about their
normal business unhindered.

The Palestinian population is indeed extremely
vulnerable and in desperate need of protection from
the international community. That protection should be
provided for under international law, notably the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Regrettably, however, in the
Palestinian territories today the Geneva Conventions
are referred to more in the breach than the observance.
I would particularly like to draw the Council's attention
to the dire situation in the Gaza Strip. There, another
dismal milestone is being marked this year, the tenth
anniversary of the imposition of a blockade that
amounts to collective punishment of all of Gaza's
1.7 million people.

I have participated in only one of The Elders
visits to Gaza, and that was in 2010. The misery in
that unhappy, overcrowded strip of land is difficult to
describe and more difficult to endure. A young woman
student told us,

"Israel put us in a concentration camp. Those who
call themselves our leaders are taking away the air
we breathe".

Only through the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the World Food Programme and
other United Nations agencies, as well as persistent
interventions by the Secretary-General's Special
Coordinator for the Middle Peace Process, are Gazans
able to survive. But what kind of life is it for them - a
densely crowded environment, half-destroyed cities, no
work, undrinkable water, electricity available for only
a few hours a day when it is available at all, and their
basic humanity robbed by constant humiliation and the
need to depend for survival on the charity of others?
To add insult to injury, the irresponsible failure of
the Palestinian leaders, especially those of Fatah and
Hamas, to reconcile and unite is a huge hindrance both
to the daily life of the people and to the struggle of
civil society, prisoners and others to mobilize national,
regional and international support for the fight
against occupation.

Despite James Wolfensohn's personal commitment
and commendable efforts, the Quartet achieved little
before the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair, and since
then has been totally absent. As I am sure the Council
knows, many today think that the Quartet has outlived
its usefulness. Nevertheless, there is a crying and
urgent need for the Security Council to play an active
role in that regard. The Council might wish to begin
by organizing a visit of all its members to Israel and
Palestine. Remarkably, considering the longevity of
this issue on the Council's agenda, and the frequency of
its visits to other conflict zones, there has been no field
visit for many decades. On that trip, the members could
take the opportunity to talk to all parties, but above all
to civil-society representatives in Israel and Palestine.
They could thereby see for themselves all the harm
that has been done to the Palestinian people, as well
as what the occupation is doing to the psychological
and moral fibre of the men, women and children of
both the occupying Power and the occupied people.
In that connection, I would like to put on record The
Elders appreciation for the work of the peace movement
in Israel and its brave human rights defenders such
as B'Tselem, Breaking the Silence, and the Israeli
Committee against House Demolition, as well as the
writings of such outstanding authors as Gideon Levy
and Uri Avnery.

If the Council could make such a visit, its members
would see how urgent it is to enforce the many binding
resolutions that the Council has adopted since the June
1967 war, starting with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and including the most recent, resolution 2334
(2016), which focused on the illegality of settlement
building. In that connection, is there any need to remind
the Council that resolution 2334 (2016) is already being
flouted? The recent Israeli Government decision to
legalize the so-called outposts in the West Bank once
again demonstrates its disregard for international law
and the Council's decisions.

The not-so-discreet contacts of the Israeli Government
with some countries in the region cannot be a substitute
for peace with the Palestinians. Only a genuine, just
solution to the Palestinian problem will open the way
to lasting peace and cooperation between Israel and all
its neighbours.

The Arab Peace Initiative provides a sound basis
for that to happen. Issued at the Arab Summit in
Beirut in 2002, the Initiative has been ignored by the
Israeli Government all these years. Unanimously, Arab
countries called on Israel and all Israelis

"to accept this Initiative in order to safeguard the
prospects for peace and stop the further shedding
of blood, enabling the Arab countries and Israel
to live in peace and good neighbourliness and
provide future generations with security, stability
and prosperity."

Israeli politicians of the left and of the right and the
media in Israel and civil society routinely speak of the
danger of apartheid. Some warn that their country may
become an apartheid State; others denounce practices
that are already creating an apartheid system. Be that as
it may, Palestinians have rights. They have individual
rights like all human beings and they have collective
rights like any other people in the world. And they have
the right to fight for their rights with all the legitimate
means available to them.

The Charter of the United Nations, international
law and international humanitarian law, as well as
all norms of international solidarity, call for effective
support to be given to the legitimate struggle of the
Palestinian people against occupation and oppression.
Such support will in fact help liberate both Palestine
and Israel.

