The Philippines congratulates Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November and welcomes today's open debate on contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity under the agenda item on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. According to pundits on international relations, since the end of the Cold War overall levels of conflict have been declining in view of countries' increasing commitments to international norms for dispute settlement and economic interdependence, as well as declining trends in conflict triggers such as social exclusion and ethnic polarization. Yet the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the climate crisis, two of the main drivers of contemporary conflict and insecurities, are considered to be "developments in reverse,' undermining outcomes under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. These so-called drivers are context-specific and multidimensional, with direct, indirect and legacy effects on a broad range of important peace and development outcomes. Given the current realities, the Philippines submits the following views for today's discourse. With regard to COVID-19, the pandemic has unleashed an unprecedented crisis that has exposed the fragility of societies, and in particular threatened the gains already achieved in finding just and lasting peace in conflict-affected areas. Recognizing the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the work to achieve peace, President Rodrigo Roa Duterte declared a unilateral ceasefire with the Communist Party of the Philippines and its affiliates from 19 March to 15 April, days before the Secretary-General issued his appeal for a global ceasefire on 23 March. Recognizing that initiative, the Secretary-General said that "upholding these commitments will be crucial to enabling an effective response to, and recovery from, the COVID-19 crisis", while encouraging "both sides to build on this momentum and translate these expressions of goodwill into a lasting political solution". The ceasefire demonstrated the Philippine Government's commitment to the swift and unimpeded provision of public health assistance, especially the safe movement of health-care workers, to stricken communities in dire need of immediate medical care. The impacts of COVID-19 are also disproportionately felt by vulnerable groups in conflict situations, especially women and migrant workers. Institutions accountable for protecting the human rights of women and girls before, during and after conflict situations and for preventing incidents of violence against women must therefore remain fully operational to ensure that gender-responsive, culture- and conflict-sensitive and peace-promoting approaches continue to be observed. Regarding the climate crisis and food security, the annual report of United Nations agencies The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World in 2017 and 2018 showed that conflict and climate variability and extremes undermine efforts to end hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition. In 2019, the report showed that economic slowdowns and downturns also undercut these efforts. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and the unprecedented desert locust outbreaks in East Africa are obscuring economic prospects in ways no one could have anticipated. The situation may only get worse if we do not act urgently and take unprecedented action. Much recent food insecurity can be attributed to the greater number of conflicts, often exacerbated by climate-related shocks. Even in certain peaceful situations, food security has deteriorated as a result of economic slowdowns, threatening access to food for the poor. The increasing frequency of extreme weather events, altered environmental conditions and the associated spread of pests and diseases over the past 15 years are factors that contribute to vicious circles of poverty and hunger, particularly when exacerbated by fragile institutions, conflicts, violence and the widespread displacement of populations. In response, the Philippines Department of Agriculture has adopted a survive, reboot and grow approach, and is earnestly focused on enhancing food availability, accessibility, affordability, price stability and self-sufficiency. The Department has proposed a major initiative - the Plant, Plant, Plant Program - aimed at ensuring food security, raising the productivity of our farmers and fisherfolk and pushing for higher growth and incomes in the agriculture sector. To bridge the gap between today's crises and the future we want, we must address the vulnerabilities that COVID-19 and the climate crisis, inter alia, have exposed, by forming sound strategies with a clear political vision and integrated into a culture of accountability. What does that mean for the work of the Security Council? On 14 May 2018, a Security Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/10) stressed that political solutions should guide the design and deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations, which are the cornerstone of mandate implementation and remain key to reaching sustainable peace and security. In the fifth paragraph of that statement, the Council recognized "the need to weigh the full range of responses, when addressing a situation, which may endanger international peace and security, and to deploy United Nations peacekeeping missions and pursue peacebuilding efforts only as an accompaniment, not as an alternative, to a political strategy that addresses, among other elements, the root causes of conflict." Despite overall support for that concept, Council members have struggled to make it operationally coherent. Perhaps it is time to render operationally coherent, given the twin challenges of COVID-19 and the climate crisis. In the light of the multidimensional risks to sustaining peace, global leadership and cooperation are needed more than ever to combat the biggest test that the world has faced since the Second World War.
