Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, Mr. President,
let me too extend our best wishes for your presidency and
thank Poland for its successful presidency last month.

I would like to thank Special Representative Salame
and Ms. Mohamed for their enlightening briefings. I
would like to make four short points.

First, with regard to the arms embargo, the
continued flow of arms into Libya, in open breach of
Security Council resolutions, harms the Libyan people
and the authority of the Security Council and must end.
It also weakens the readiness of the conflicting parties to
negotiate, thereby undermining Special Representative
Salame's mediation efforts. We again urge all States
to immediately take the measures necessary to ensure
the full and strict implementation of the arms embargo.
Non-compliance with the sanctions regime has grave
consequences for Libya. We therefore urge all United
Nations Member States to immediately halt any arms
delivery. The illicit flow of arms needs to stop and
needs to stop now. Otherwise, we may see even more
escalation to come.

Secondly, with regard to the political way ahead,
there is no military solution for Libya, and what Libya
needs right now is an immediate ceasefire, negotiations
between the parties to the conflict and a push in that
direction by all external actors with influence on them.

Let me, first and foremost, reiterate our firm
support for Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Salame, his team at the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and their important
and tireless work in such difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We will work to renew and strengthen
UNSMIL's mandate in the coming weeks. We strongly
support the three-step plan that Special Representative
Salame proposed to the Council in his previous briefing
(see S/PV.8588) in order to revive an inclusive political
process under United Nations auspices.

We commend the commitment of the parties to the
truce during Eid Al-Adha and the substantial reduction
of violence during that period along the main front
lines. That positive first step must now be extended to
a prolonged, robust and lasting ceasefire. We therefore
urge all relevant actors to support the implementation
of the three-step plan, bring about a genuine ceasefire
and use their influence to bring all parties back to the
political process.

Thirdly, the conflict in Libya, fuelled by the ongoing
flow of arms, has caused a humanitarian disaster, and
the briefings by Special Representative Salame' and
Ms. Mohamed reminded us that the most vulnerable
in conflict-affected areas, as well as migrants and
refugees, especially need immediate protection. We
strongly condemn all attacks on civilians, civilian
infrastructure and health workers, and once again urge
all parties to the conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law to avoid further casualties and
safeguard the lives of civilians.

We welcome the decision of the Libyan authorities to
close three detention centres, but it is important that the
closures be implemented gradually and deliberately and
that those set free are supported by the Libyan authorities
and international humanitarian organizations.

Lastly, I want to especially thank Ms. Mohamed
for her very informative briefing about the situation of
women in Libya today. Civil society plays an important
role in many areas and aspects - in reporting crimes,

protecting women, building supportive networks and
giving women a voice. We strongly condemn sexual
violence perpetrated against migrant women and girls.
The absence of a central State authority and the lack
of accountability for crimes of sexual and gender-
based violence are alarming and contribute to general
insecurity and a climate of fear.

The abduction of House of Representative
lawmaker Siham Sergewa is a case in point. It shows
how dangerous it is for women to participate in the
political process in Libya these days in a climate of
reprisals against women who speak out or get involved
in political and social activities. We need to see her swift
return so that her voice can be heard. Her case is a stark
reminder that the involvement of women in political
processes and peacebuilding is absolutely critical.

