Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): First of all, I
should like to convey to the Council, and to you
particularly, Mr. President, our great appreciation for
having convened this meeting, which was to have been
a joint briefing that included a review of the Secretary-
General's report. The fact that Angola has become such
an important subject to the United Nations caused me
to arrive slightly late: I was in the next chamber,
delivering a statement before the Economic and Social
Council, which was also discussing Angola and the
very question that Mr. Oshima brought before the
Council: the humanitarian situation.

First, I should like to reassure the Council that the
Government of Angola will take seriously the
recommendations in Mr. Oshima's briefing. The
Council will recall that it had recommended that
Mr. Oshima visit Angola only a few months ago, in
March, when it considered the very serious
humanitarian situation before the new developments in
Angola. In April, with the signing of the Memorandum
of Understanding and the Peace Accord, we saw a
different situation emerging in Angola, with the
reinforcement of the peace process, and the
implementation of the recommendations that the
Council has been making for a number of years. Let me
say that we are very encouraged by the fact that, very
soon, we shall also see a new format for the United
Nations presence in Angola. I hope that that will be a
way for us to start considering the questions of the
reconstruction of the country and the consolidation of
peace.

With regard to some of the points that have been
raised, including that of burden sharing: for the past
two years, the Government of Angola has increased the
share of the budget allocated for spending on social
programmes. Again that is a trend that must be
reinforced. As the President pointed out in his capacity
as representative of the United Kingdom, two to three
weeks' worth of Angola's oil revenue covers what is
requested in the appeal that will soon be launched.

Perhaps we need to take a look at these indicators
from a different perspective. This is an evolving
situation. It is a situation that has very much become
one that calls for a more resounding response by the
international community. Very soon - by the end of
July, I hope - the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs will launch a new appeal. In
responding to that appeal, we would like the
international community to look at Angola differently:
not as a "rich" country whose resources could cover
what is requested in two to three weeks, but as a
country that is ready to continue to increase its share in
the provision of services.

Let me say that, yes, Angola may be among the
countries where the provision of services tends to be
more expensive, owing to the need to provide those
services by air. One of the key programmes, which was
approved immediately and which is currently being
implemented, covers bridge, road and airstrip repair.
This is so because in some places one cannot use roads
due to the need for demining, which must be done in a
much more coordinated and forceful way. We are
completely determined to do just that.

I would also like to thank the Council for the
words expressed with regard to Angola's ratification of
the Ottawa Convention. Again, this points to a trend
that indicates that we are determined to look at the
landmine situation and to deal with it with the
international community, rather than continue as in the
past.

Again, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Oshima for his briefing to the Council. With
regard to the recommendations that have been made,
the Council can count on the full and determined
support of my Government.

