Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): This
meeting is being held at a very important time and
addresses pressing international issues. The African
continent is witnessing an outbreak of armed conflicts.
Recent developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Cote d'Ivoire have been characterized
by the excessive use of force, violence against civilians
and the use of arms as a means of asserting one's
presence and of achieving both political or economic
aims. Conflicts are threatening to spill over beyond
State borders, and there is a danger of their taking on a
regional dimension. For these reasons, the Council
must take a much more effective and rigorous stand
and devise new ways and means of discharging its
primary task of maintaining international peace and
security in general and in Africa in particular.

We note that, in the face of the bleak political and
humanitarian scenario in various regions of Africa, and
in the face of the suffering and worsening humanitarian
situation of tens of thousands of civilians, the efforts of
the United Nations, which represents the will of the
international community in dealing with African
conflicts, have been characterized by both successes
and failures. Hence there is a need to mobilize the
political will to assist in the efforts of the Organization,
in order to consolidate the progress achieved and to
avoid setbacks.

To be sure, the past experience of the United
Nations in settling armed conflicts and building peace
in various regions of the world, particularly in Africa,
has shown that political will is a necessary factor in
supporting efforts to settle conflicts and to increase the
effectiveness of conflict-management mechanisms.

The key condition for building and creating peace
is to ensure a political commitment at all levels -
domestic, regional and international - in an integrated
and holistic manner. Similarly, the various stakeholders
that have an interest in the future role of the United
Nations and of the Security Council in dealing with
African conflicts are asking themselves whether this
role is going to be restricted to managing conflicts, to
the maintenance or building of peace and to the
provision of humanitarian assistance to those who need
it, or if it will enable the United Nations to act
effectively in order to prevent and contain conflicts
before they break out and before they have claimed
victims and displaced civilian populations?

In this respect, Egypt believes that a number of
the conflicts that have recently broken out in Africa
could have been avoided, or at least contained much
earlier.

As a result, one of the crucial challenges for the
future role of the United Nations in dealing with
conflict in Africa is the establishment of an effective
early-warning system through the work of the
representative of the Secretary-General and the offices
of the United Nations in Africa, under the guidance of
the Security Council, in cooperation and coordination
with the secretariat of the African Union and regional
organizations and actors concerned.

The international community must manage
conflicts in Africa by dealing with them in a holistic
fashion, encompassing all their political, social and
economic aspects. Egypt believes that the role of the
United Nations in conflict management in Africa faces
a considerable challenge. There is a lack of donor
commitment and a failure to meet peace-building
commitments in countries emerging from conflict. As
well, there is, in the countries concerned, a delay
between the implementation of United Nations security
policies and the establishment of social and economic
infrastructures, in particular the implementation of
institution-building programmes; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes; and
programmes for demining and for prosecuting war
crimes among others.

There is no doubt that effective coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as with the regional actors and organizations in
Africa, also requires ongoing financial assistance so
that those actors and institutions can carry out their
difficult peacekeeping duties in the various regions and
countries of Africa.

Egypt notes that the Security Council is
attempting to use a regional focus in responding to
conflicts in Africa; that is thoroughly appropriate. That
tendency has been reflected in Council debates,
particularly on the conflicts in Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia in West Africa, and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi in Central Africa. A regional
focus for conflicts in Africa contributes to containing
those conflicts, limiting their negative impact and
enhancing the effective action of the United Nations.

Egypt also welcomes the Council's intention to
send two missions to West Africa and Central Africa,
in June 2003. That initiative will enable the Council to
meet the following goals. First, the Council will be
able to reaffirm the international community's
commitment to finding balanced, lasting solutions to
conflicts in the two regions. Secondly, the Council will
be able to explore the realities and developments of the
situation, as well as the extent of the people's suffering
due to armed conflict. Thirdly, the Council will be able
to identify the genuine needs of the United Nations for
an effective presence on the ground in areas of conflict.
Fourthly, the Council can assess the effectiveness of
Council policies and resolutions on conflicts in West
and Central Africa.

We hope that the two missions will achieve those
goals and return with a clearer, more holistic vision of
how the United Nations should deal with conflict in
Africa in the future. We also hope that the results of
those missions will be followed by the strengthening of
United Nations mechanisms for preserving and
promoting international peace and security.

