Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing.

We join our colleagues from France in welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali.

At the outset, I wish to highlight the political
progress made in Mali. We note with some hope that
the consolidation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is moving ahead with essential
steps that will without doubt also encourage the
Security Council, the international community and, of
course, the Malian people and Government to pursue
their efforts in favour of peace and lasting stability in
that brotherly country.

In that regard, we note the definitive cessation
of hostilities between the armed groups through the
signature of the document of commitments, which
provides for a resumption of dialogue towards the
full implementation of the peace and reconciliation
agreement and an increase in confidence-building
measures for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the fighters. Furthermore, we note the
latest meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee
in Bamako, which took place early last week and at
which the parties agreed a revised, prioritized schedule
for the implementation of the pending provisions of the
peace and reconciliation agreement, to be undertaken
by the end of March. We consider these commitments
to be an important initiative that must be secured in a
decisive way. We welcome the efforts of the Government
and the President of the Republic of Mali to achieve
the definitive cessation of hostilities through national
plans and the taking of fundamental policy measures to
achieve peace and stability in their country.

It is important to reiterate and recognize that the
impact of the Libyan conflict on the security situation
in the region is a direct consequence of interventionist
practices and policies of regime change that have had a
collateral effect in the Sahel, engendering a rise in chaos
and terrorism, with regrettable results that continue to
reverberate to this day.

We view with concern that asymmetric terrorist
attacks perpetrated with small arms and improvised
explosive devices continue to threaten the integrity
and life of the civilian population, the Malian security
forces, State authorities and the members of MINUSMA,
not to mention the fact that they have propagated
and entrenched the presence and consequences of
transnational crime in the subregion.

We therefore consider it necessary to highlight
and recognize the tasks undertaken by the personnel
of the MINUSMA, which has stepped up its work in
for the final implementation of the peace agreement
by monitoring and facilitating the political dialogue
through mediation and good offices, in coordination
with the Malian Government. We commend the
activities of the Mission in the provision of technical,
logistical and security advice for the preparation of
future electoral processes in Mali. Furthermore, we
attach importance to the signing of the memorandum
of understanding with the Malian Government,
which will offer support to the armed forces in the
areas of operations, intelligence, medical evacuation,
the elimination and handling of explosive artifacts,
demining and the protection of civilians.

However, despite all the efforts carried out by the
Mission, we are concerned about the ongoing lack of
material, logistical and technological capabilities that
would allow it to efficiently and effectively fulfil its
mandate in a volatile and asymmetric environment.

On the other hand, the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate due to violent terrorist attacks,
with their collateral and very grave effects, which
have increased the number of internally displaced and
refugees in border countries. Another collateral effect
we would note is food insecurity, which keeps hundreds
of thousands of people at risk, among them more
than 10,000 children suffering severe malnutrition.
Vulnerability remains highest among minors, who are
marginalized and deprived of their fundamental rights,
including to education, due to the closure of hundreds
of schools as a result of terrorist threats.

In that respect, it is clear that the security situation
in Mali and the Sahel still presents great challenges.
Bolivia highlights the essential efforts carried out by
the regional and subregional organizations, led by the
African Union, in cooperation and coordination with the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which we
consider to be critical to the fight against transnational
criminal groups and to providing broader and better
security conditions to the civilian population.

To conclude, we urge the international community
in general to pursue its efforts to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Mali. We believe that support
for the Malian Government is the fundamental pillar
that should motivate us to achieve definitive peace,
in strict respect for and dedication to its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

