The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

Peru welcomes the holding of today's quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his important briefing.

Peru is deeply concerned about increasing
instability in the region and the escalating violence
observed over the past few weeks in the Gaza Strip,
which has left many dead and wounded. We deplore
the most recent wave of escalating violence and extend
our deepest sympathy. In line with the remarks of
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, we believe that an
independent and transparent investigation is required
in order to determine those responsible for the most
recent tragedy.

Peru recognizes the freedom of expression and
association of the Palestinian people and underscores
that all protests must be peaceful in order to prevent
further escalation. Peru also recognizes Israel's
right to respond to acts that may pose a threat to its
security and underscores that the right to legitimate
defence must be exercised in line with the principles of
proportionality, precaution and legality. We believe that
the violence witnessed over the past few weeks again
demonstrates the urgent need to address its root causes,
in particular with regard to the gradual deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza. In that regard,
we welcome the generous support provided through
various regional initiatives that support the urgent
proposal to provide stable and predictable funding
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

Peru also considers it urgent that the Israeli and
Palestinian sides, with the support of the international
community, resume negotiations towards a two-State
solution, with secure and mutually recognized borders.
We therefore once again express our concern over
settlement practices, demolitions and evictions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including legislative
initiatives that contravene resolution 2334 (2016). We
recall that such practices run contrary to international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the State of Palestine and undermine the chances of
achieving a two-State solution.

We would like to conclude by encouraging
the political, religious and social authorities and
leaders of both Palestine and Israel to always act
with responsibility, prudence and moderation, and to
encourage the resumption of a reasonable dialogue that
will allow their respective peoples to move towards
sustainable peace. We believe that this would be
particularly important in the current context of growing
instability in the Middle East, which is manifested with
particular gravity in the conflicts and humanitarian
crises in Syria and Yemen, among other instances of
regional tension.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
wish to inform all concerned that we will be carrying
on this open debate right through the lunch hour, as we
have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.

