Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the delegation of
the United States of America on its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. We wish you, Madam, every success. We
appreciate the work of the United Kingdom delegation
and its effective presidency of the Council during the
month of March. I thank Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), for
his valuable briefing.

I would like to take this opportunity to offer the
delegation of the Russian Federation our condolences
and most vehement condemnation of the cowardly
act of terrorism that claimed the lives of innocent
civilians. We stand ready to support the Government
and the people of the Russian Federation during this
difficult time.

Over the past month, the situation on the ground in
Darfur has seen major improvement, and security has
improved. Our delegation has repeatedly stressed that
the Security Council should change the way it addresses
situation in Darfur to reflect those developments on the
ground. We should therefore focus on addressing the
root causes of the conflict and seriously seek a final
political settlement to the situation in the region that
would ensure the humane and voluntary return of
millions of internally displaced persons.

UNAMID has made outstanding efforts to establish
peace in the region over the course of the years-long
conflict. However, the Mission should not remain
indefinitely without a deadline for the modification or
termination of its mandate. That is impractical. We must
achieve the formulation of a clear exit strategy for the
Mission that corresponds with the improvement of the
situation on the ground and the relative calm in Darfur.
The Mission should focus on peacebuilding activities.
In that regard, we reaffirm the role of the joint working
group and the Tripartite Coordination Mechanism on
Darfur as a main framework to explore the practical
aspects of the exit strategy. At the same time, the
improvement in the situation on the ground does not
mean that challenges do not remain in the region.

Intercommunal violence and criminality, which are
directly linked to the root causes of the conflict, must
end. There must be reconciliation and the establishment
of structures and institutions responsible for natural
resources, as well as governance, economic and social
development, the rule of law and the judicial system.
UNAMID should focus on developing the region and
rebuilding its institutions in cooperation with the
United Nations country team.

On the political level, the necessary political
support must be extended to the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel chaired by former President
Mbeki. Support must be given to the regional mediation
efforts of the Justice and Equality Movement and the
Sudan Liberation Army. The different channels of
negotiation need to be coordinated so as to avoid
any duplication or conflict in carrying out its work
and optimize progress in that regard. Moreover, it is
dangerous for the international community to overlook
the intransigeance of a number of armed opposition
factions that refuse to join the peace process, through
refusing to sign the road map - in particular, the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction. The
Council must therefore shoulder its responsibility and
seriously consider taking action against the leaders of
the armed groups that are obstructing the political path
and continue to refuse to join the political process.

In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms its support
for UNAMID and the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, to bring
peace to Darfur.

