Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank this morning's briefers,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, from Jerusalem, and
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for the clarity of their briefings,
which highlight once again the alarming situation
on the ground. It continues to be characterized by
the pursuit of settlements and violence in one of the
most difficult humanitarian situations, particularly in
Gaza, all against the backdrop of the deadlock in the
political process.

Just one month ago, in this Chamber, the Secretary-
General indicated (see S/PV.7774) that, unfortunately,
23 years after the signing of the Oslo Accords, the
reality on the ground in the Middle East resembled
a one-State solution more closely than the two-
State solution that we, the Security Council and the
international community, are pursuing.

The Council has regularly considered the
intensification and acceleration of settlement-building,
especially during this past year. Aside from being
illegal, it represents the main obstacle to the two-State
solution. Nonetheless, the last Council resolution on
the issue dates back to 2009, despite an increasingly
untenable situation on the ground. The pursuit of
settlements is ongoing, as confirmed by the figures and
statistics we heard this morning.

The demolition of houses and structures, as well
as administrative restrictions regarding the issuance
of construction permits to Palestinians - primarily in
Area C, which is completely segmented - resembles a
policy of fait accompli. According to the Quartet report
issued on 1 July 2016 (S/2016/595, annex), from 2009
to 2013, only 34 of 2,000 Palestinian applications were
approved. In 2014, only one was granted, and none in
2015. According to the same report, since the signing
of the Oslo Accords in 1993, over 570,000 Israelis
have settled in Area C in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.

At the Security Council's Arria Formula meeting
on 14 October, credible presentations were made
regarding the rapid and ongoing growth of settlements,
including by Israeli organizations that corroborate that
trend. Fortunately, while warning about the danger the
expansion of the settlements poses both to the two-
State solution and the security of Israel, the panellists
also showed that practical solutions are still possible.
They also called on the Council to take urgent action to
end the settlements, which are contrary to international
law and Security Council resolutions.

As for the humanitarian situation - which is
catastrrophic, particularly in Gaza - in the view of the
Senegalese delegation, it is a time bomb, with real risks
of increased radicalization and sectarianism. Therefore,
Senegal wants that this issue to be permanently included
in the briefings of the Security Council.

Beyond mere humanitarian assistance, we must
also address the recovery of the Palestinian economy.
It is in a difficult situation, primarily as a result of the
occupation, but also due to a decrease in assistance from
international partners and to the fact that the occupying
Power is withholding taxes due to the Palestinian State.

In that connection, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, in its annual report on the
costs ofoccupation, highlighted the economic stagnation
of the occupied territories of Palestine. According to
the report, 1.1 million people living in the West Bank
and 1.3 million in Gaza are in need of humanitarian
assistance, while the mortality rate has surged from 12
per thousand in 2012 to 50 per thousand today - an
untenable situation, as we look towards 2020.

Another illustration of the cost of the occupation is
the drastic decline of role of agriculture and industry
in the Palestinian economy, which has fallen from
37 per cent in 1975 to 18 per cent in 2014. In those
circumstances, it would be impossible for Palestine to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, despite all
governance efforts.

While we reiterate our reproach of hatred,
violence and terrorism, whomsoever the perpetrators
and whatever the motivations, Senegal must recall
that it is the lack of political prospects that breeds
extremists on both sides. Administrative detentions,
collective punishments, disproportionate use of force
and the firing of missiles, besides being violations of
international law and human rights, fuel the feelings of
humiliation of Palestinians who have been living under
occupation for 50 years.

What we need, as the Secretary-General stated so
eloquently, are courageous political initiatives on both
sides that give peace a real chance, based on a clear
political goal leading to a final settlement that leaves
no room for violence or terrorism. That is why Senegal
once again calls for an end to colonization and the
activities related to it with the aim of beginning good-
faith discussions according to an agreed-on timetable
with specific goals leading to a lasting peace that
addresses Israel's security needs and Palestinians'
legitimate aspirations to the status of a sovereign State
with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the pre-
1967 borders.

In that regard, I reiterate Senegal's hope that
despite being postponed, Palestine's local elections
will be held throughout its territory and pave the way
for reconciliation between the political actors and for
forming a Government of national unity. My delegation
reiterates its active solidarity with the Palestinian people
and thereby reaffirms its support for the initiative that
aims to make 2017 the year when we see an end to 50
years of occupation.

We also encourage the Quartet in its efforts and
reiterate our belief that in assuming its responsibility,
both moral and legal, the Security Council will have the
means to play its part as a guarantor of international
peace and security with the aim of reaching a lasting
solution to this conflict. It is in that spirit that we
have taken note of the conclusions of the Quartet
meeting held here in September on the margins of the
high-level segment of the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, especially its recommendation on
improving coordination between the various initiatives
under way, such as the French initiative, so admirably
outlined by our colleague Mr. Delattre, aimed at
convening an international conference for relaunching
the process - because, and I am borrowing his words,
the status quo is aggression.

For its part, Senegal will also continue to encourage
the efforts of the Arab Group and the Russian
Federation. In our capacity as Chair of the United
Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, we will continue to
work to achieve a final settlement through dialogue
and consultation that ensures Israel's security as well
as the Palestinian people's full and complete exercise
of their inalienable right to an independent and viable
Palestinian State.

