Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending Uruguay for convening this open debate
one year after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016).
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2017/414) and his briefing this morning. We are
grateful to him and all other briefers for sharing their
thoughts on the theme of our debate today.

In our consideration of various conflict situations
around the world here in the Council, there have been
concerns about the grave violation of international
humanitarian law committed by parties to armed
conflict. This has to do with the means and methods
of combat used by conflicting parties, particularly
widespread and indiscriminate attacks against civilian
populations. We are also alarmed by reports of continued
attacks on civilian objects, such as schools and hospitals,
the denial of access for humanitarian actors operating in
accordance with international humanitarian principles,
as well as attacks, the threat of attacks and obstruction
hindering humanitarian assistance, including health-
care services and personnel.

Violence against health care in armed conflict
has devastating short- and long-term consequences
for affected communities, health-care facilities and
thousands of health-care staff and volunteers who
provide assistance. Such reports in various conflict
situations result in forced displacement, poverty and
lack of access to basic services. Of particular concern
to us is, of course, the impact on civilian populations,
including the untold suffering and loss of life, the
displacement of people internally and across borders,
as well as the weakening of the capacity of health-care
systems to provide the necessary care to the civilian
population, as highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his report.

Ethiopia welcomes the three protection priorities
identified by the Secretary-General in his report,
which are aimed at strengthening compliance with
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, the protection of humanitarian and
medical missions, and the prioritization of civilian
protection in United Nations peace operations, as well
as at preventing forced displacement and at finding
durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced
persons. We also note his vision for strengthening the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. In that regard,
we would like to make the following five points.

First, Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to an armed conflict, especially where that law
relates to the means and methods of combat, which
includes the protection of civilians against the effects
of hostilities involving a deliberate or accidental attack.
We would encourage the further exploration of the
impact of the risks associated with the proliferation of
weapons ofmass destruction in violation ofinternational
humanitarian law, which again relates to the means of
warfare used by parties to an armed conflict and their
possible devastating impact on civilians.

Secondly, while concurring with the importance
of accountability in strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law, strengthening or
establishing national and regional accountability
mechanisms should be encouraged.

Thirdly, as one of the largest refugee-hosting
countries, Ethiopia is encouraged by the inclusion of
forced displacement as one of the key priority areas
for action by the Secretary-General in his report. We
also appreciate his recognition of the indispensable
role of United Nations peace operations in protecting
civilians. We want, however, to emphasize that United
Nations peace operations should be provided, from
the beginning, with the necessary resources and
capabilities, including the equipment and training
needed to fully implement their mandates. As much as
possible, that should be coupled with the capacity to
address the needs of the victims of serious violations
and the capacity to respond to the humanitarian needs
of the civilian population, particularly internally
displaced persons. The capacity to find durable
solutions to assist internally displaced persons should
be further strengthened. Such capacity would enable us
to respond to the protection needs of civilians, while
preventing any further displacement and reducing their
vulnerability to the impact of armed conflict.

Fourthly, the Council should look closely at the
conclusions reached by the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict with regard to the various country
situations involving children and armed conflict. It
would also be important for the Security Council to
make greater use of the informal expert groups relating
to the protection of civilians so as to track serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

Finally, as one of the major troop-contributing
countries and a signatory to the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians, I would like to conclude
by reiterating the firm commitment of Ethiopia to the
protection of civilians. We will continue to work with
all of the relevant actors in that regard.

