Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I
welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and His Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them
for their statements.

Luxembourg congratulates the Kosovo authorities
on the successful conduct of parliamentary elections
in Kosovo on 8 June. The elections were conducted
peacefully throughout Kosovo, including in the four
northern municipalities with a Serb majority, in a
unified legal framework. The election turnout was
generally satisfactory and many Kosovo Serbs chose to
go to the polls. We welcome Serbia's constructive role
in encouraging that democratic choice.

This month, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
was able to clarify a number of issues raised following
the elections. We now encourage the political leaders
of Kosovo to show a spirit of compromise in order to
swiftly form a new Government supported by a stable
majority in Parliament.

It is encouraging to see that the situation in Kosovo
remained calm and stable during the period covered by
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/558).
That said, we strongly condemn the fatal shooting that
claimed the life of a Serbian police officer yesterday
morning near the Serbian town of Merdare, near the
Kosovo border. The circumstances of the attack must
be investigated and those responsible must be brought
to justice. During the months of June and July, tensions
arose around a so-called peace park that was set up on

the bridge of Mitrovica, blocking movement between
the two parts of the city. We encourage the initiatives
under way to address the issue by consensus.

We welcome the efforts made by Kosovo to
strengthen the rule of law, with the support of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX). We welcome the progress made by the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force concerning
allegations contained in the report on inhumane
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo, published in January 2011 by the
Council of Europe. We thank the Chief Prosecutor,
Mr. Clint Williamson, and his team for their hard work,
which was summarized in a presentation on 29 July.
We encourage Kosovo institutions to cooperate with
the European Union in the establishment next year of
a special tribunal to prosecute the perpetrators of the
crimes committed, while allowing those who have been
falsely accused to prove their innocence. Justice system
can thereby become an integral part ofthe reconciliation
process between Serbs and Kosovars.

In recent months, Serbia and Kosovo have taken
further steps on the path to European integration.
Negotiations with Serbia onjoining the European Union
are ongoing and, as has been noted, Kosovo has just
initialled a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union. As Serbia and Kosovo
advance in that direction, there will be less need for
United Nations involvement. We therefore call on the
United Nations to adjust its presence to foster lasting
stability in Kosovo, in line with the recent efforts of the
European Union in restructuring EULEX. We welcome
the Serbian Government's statement of unwavering
commitment to the normalization of relations with
Pristina under the auspices of the EU-facilitated
dialogue. We are confident that the new Government of
Kosovo, once established, will do the same to foster a
new political impetus in the normalization of relations.

In conclusion, Luxembourg takes this opportunity
to encourage the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo to
continue to exercise the wisdom, commitment and
courage needed to achieve successful reconciliation
between their countries and fulfil their common
European aspirations.

