Ms. Ruiz Cerutti (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement by paying a sincere
and well-deserved homage to Mrs. Carmen Argibay, on
behalf of my country, Argentina, and of all the women
and men who are fighting to eradicate violence of any
kind committed against women in times of peace and
in conflict situations. Mrs. Argibay passed away on
10 May 2014. She had been a judge on my country's
Supreme Court since 2005. She was the first women
in the democratic history of Argentina to be appointed
to the highest court ofjustice of our land. One of her
first acts was to create a women's office in that court,
so that gender-based crimes would not be invisible or
enjoy impunity. She introduced into our country and
our judicial system something that had been sown at
the international level. In June 2001, she was appointed
by the General Assembly as an ad-litem judge in
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). There, she was a pioneer in getting

sexual Violence committed against women classified as
an international crime, as subsequently recognized in
the Rome Statute. After she was arrested on 24 March
1976 by the civil-military dictatorship, she worked to
ensure that the suffering ofthe victims and their right to
truth, justice and reparations would never be forgotten.
I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to pay tribute to her.

I would like to welcome, as always, the presence of
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Jallow
and Brammertz. I also welcome the presence of Judge
Meron in his capacity as President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

I take this opportunity to recognize Chile for
its leadership of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

After two decades of work, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are at the stage
of completing their work, during which, according to
the completion strategy adopted by the Council, they
must complete their judicial work in accordance with
the agreed deadlines by transferring cases and archives
to the Residual Mechanism.

Argentina would like to recognize the reported
progress in the work of the Tribunals and the way in
which the Mechanism has begun its work.

As regards the ICTY, we note that court proceedings
have been concluded for 141 of the 161 individuals
charged and that there are no more cases of fugitives.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of
the nine cases that are pending. Of those, some will
continue after the end of 2014. In that regard, it is
imperative to take into account the circumstances
that might influence the processing times for those
cases. One is the remarkable challenge of the loss of or
difficulty in retaining qualified staff at this stage prior
to the final completion of the Tribunal's functions. We
believe that, while resolution 1966 (2010) may have set
ideal dates for the transfer of functions to the Residual
Mechanism, the judicial function may, in itself, pose
challenges owing to the complexity of the cases and the
transitional situation that we are in. Therefore, just as it
supported the call for the election of an additionaljudge
for the Tribunal to be held expeditiously, Argentina will
support the Security Council's renewal of the mandate
of the judges and the Prosecutor of the ICTY.

However, my country also hopes the Council will
reconsider measures that have already been requested
by the Court and that the General Assembly will then
consider the issue in its Fifth Committee. For example,
the Court requested the establishment of a working
group at the United Nations to provide opportunities
to absorb staff from the Tribunal and the granting of
a special subsidy to prevent the early departure of
such staff, who fear that their posts will be eliminated.
Solutions must be provided and we are encouraged that
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will be considering that issue.

We also appreciate the information provided by
the ICTR with regard to the implementation of its
completion strategy. The Tribunal has concluded
its substantive work with respect to the entirety of
the 93 accused, having concluded or being about to
conclude the trials and appeals as expected. That leaves
only the appeal in the Butare case to be concluded in
2015.

We recognize the apprehension of fugitives from the
ICTR as a priority. The fact that nine ICTR defendants
are still at large is not encouraging. Of those, three
are still under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism and
the Mechanism is in a position to try those individuals
once they are arrested. However, arresting the
fugitives - those who are under the jurisdiction of the
Mechanism and those who have been transferred to the
jurisdiction of Rwanda - will require the cooperation
of all States pursuant to the obligations set forth in
resolution 955 (1994).

I want to underscore the activities of both Tribunals
in cooperating in areas of training in investigative and
trial skills, including in sexual, sexist and gender-based
violence.

With regard to the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
underscores that both the subdivisions of Arusha and
The Hague are operating and will be able to fully
operate when both Tribunals close. We would like
to also express our appreciation to the Government
of Tanzania for supporting the Mechanism through
the conclusion of the headquarters agreement, which
recently entered into force, as well for the facilities
provided for building the headquarters. I also want to
recognize the support of the Netherlands for The Hague
branch.

The international community should continue
supporting the Tribunals' work - not only its judicial
activities, but also its activities in the lives of those
directly affected by that justice system. An important

aspect is that of reparations for Victims. We welcome
the conclusion of a memorandum of understanding with
the International Organization for Migration to consider
how to address the issue of reparations for victims of
the Rwandan genocide. In that regard, the involvement
of associations of victims and survivors, civil society
and the Rwandan Government is encouraging.

On the other hand, there are also those who have
been acquitted of their charges or who have served the
sentences handed down by the Tribunal. Finding a State
in which to relocate those people and providing them
with documentation to fully enjoy civilian life and
exercise their rights is a task that the Tribunal has been
actively focused on. Although some people have been
relocated, for others relocation has been very difficult.
Argentina recognizes the importance of work of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
which continues to look at that issue to support those
efforts. It is also important for the Security Council to
encourage all Members of the Organization to do the
same.

Commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda and the creation of the ICTR, it is
high time that the international community recognize
the progress made in the fight against impunity that
the ICTR and the ICTY have represented with their
important doctrinal contributions to international law,
in particular to international humanitarian law, and the
role and importance of international criminal justice.
Undeniably, the legacy of both ad hoc Tribunals in
affirming the international community's awareness
that there is no lasting peace without justice has been
definitively consolidated with the establishment of
a permanent international criminal tribunal - the
International Criminal Court - which is today the
centrepiece of the international community's criminal
justice system as a whole. The system requires the
commitment of all States, notjust the States parties, as
well as the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would once again like to pay tribute
to the Judges, Prosecutors and staff of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

