Mr. Li Boadong (China) (spoke in Chinese): Ithank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing. I
have listened very carefully to statements by the four
journalists.

During armed conflicts, journalists and media
professionals represent a very distinct group of people.
They are vulnerable civilians on the front lines of
conflict, providing first-hand and timely information
from the field. They often face injury, kidnapping and
even death, taking enormous risks, including with
their lives. China condemns all acts of violence against
journalists in armed conflict and calls on parties to
conflict to stop deliberate attacks against journalists
and to support the effective measures adopted by the
international community to protect journalists during
armed conflict. I should like to make four observations
in that respect.

First, the protection of journalists in armed
conflict is an important part of the protection of
civilians undertaken by the international community.
Like civilians, journalists are not involved directly in
hostilities and as such they should enjoy the protection
of international humanitarian law. The relevant
resolutions and presidential statements adopted by
the Council have established the basic principles and
frameworks for the protection of journalists in armed
conflict. The full implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council is an effective way
for the international community to protect journalists
in wartime.

Secondly, the countries concerned should assume
the primary responsibility for the protection of
journalists in conflicts. The Governments of those
countries have the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians on their territories, including journalists. By
protecting journalists in conflict, the international
community must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned. At the same time,
arties to the conflict should fulfil their obligations
under the Geneva Conventions and do their best to
prevent and stop journalists from being harmed. They
should also investigate and punish the perpetrators
who have harmed journalists and violated international
humanitarian law. The judicial systems of the countries
concerned should play their full role in promoting the
protection of journalists.

Thirdly, all agencies and organs of the United
Nations should enhance their coordination and
cooperation in jointly promoting the protection of
journalists in conflict. China appreciates the efforts
of UNESCO, the Human Rights Council and other
agencies to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests
of journalists and to implement the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the
Issue of Impunity. We hope that in fulfilling their
respective functions, all United Nations agencies will
work in synergy to avoid duplication and improve
efficiency. Media professionals should also abide by
their professional code of conduct and the principle of
impartiality and objectivity in their coverage, and avoid
siding with one party and even farming the violence.

Fourthly, with a View to the peaceful resolution
of conflict, the Security Council should adopt an
integrated conflict-prevention and peacebuilding
strategy that enhances the protection of civilians,
including journalists. The Council shoulders the
weighty responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. People around the globe have
high expectations of this organ. From my own three
years of experience in the Council, I feel deeply that
it should abide by the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter; be steadfast in promoting
cooperation, achieving common security and lasting
peace; and provide civilians with the best and most
effective protection. On the basis of these principles,
China will become more deeply involved in the work
of the Council in peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We will work with other Member
States in enabling the Council to play a greater role in
maintaining international peace and security.

