Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the situation in Darfur. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/8l2),
issued on 27 September, provides updates on the main
developments in the situation. I should therefore like to
focus today on some of the most salient points in the
report and on several important events that have taken
place in the past week.

First, with respect to the security situation, we
must acknowledge that the situation in the Jebel Marra
region of Central Darfur remains volatile. The fighting
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid that took place from
January to May has somewhat abated in intensity but
has never stopped altogether. Since June, there have
been new skirmishes and frequent aerial bombardments
in the area. There is a sense that the security situation
deteriorated further as of 17 September, when there
were reports of heavy fighting around Gulo and Guldo,
situated north-east of Nertiti in Central Darfur. Other
clashes have also occurred in western Jebel Marra, in
which at least nine Villages have been attacked.

Unfortunately, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is not in a
position to confirm these reports or to evaluate the
military situation with any precision because, I am
compelled to reiterate, the Government of the Sudan
continues to impose access restrictions. However, we
have our ears to the ground, and as the recent clashes
seem to demonstrate, since the Sudanese Government
launched its offensive in January its forces have only
partially succeeded in achieving their objective of
dislodging the fighters of the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid from their operational bases in the
foothills of Jebel Marra. Continued fighting in recent
weeks is clearly worrisome, given the fact that the dry
season, which has just begun, is usually the optimal
time for large-scale military operations.

Moreover, we have received limited and conflicting
information on the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid. The movement continues to deny having lost
ground and suffered losses in Jebel Marra, while the
Government maintains that the entire region is under
the control of regular forces and that the recent rebel
attacks were really only desperate attempts to give the
illusion that the Abdul Wahid movement had survived
politically and militarily.

(spoke in English)

The security situation in other parts of Darfur
remained calm but with a sporadic seasonal spike in
violence between pastoralists and farmers over the use
and management of water and grazing land. Outbreaks
of intercommunal and intracommunal violence
occurred in some hotspot areas, amid a reduction in
the number of large-scale conflicts. Local authorities
continued to take measures to contain the situation
by facilitating peace agreements and ensuring the
presence of Government forces in the more sensitive
areas. Khartoum also announced a strategy to address
intercommunal conflicts and curb criminality by,
among other measures, the regulation and control of
weapons. That certainly is encouraging recognition of
the seriousness of the situation.

But, beyond those measures, complex challenges
in terms of governance and development still need to
be addressed in order to try to restore the social fabric
and peaceful coexistence among communities in a
region crippled by over a decade of conflict. UNAMID
continues to support central and local Government
initiatives to restore peace and stability in communities.
Of course, the Mission remains focused on the core
objective given by the Council - to protect civilians.
I can only call on the Government of the Sudan and
on the international community to work closely, and in
good cooperation, to address all these challenges.

Turning to the humanitarian angle, the impact of
the conflict remains significant. Since the resumption
of the fighting, as I mentioned earlier, in G010 and
Guldo on 17 September, humanitarian agencies
estimate that about 5,500 newly displaced people,
mainly women and children, have arrived in the Nertiti-
north camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
although community leaders in the camps report higher
numbers f of up to 12,500 people. There are further
reports of an additional 4,000 people having arrived
in Guldo town. At this stage, none of the reported
numbers can be verified. Local authorities have issued
instructions to humanitarian agencies that they are to
limit their activities only to old established caseloads,
and should not verify, register or share information
pertaining to newly arrived IDPs. Moreover,
international non-governmental organizations have
reported that all missions between Nertiti and Guldo
have been stopped until further notice.

Despite those access and reporting restrictions,
UNAMID continues to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance through logistical support and
protection, while engaging the parties to immediately
cease hostilities and the Government to allow
immediate, full and unhindered access conflict areas
in Jebel Marra.

Turn to the political situation, as members will
recall, the road map agreement was signed at Addis
Ababa on 8 August by the members of the Sudan Call.
The African Union High-level Implementation Panel
then convened talks between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/
North, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi. Those
talks were held from 9 to 14 August to consider draft
agreements on humanitarian access and a cessation of
hostilities in both Darfur the two Areas. Both sets of
talks were suspended until further notice following
persistent disagreements between the parties.

In the face of that impasse, the High-level
Implementation Panel, the Special Envoy and UNAMID
continued their engagement with the parties to try to
bridge their differences. At the beginning of September,
UNAMID held consultations with the leaders of the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement/North, the JEM
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi in
Kampala. All restated their areas of contention in the
talks and indicated that, if necessary flexibility were
demonstrated by both parties on two issues - on the
release ofprisoners ofwar and on the mechanism for the
oversight of humanitarian assistance - an agreement
could be reached.

The Government and the Darfur armed movements,
together with UNAMID, are expected to travel to Doha
for engagement with the Government of Qatar on the
way forward. The High-level Implementation Panel also
held a new round of informal consultations in Addis
Ababa last week end. Regrettably, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid remains outside of the negotiation
process, and no consultations with its leadership have
taken place since the last meeting with the UNAMID
Joint Special Representative, which took place last July
in Paris.

Meanwhile on the ground in Darfur, on
7 September, President Al-Bashir hosted the Presidents
of Chad and the Central African Republic and the
Emir of Qatar at a ceremony to mark the end of the
Darfur Regional Authority (DRA). On that occasion, he
announced a new era of peace and stability for Darfur.
And, on 21 September, the President issued a decree
formally dissolving the Darfur Regional Authority and
all bodies established under the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, with a few exceptions. On the same
day, and as earlier promised by President Al-Bashir, the
Government released 21 children it claimed had been
captured in clashes with the JEM. in 2015.

With regard to the National Dialogue, on
26 September, President Al-Bashir officially received
the recommendations of the National Dialogue
Conference, which he pledged to implement following
its conclusion on 10 October. As political disagreements
remain over that end date, and as the Sudan Call - as
it calls itself- maintains its rejection of the National
Dialogue Conference, the political process remains
seriously constrained.

I am, however, pleased to report a relative
improvement in the issuance of Visas to UNAMID
personnel and the processing of ration containers for
our troops. However, a significant amount of United
Nations and contingent-owned equipment remains at
Port Sudan, which continues to hamper the operational
effectiveness of the Mission. During my most recent
meetings with officials ofthe Government ofthe Sudan,
they promised that measures would be taken to address
bureaucratic and procedural impediments and to ensure
the release of those shipments.

On 17 October, the African Union, the United
Nations and the Government of the Sudan will resume
their engagement on the exit strategy based on the
parameters set by the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. A critical step in that
process will be the development of agreed criteria for
gauging progress towards the UNAMID benchmarks
agreed upon following the last convening of the Joint
Working Group, in May.

Ending the protracted suffering of the civilian
population in Darfur must remain the main priority of
the international community. In that context, we are
aware of the allegations regarding the use of chemical
weapons against civilians by Government of the Sudan
forces in Jebel Marra, as presented in the Amnesty
International report that was released on 29 September.
We have not come across any evidence regarding the
use of chemical weapons in the Jebel Marra. At the
same time, as Council members know, the Government
of the Sudan has consistently denied any access by
UNAMID to conflict areas in the Jebel Marra, which
has clearly prevented the mission from being able to
monitor effectively and report on the impact of the
fighting.

I have to note further that an initial assessment
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has stated that without further
information or evidence being made available, it is
not possible at this stage for it to draw any conclusions
based on the content of the Amnesty International
report. I would therefore encourage the Government
of the Sudan, which is party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, to extend its full cooperation to any
future OPCW investigation, as in fact the Government
in Khartoum has expressed it was ready to do in its
statements to the media following the publication of the
report, which underscores the absolute urgency of the
need for a cessation of hostilities in Darfur and a need
for the Security Council to act in unison to bring about
an end to armed conflict in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
with the signature by all the parties to the political
road map proposed by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, we have taken an important
step forward in the peace process. This now needs to
be consolidated, and the parties should from now on
implement both the letter and the spirit of the document
and undertake to resume negotiations so as to come
quickly to an accord on both the cessation of hostilities
and the modalities of humanitarian access to the
conflict zones. I would call on them to listen attentively
to the hopes of the people, hopes that are focused on
peace, stability and a somewhat better livelihood
through development. We remain convinced that the
Security Council will bring all the support needed for
the cooperative effort of the international mediators to
achieve those objectives.

