Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to commend and thank you, Mr. President,
and the Spanish presidency ofthe Council for convening
this very timely debate this morning. I also welcome
the very valuable contributions by our three briefers,
notably the Deputy Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and the Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council.

I am speaking today on behalf of Angola, Chile,
Jordan, Malaysia, New Zealand and Spain e six
countries from six different regions of the world. We
are six Security Council members that are committed to
collaboration and to working together on the set ofissues
before us today, including my own country as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions of the Security Council.
We share a common wish to make the working methods
of the Council and the Council's interactions with other
organs of the United Nations, as stated this morning,
more effective, so as to better reflect contemporary
realities.

This annual open debate is about much more than
just the working methods of the Security Council. It is
about the decision-making culture and the effectiveness
of the Council. It also goes to the heart of the Council's
performance and accountability to the whole United
Nations membership and the Charter of the United
Nations. The current crises facing the United Nations
and the Council's difficulty in responding effectively to
those crises suggest the need for a new approach.

Meaningful changes are driven by practice, by
taking the initiative and leading by example as much as
by rules and procedure. While there are good ideas on
working methods contained in the President's concept
note (S/2015/793, annex) agreed to by the Council, the
dilemma is that they are couched in vague language, are
often not implemented, and some Council members even
resist implementing them. That reflects the disconnect
between the Council's working methods, this debate
and the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. The Council will find
solutions and improve its performance by adapting its
working methods in innovative ways to meet the needs
of specific cases, not as a result of the generic work
done in the Informal Working Group, although the
latter should base its future work on the common points
of action from the outcomes of this open debate.

The Council must throw offsome ofthe constrictions
that have cramped even the way it discusses matters,
let alone how it makes decisions. While consensus on
procedures is a fine goal, it should not be elevated to
the point where we have a 15-member veto, not just
in the Council itself, but also in its subsidiary bodies,
including its sanctions committees. That was never the
intention of the Charter. All Council members have a
responsibility to find solutions to improve our processes
and culture and to work at all levels of our diplomacy.
For that reason, we have fostered increased dialogue
among the Permanent Representatives on the Council's
working methods, including a monthly meeting to
discuss how we work together on the issues before us.

We also need working methods that produce
effective political focus in the Council's work. The
Council's members have to display more discipline
and restraint in the range of initiatives considered or
taken, many of which absorb valuable time and distract
us from real problem-solving and diplomacy and have
limited world impact. We also have some distance to go
in terms of focus and interactivity in order to ensure that
open debates are a useful forum for exchanging views
between the Council and the rest of the Organization.
They need to be more than a platform for States to
record national positions.

The veto may not be, strictly speaking,a working
method, but it has a significant negative impact - a
cascade effect- on the working methods ofthe Council,
where elected members are routinely excluded for
no reason other than habit. There needs to be a more
inclusive process for developing resolutions and
presidential statements. All Council members need the
opportunity to engage and contribute meaningfully. It
is a simple request, but in the current Council practice
it is the exception, not the norm.
Arguably, the very recent introduction of the
penholdership system has improved Council efficiency.
It ensures that the first drafts of most Council
products are prepared by delegations with consistent
knowledge and a long background in the issues. But it
has also diminished the opportunity for wider Council
engagement, especially by the elected members, and
has significantly increased the risk of Council products
being crafted in a way that serves only the interests of
the permanent members. In those respects, the system
cuts across the principle of collective responsibility
that underpins the Charter. We should all feel a sense
of ownership over the Council's work, and we should
not preclude others from offering their drafting ideas
for texts. Wherever possible, we want to encourage
changes to the penholdership system. That is an obvious
way both to ensure necessary continuity, by including
permanent and elected members, and to leverage their
relevant expertise, whether that be regional or through
their chairmanship of subsidiary bodies or some other
source.

As today's three briefers made clear, the Council
needs to become better at cooperating with other
United Nations and regional organs, bodies and
offices. One simple way to promote better interaction
would be for Council members to respect the role of
the presidency in organizing the Council's regular
business for the month. That should include arranging
for interactions with the Secretariat, the Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, and also with other
bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission whose
advisory and early warning capacity are of direct
importance to the Council's work. We also need to get
more serious about the supporting partnerships and the
complementary roles of the United Nations, regional
organizations and counterparts, especially the African
Union, in preventing and managing conflicts. In that
effort, it is also important to improve consultations
and coordination with troop- and police-contributing
countries, especially in relation to the development and
renewal of mandates. The knowledge and challenges
that they acquire in the field is an asset that the Council
must consider when discussing its mandates.

The process for the Secretary-General's
appointment, which includes the Council's close
cooperation with the General Assembly, will be a key
issue for all Members of the Organization over the
next year. It is not acceptable that the Council has been
slow to take up the necessary engagement between
the Presidents of the General Assembly and Security
Council on a matter of such direct importance to all
Member States. That is especially relevant given the
unequivocal call from the General Assembly, which we
have all supported, for dialogue and a more transparent
and inclusive process in the decision-making on this
specific issue.

