Mr. Labbe (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Soliz, in his
double capacity as President of the Security Council
and as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), for convening today's important
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors.

We welcome the briefings delivered by the Under-
Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the
Senior Officer from the Office of Strategy and Policy
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, Mr. Joseph Ballard.

Chile aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540.

Today's debate could not be more timely. It is
being held as a treaty is being negotiated in this very
building to prohibit weapons of mass destruction. The
most recent category of weapons of mass destruction,
which is contrary to international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, has still not been
expressly prohibited by a convention. There is no doubt
that such a convention would help to strengthen the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

One of the key components of the non-proliferation
architecture is resolution 1540 (2004), which was
unanimously adopted on 28 April 2004 and represents
a historic milestone, to which Chile was proud to
contribute at the time as a non-permanent member of the
Council. It is indeed the first resolution of the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
that established concrete measures to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery on the part of non- State actors. In that
sense, resolution 1540 (2004) is today an instrument of
prime importance that provides a specific framework
for States to combat more effectively the terrorist threat
linked to the proliferation of such weapons.

Likewise, we especially value the final document
on the 2016 comprehensive review of the status of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/2016/1038, carried out under the leadership of Spain
and which is endorsed in resolution 2325 (2016),
adopted by the Security Council on 15 December 2016.
It is important to note that current global trends
are intensifying proliferation threats. For example,
globalization and increased trade in components and
in trans-shipment, accelerating technological advances
and the facilitation of the intangible transfer of
technologies, shell companies, overseas procurement
networks and black-market distribution networks must
all be considered in developing effective measures
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and dual-use components.

Strategic controls are key to preventing important
technologies from reaching the hands of non-State
actors. Proliferation agents attack the weaknesses
of the existing control and commercial distribution
chains. That is why resolution 1540 (2004) requires
States to adopt and enforce effective measures to
establish national controls aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
related materials.

We are convinced that strengthening national
capacities, assistance and cooperation are essential to
progress in the implementation of existing measures and
in considering future actions. Therefore, Chile, together
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, organized a training course for
focal points in Latin America and the Caribbean that
are responsible for its implementation, which was held
in Santiago from 24 to 28 October of last year.

The use of chemical weapons or toxic chemicals
by non-State actors is no longer just a threat, but a
worrying reality, as confirmed by the research of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
In conclusion, we hope that those results will deter
those who are determined to use chemical weapons in
the future.

