The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing on
the situation in Haiti. Overall, in spite of the country
having recently been put to the test, its Government
and people, with the active support of the international
community, have been able to progressively stabilize
the situation.

Unfortunately, the political process in Haiti
continues to be shaky. There has been rising political
rhetoric recently, which certainly has not served to
eliminate the differences between the executive branch
and Parliament. An important step in achieving stability
and moving towards democracy could be the holding
of partial parliamentary and municipal elections. We
hope that the Government will continue to work on the
process for national dialogue and hold elections this
year. The United Nations must provide all the necessary
support to Haiti's electoral process. All political forces
in the country should demonstrate the utmost calm and
restraint and resolve disputes exclusively through legal
mechanisms.

We were concerned to learn that the situation
with respect to crime in the country continues to be
troublesome. It is clear that stabilization is impossible
without putting an end to violence, ensuring that
the rights of all citizens are upheld and effectively
combating organized crime and corruption.

Without a doubt, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti plays a leading role in all ofthose areas,
as underscored in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/139). Peacekeepers have much work to do in
vigorously and dynamically assisting the Government.
In the future, Haiti must continue to be supported in
enhancing the rule of law and law enforcement so that,
in the end, security is ensured by the national forces
alone.

The social, economic and humanitarian situations
continue to be of concern. Along those lines, there
must be active participation by United Nations funds
and programmes in the rebuilding of the country,
peacebuilding activities and coordination among
donors.

It is worrisome that, in spite of large-scale
international assistance, the cholera epidemic has not
yet been eradicated. While the number of cases are
falling, they still remain numerous. In that respect,
we welcome the active and sustainable results-based
initiatives of the Secretary-General to combat that
illness.

With respect to the consolidation plan for the
Mission, we feel that the basic criteria for adjustments
to the mandate and configuration must continue to be
based on the actual security situation. That is directly
tied with the level of readiness of the National Police.
On the whole, we support the Secretary-General's
proposal to focus the mandate of the Mission on a
number of objectives that could be successfully attained
over the course of four or five years. However, we must
recognize that the announced goals and measurement
indicators are ambitious and require future discussion
among Council members.

We agree that the internal political mechanisms in
Haiti are of the utmost importance at this time. Currently,
without them, security, stability and sustainable
development cannot be achieved, and therefore no
changes can be made to the configuration of the
Mission. The current situation shows that the Haitian
Government and the international community - in
particular the United Nations - face a host of complex
challenges in resolving crucial peacebuilding issues for
the country, such as achieving national consensus and
consolidating society, including on the humanitarian
and economic fronts. The Haitian Government must
play a leading role. It bears responsibility for the
effective implementation of international assistance and
must play an active role in coordinating that assistance.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

