Mr. Vassilenko (Kazakhstan) (spoke in French):
First of all, I thank the Dutch delegation for convening
us to discuss the situation in Afghanistan. I also
express my gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto, Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi
for their respective detailed briefings.

I underscore the symbolism that this debate is
taking place on 8 March - International Women's Day.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to all women and
wish them happiness, love and prosperity.

Women play a primary role not only in prevention,
but also in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
development. We recognize the importance of the role
played by civil society, thanks to which women are
participating at an increasing level in social spheres
of every day life. We take note of the importance of a
comprehensive analysis of today's topic as seen from
a female perspective, as has been proposed by the
presidency of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

Kazakhstan commends the actions taken by the
Government of Afghanistan, namely, seeking gender
equality within public services; the adoption of a
national plan of action, which will include developing
a policy for the protection of women during crises; and
the establishment of special courts to combat violence
directed against women, as well as the adoption of a law
on eliminating violence against women and espousing
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. We thank Ambassador Saikal of Afghanistan
for his statement.

As everyone knows, this coming fall Kazakhstan
will hold a conference on the expansion of women's
rights in Afghanistan, which will cover the relevant
socioeconomic and political areas in the country;
sharing lessons learned in the area of establishing
gender equality; and implementing recommendations
concerning the expansion of women's rights in the
country. I would like to inform the Council that
Kazakhstan has taken the initiative of continuing
co-financing the education programme for Afghan
citizens, together with the European Union and other
partners. Within the framework of that education
programme, which has raised $50 million, nearly 1,000
Afghan citizens will have pursued their education
in Kazakh universities during the period from 2010
to 2021. Currently the European Union is preparing
financing for the first part of a related project, which
will be implemented together with UN-Women. Its goal
will be to provide education for female Afghan students
in Kazakhstan.

We are very concerned by violence against women
in Afghanistan as well as by the growing number of
deaths due to terrorist attacks and massive air strikes
conducted by the army. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/165), women accounted for
some 12 per cent of the overall number of victims.

We support effective formats of regional and
global cooperation as well as United Nations efforts in
Afghanistan. We welcome the solutions that have been
developed by UNAMA that are aimed at reducing the
number of victims among civilians, improving their
standard of living and developing the educational and
medical fields. We call on all countries concerned to take
part in implementing the relevant recommendations.

I should like to specify that thanks to the initiative
of Kazakhstan during its presidency of the Council,
a visit to Afghanistan was organized for members of
the Council during which meetings were held with
representatives of the Afghan Parliament and women's
organizations, chaired by the First Lady, Rula Ghani.
We should not forget that the number of terrorist attacks
continues to grow, as shown by the attacks that took
place in January and Kabul and Jalalabad, carried out
by the Taliban and Da'esh.

We welcome the second Kabul Process, in which
the Kazakh delegation participated. We believe that
we should very carefully study the idea of beginning
peace negotiations with the Taliban, as proposed by His
Excellency President Ghani. It is vital to consider the
following aspects in these negotiations: acknowledge
the Taliban as a political party, impose a ceasefire,
implement transitional confidence-building measures
that will pave the way towards elections; revise the
Constitution or introduce amendments thereinto;
address grievances and apply the law; and release certain
Taliban members from prison and remove some from
United Nations sanctions lists. Political and economic
problems as well as the security threats that Afghan is
confronting requires the constant support of countries
of the region, the international community, the United
Nations and especially of the Security Council.

Kazakhstan continues to promote a model of
sustainable development made up of three pillars.

First, concerning the link between security and
development, we are convinced that to achieve lasting
peace and security in the country, it is essential to
implement development programmes.

The second pillar is a regional approach. In the
context of the growing globalization of conflicts, this
new approach will make it possible to confront cross-
border challenges and threats, because it is impossible
today to find solutions to these problems solely within
the borders of one State. Proof of that was the launch
on 23 February in Herat of two major transnational
projects, the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
Pipeline and the tripartite Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan 500-kV power project, as well as the laying
of fibre-optic cables and the building of a rail link
between Mazar-e-Sharif and Herat.

The third major pillar is the principle of One
United Nations. The growing number of conflicts and
contemporary challenges requires greater coordination
and efficiency in the work of the United Nations, both
at Headquarters and at the regional level, especially
in view of the cuts to the budget of the Organization.
Without such coordination we would see a fragmentation
of programmes and projects, which could be avoided
by combining the efforts of the various structures and
bodies of the global Organization in order to achieve
sustainable development in a holistic manner rather
than in a piecemeal way, focused on a specific region.

I should like to conclude my statement with a
Kazakh proverb: "A woman rocks the cradle with one
hand while running the world with the other".

