Mr. Mukerji (India): We thank the Lithuanian
delegation for organizing this debate. We compliment
you, Madam, on the very useful concept note
(S/2015/306, annex) circulated earlier, and we also
thank the briefers from this morning. We note that
the Security Council had occasion to discuss this
issue in depth in 2013 when adopting resolution 2117
(2013). Given its cross-cutting nature, this issue is also
featured in numerous other resolutions and presidential
statements of the Council.

We must bear in mind that there is consensus within
the international community, as expressed in various
General Assembly resolutions, on the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects as the main framework for measures to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. Nothing must
be done to detract from that process, which is inclusive,
universal and consensus-based.

India has supported the full implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action. We contributed
to the success of the second United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, held in 2012, and to that
of subsequent biennial meetings. We look forward to
the third Review Conference in 2018. India shares the
concerns of the international community on the adverse
security, political, socioeconomic and humanitarian
impact in States affected by illicit transfers and the
diversion of small arms and light arms to terrorists,
illegal armed groups and unauthorized recipients.
Insecurity and instability spawned by cross-border
terrorism impact innocent civilians, particularly women
and children, and cause large-scale displacement. India
has been a victim of cross-border terrorism for decades.
In addition, there is a huge cost to the development
agenda within affected States and across regions.

The easy availability of such weapons in large
numbers and the easy access often provided by some
States as deliberate policy have been two of the main
reasons for the growth of terrorism in various parts
of the world. Of late, we note with concern the use of
such weapons against United Nations peacekeepers by
armed groups and terrorists. Diversion of such arms has
also been a major problem. The scourge of international
terrorism cannot be defeated if this trend continues.
The strict implementation of the arms embargo covered
under Security Council sanctions regimes, such as that
established by resolution 1267 (1999), is important in
that context.

The focus for international cooperation should
continue to be on the supply side of the equation, while
encouraging effective measures on the demand side,
which is under national jurisdictions. Various events
have sharpened the focus on some of the deficiencies
of the Arms Trade Treaty, deficiencies that India had
highlighted during the negotiations, in particular,
whether the Treaty could make any meaningful impact
on illicit trafficking in conventional arms and their
illicit use by terrorists and unlawful non-State actors.
In our View, these gaps in the Treaty weaken our ability
to address a major source of international instability.

India follows a policy of responsibility and restraint
in the export of conventional arms, including small
arms and light weapons. We have put in place an export
control system that is at par with international standards.
We implement all the obligations arising out of extant
Security Council resolutions on arms embargoes.
Let me reiterate my country's firm commitment to
preventing the misuse of small arms and light weapons
and thereby continuing to contribute to the global fight
against terrorism.

