Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me start by joining
other Security Council members in paying tribute to
you and your team, Mr. President, for your excellent
stewardship of the Council during the month of January.
As the first country from Central Asia to preside
over the Council, we commend the focus on regional
approaches to conflict prevention that you have brought
to our work. Stronger regional cooperation can not only
help overcome common challenges, but also creates the
conditions for mutually beneficial opportunities. Each
country is better off if their neighbours also prosper.
That point was clearly demonstrated during the open
debate on 19 January, when we discussed regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model
for linking security and development. The presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) adopted following that
debate is an important legacy of your presidency. I
would also add my deep appreciation for our joint trip
to Kabul and for the way you and your team managed
that visit.

Regarding regional approaches, for our part, we
were pleased to collaborate with Cote d'Ivoire, with
constructive engagement from all Council members, on
the presidential statement on the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), which
was adopted yesterday (S/PRST/2018/3). A regional
approach to conflict prevention, early warning and
response mechanisms have proven increasingly relevant
as challenges related to climate change, trafficking and
terrorism do not respect borders. UNOWAS is a model
for other regions.

Sweden has long been a champion of disarmament
and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The briefing on non-proliferation and, in
particular, the important role of confidence building
measures, was very welcome and timely. The Council
has an important role to play in advancing these issues,
as well as standing united to ensure that those who
violate international norms are held to account. The
Council needs to move forward in this effort.

In the area of non-proliferation, Sweden, together
with Poland, requested an update from the Secretariat
under other business following the 9 January
intra-Korean talks, the first in two years. The Council
members welcomed the developments, reiterated its
call for full implementation of sanctions against North
Korea and echoed the Secretary-General's call for
denuclearization. The meeting was important, as it
also showed the Council's commitment to and support
for a peaceful solution to the tense situation on the
Korean peninsula.

Turning to the situation in Syria, we are alarmed
by what we heard only yesterday (see S/PV.8171) - the
continued severity of the devastating humanitarian
situation in Syria, the unacceptable levels of violence,
and that urgent humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance, is required by more than 13 million
people. As penholders, together with Kuwait, we are
resolved to do what we can to support the United
Nations and the humanitarian actors on the ground
to help the millions in desperate need. During his
briefing to the Council on 22 January, Emergency
Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock outlined five actions
needed for sustained and improved humanitarian
assistance, particularly to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. These are concrete, tangible and realistic, and we
strongly support them. It is imperative that the Council
stand united behind the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in that regard.

Let me say a few words regarding working methods.
We applaud your efforts, Sir, to ensure that the Council
was able communicate clear messages after most closed
consultations during the month. That not only increases
transparency, but also helps the Council to summarize
the most salient points of discussions and to think
about how to best address the issues further. We look
forward to working with Kuwait on continuing efforts
to make the work of the Council more results-oriented,
transparent and inclusive. The open debate next week
on working methods is welcome in that connection.
Many of the tools needed to make the Council more
effective are already there; however, they must be used
appropriately. That includes ensuring that meetings
are tailored in terms of format and focus to ensure
the best chance of a meaningful outcome from the
Council's deliberations.

Finally, Mr. President, experience over the past year
shows that non-traditional briefers from civil society,
notably women, have often animated our discussions
by adding perspectives that we would otherwise not
necessarily think about. We appreciate the fact that a
woman civil society organization briefer was added to
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya meeting
on 17 January (see S/PV.8159). Ensuring women's full
participation in sustaining peace is a Swedish priority.
In Libya, it is essential that women be able to participate
at every step in the implementation of the action plan.
We strongly believe that the Council will find that our
efforts are generally more effective if we allow that to
happen across the board.

