The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like first to thank Mark Malloch Brown
for the briefing he has just provided us on this critical
matter. I note also the presence of one other Under-
Secretary-General today, Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno, and we welcome him as well.

First and foremost, we must always keep in mind
that issues of waste, fraud and abuse in peacekeeping
procurement are not simply about dollar figures.
Corruption and mismanagement can greatly hinder a
mission's ability to effectively carry out its mandate. In
short, the discussion we are having today is about
saving lives, not only of the civilians we are trying to
protect, but also of the personnel of the contributing
nations participating in peacekeeping operations.
Without accountable, cost-effective, efficient and
transparent United Nations procurement practices, the
United Nations will not have its essential goods and
services, billions of dollars of contributions might be
ill spent or not properly accounted for, and the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations would be jeopardized.

This is why it is critical that the Security Council
convene today to discuss this matter in an open and
transparent fashion. The legitimacy of these open
briefings cannot be doubted, given the Security
Council's clear responsibility under the Charter for
creating, supervising and terminating peacekeeping
operations. The participation by responsible Secretariat
officials only underscores this point. The commitment
of the United States to peacekeeping is firm and is
evidenced by our support and advocacy in the Security
Council for clear mandates for each mission. So too is
the commitment of the Security Council. As a whole,
the Security Council bears responsibility, along with
the Secretariat, to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations are undertaken in the most
efficient and transparent process possible.
Precisely because of this commitment, we also
have the responsibility to look at the flaws in how
peacekeeping is managed, so that we can work together
to rectify these problems and to help build stronger,
more effective operations.

The challenges are immense, and the problems
are many, but we remain committed to working with
the United Nations and Member States to achieve
effective reform.

I would like to commend the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) for initiating the report
entitled "Comprehensive Management Review of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations -
Procurement". No doubt, it is always a difficult task to
shine the light on one's own problems, but it is a
critical first step. The OIOS report reflects what I
believe is increasingly felt by many: that Member
States must effect a fundamental shift in the operating
culture of the United Nations.

Reading the OIOS report, it struck me how
similar it was to that issued by Paul Volcker and his
panel on the oil-for-food scandal. When testifying
before the United States Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, Mr. Volcker was asked if he thought there
was a culture of corruption at the United Nations. His
response was that there was not so much a culture of
corruption, but a culture of inaction. Sadly, the OIOS
report on the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) reinforces this view. Indeed, as the report
itself notes,

"it is OIOS's conclusion that there is substantial
evidence of abuse in procurement for peacekeeping
operations leading to financial losses and significant
inaccuracies in planning assumptions".

In particular, OIOS cited the lack of internal
controls, noting that

"It is also of great concern that United Nations
management has not enforced accountability for
non-adherence to internal control procedures
[and that] Important controls were lacking while
existing ones were often bypassed".

We take note of DPKO's acknowledgement of
these primary findings and conclusions by OIOS, but it
would be remiss of us not to point out another finding
in the OIOS report, which is the likelihood that
problems will continue. Section 9 of the report
identifies 10 different risk or control areas that OIOS
studied, including staffing, vendor qualifications,
disclosure of conflict of interest situations, and others.
Of the 10 categories they studied, OIOS concluded that
failure in any of these could have a "severe" impact on
the Organization; but more troubling, in all 10
categories, the likelihood of recurrence "is almost
certain under current conditions".

What is needed, then, as I noted earlier, is a shift
in the DPKO operating culture. In some cases, OIOS
properly identifies institutional flaws. In other cases,
though, OIOS identifies problems related to personnel.
We concur in full with OIOS when they stress the
importance of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the United
Nations Charter, which calls for securing the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity in the
employment of staff. Sadly, as the report notes in
overall assessment, "It is clear from the findings in this
report that there have been serious lapses in adhering
to these standards". This is particularly relevant in an
era when DPKO is requesting funding for new
positions to be filled and when it is unclear how these
staffing patterns fit into overall objectives.

We have taken an important step here today,
though, by bringing together many of the interested
parties to discuss this important issue. We welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General's representatives
in these open briefings. Indeed, we take the Secretary-
General's decision to cooperate with the Security
Council as a signal to welcome new emphasis in
peacekeeping on management and professionalism.

We believe it is important to bring together
interested parties with important equities and work
together cooperatively in a new manner. The reason to
do so was made clear by OIOS itself, when it evaluated
the past practice of business as usual. As the report
states, "Despite numerous recommendations by OIOS
in past audit reports, management has failed to
establish accountability where irregularities occurred".
As I stated earlier, this goes to the heart of the culture
of inaction.

Indeed, it is in fact time for a wholesale change in
the culture of the many agencies and entities within the
United Nations system. Whether it is a culture of
inaction or a culture of impunity, we must see changes.
The problem of procurement fraud, waste and abuse is
one that directly affects our tax dollars as the largest
contributor to the United Nations system: 22 per cent
in the regular budget, 27 per cent in the case of the
peacekeeping budget. This means that the United
States pays one fourth of the price in every case of
waste, fraud and abuse.

This is unacceptable if we are to heed the charge
given to us by our leaders, 150 of whom signed the
outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1)
last September. We take note that DPKO has
commenced several initiatives to help counter the
problems identified in the OIOS report. And we
recognize that they face a daunting task. The surge in
peacekeeping operations has strained the Organization,
and we understand the challenges faced by those in the
field. We will support them with what we believe is
necessary to achieve their respective mandates. It is
precisely because of these new and ongoing challenges
that we expect stronger management, more efficient
and effective implementation of mandates and greater
accountability for action. But we also maintain that
OIOS has the opportunity to evaluate such initiatives
with the complete autonomy it has requested.
Maintaining the credibility and independence of OIOS
is critical if we are to successfully clean up our own
house. We need to reinforce this view at the highest
levels and therefore ask, does the Secretary-General
believe that OIOS should function independently in its
analyses and its operations?

I would like again to thank all those who are
participating in today's open briefing. With the
proliferation of peacekeeping missions, and a new one
set to begin in Darfur in the coming months, the
relevance of this issue is undeniable. As uncomfortable
as some of these discussions naturally are, the stakes
are too high to sweep these problems under the rug.
They have an impact not only on the integrity of the
United Nations itself, but also on the lives of people
participating in the operations and of those we are
trying to assist. These are compelling reasons to take
firm and decisive action. We should seize the
opportunity provided by the OIOS to chart a new
course and to help achieve what Secretary Rice has
called a lasting revolution of reform here at the United
Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I now give him the
floor.

