Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
want to thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, for
their poignant words, which illustrate both the gravity
of the situation in South Sudan and the United Nations
willingness to implement the Secretary-General's
"Rights up front" initiative, which prioritizes the
struggle against human rights violations with a view to
preventing mass atrocities.

Luxembourg condemns in the strongest terms the
attacks in Bentiu and Bor that have claimed hundreds
of civilian casualties, among them many women and
children. These attacks are the most recent examples
of the serious violations and atrocities committed
against civilians, often based on ethnicity, that have
been attributed to both sides since the conflict began on
15 December 2013. Abuses against civilians have likely
led to thousands of deaths. They have displaced more
than 1 million people.

The South Sudanese leaders who are in dispute
must finally take responsibility and stop the carnage. It
is unacceptable that Government and opposition forces
continue to violate the cessation ofhostilities agreement
of 23 January, and that the parties stubbornly refuse to
engage in political negotiations. We continue to fully
support the mediation efforts by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). We want to take
this opportunity to call urgently on the parties to begin
to address the substantive issues in good faith, without
further delay. As the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, each day missed at the negotiating table
increases the risk of famine for the South Sudanese

people.

We strongly condemn the serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that
continue to be committed with impunity in South
Sudan. The picture painted this afternoon by Ms. Pillay
and Mr. Dieng is frightening. President Salva Kiir
and former Vice-President Riek Machar bear a heavy
responsibility. They must absolutely publicly reject all
attacks against civilians and commit to holding those
who ordered or carried out the attacks to account for
their actions. The fight against impunity is a priority for
us. Those responsible for serious violations, including
the officials who ordered, instigated, encouraged or
tolerated such violations and abuses, must understand
that the international community is watching, that their
crimes will not go unnoticed and that they will have to
answer for them.

In that regard, we welcome the publication next
Monday ofthe final report on human rights violations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
We also welcome the launch of the commission of
inquiry of the African Union, led by former Nigerian
President Olusegun Obasanjo, which has just carried
out its first mission to South Sudan.

That United Nations report and the investigative
work of the African Union are important, but we must
go further. There is no doubt that war crimes and crimes
against humanity have been committed. In that context,
to fight against impunity and prevent future atrocities,
we believe that the Council must seriously consider a
referral to the International Criminal Court.

More generally, the Security Council must
consider all the means at its disposal, including the
establishment ofa sanctions regime, to bring the parties
to see reason, cease hostilities and avoid an escalation
of the situation with incalculable consequences. The
adoption of targeted sanctions against those who have
perpetrated violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, violated the agreement on cessation
of hostilities and impeded the progress of peace talks
should be considered.

We welcome the important work carried out by
UNMISS to protect civilians, especially the civilian
refugees in its bases, under extremely difficult
conditions. We condemn the restrictions UNMISS
continues to face, the harassment of its staff and the
persistent violations of the status-of-forces agreement.
The Security Council should review the mandate of
the Mission to focus on three priorities: the protection
of civilians, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and monitoring human rights. It is also
crucial to strengthen the Mission by integrating, on
terms to be agreed, the forces proposed by IGAD.
Luxembourg condemns in the strongest terms the
recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming of
children, sexual violence, attacks against schools and
hospitals and the use of schools by all parties to the
conflict. We recall to the parties that they agreed under
the cessation ofhostilities agreement not to recruit or use
children. The latest figures from UNICEF, according
to which more than 9,000 children were recruited and
used by parties to the conflict, are simply outrageous.
We recall that, on 13 March 2012, the Government of
South Sudan signed an action plan to stop and prevent
the recruitment and use of children. Any violation of
that action plan is a violation of obligations undertaken
by the Government.

Faced with the scale ofthe violations committed and
pursuant to Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict, UNMISS should strengthen the
monitoring and reporting of information on violations
and abuses committed against children. And the
Mission should be equipped with adequate resources
to do so. We also encourage the commission set up by
the African Union to investigate these violations and
abuses.

In conclusion, I would like to assure Ms. Pillay and
Mr. Dieng that we have heard their call. The Council will
act firmly to eliminate the looming threat of yet more
serious violence that risks spiralling out of control. It is
our collective responsibility to act to prevent, 20 years
on, another genocide on the African continent.

