The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General J an Kubis for his first briefing to
the Security Council this morning. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important statement.

I shall focus my comments today on the
importance of the international community delivering
on the political commitment made to Afghanistan at the
Bonn Conference. We must use this year to signal our
enduring commitment to Afghanistan's security and
economic viability for the post-2014 decade of
transformation.

First, at the NATO Chicago Summit in May, we
need to agree a long-term funding plan for the Afghan
national security forces and to clarify NATO's role in
Afghanistan after 2014. Capable, sustainable and
affordable Afghan forces are vital to ensuring that
stability in Afghanistan does not unravel once
International Security Assistance Force combat troops
withdraw after the completion of the transition process
at the end of 2014.

Secondly, for any security gains to be sustainable
in the long term, we must work together to ensure that
the Afghan people have confidence that their
Government can deliver key basic services and better
prospects for the future. The United Kingdom looks
forward to the Afghan Government's implementation
of vital governance and economic reforms. The
international community must match that at the Tokyo
conference by ensuring continued, long-term
commitments to supporting economic growth and basic
social services in Afghanistan. That is fundamental to
Afghanistan's long-term stability and prosperity.

Thirdly, stability in Afghanistan will also depend
on the participation and support of its neighbours. The
Kabul Conference in June will be a key moment for
heart-of-Asia countries to take that forward. The
United Kingdom welcomes the regionally led
implementation of the Istanbul Process, as well as the
support that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has provided.

Fourthly, underpinning those elements is the need
for continued progress towards a political settlement.
The United Kingdom welcomes Afghan-led efforts to
move forward the peace process. We note in particular
President Karzai's and Pakistani Prime Minister
Gilani's recent statements supporting the establishment
of the Taliban political office and calling on the
insurgency to reconcile. We have always said that
reconciliation would be a challenging process. The
recent Taliban statement announcing the suspension of
talks does not alter our support for Afghan-led
reconciliation.

Therefore, as we prepare for a post-2014
Afghanistan, there is still much to do. UNAMA has a
vital role, both during and beyond the transition
process, to coordinate the international community and
support the Afghan Government to deliver on its
commitments. The United Kingdom supports a strong,
continued UNAMA presence throughout the country to
assist the Afghan Government in establishing a strong
and durable Afghan State.

In conclusion, the international community made
commitments at the Bonn Conference in December
2011 for enduring support to Afghanistan's long-term
security and development. Now is the time for us to
deliver against those commitments, to reassure the
Afghan people that we will not abandon them after
2014 and to ensure that Afghanistan does not again
become a safe haven for terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

