Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express to you, Sir,
our great pleasure at seeing you preside over the
deliberations of this important session on Africa. Allow
us to congratulate your friendly country of Mauritius
on its presiding wisely over the deliberations of the
Council this month. I must also pay tribute to your
Permanent Representative and the members of your
delegation for their intensive efforts and excellent
performance, especially for the initiative of holding
this meeting.

My delegation would also like to express its
satisfaction at the participation of Ms. Louise
Frechette, the Deputy Secretary-General, in this
important debate. Let us also express our satisfaction at
the valuable opening remarks she made.

My delegation also welcomes the participation of
Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), in our meeting today, as well
as a number of high-level African representatives. We
believe that this truly reflects the utmost importance of
promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
the OAU in the framework of the efforts of the
international community to resolve the many problems
afflicting the countries of the African continent, as well
as of giving due consideration to the specifics of these
problems and their diverse dimensions.

Today's meeting and the high-level ministerial
participation reflect the Security Council's commitment
to seeking durable solutions to the many grave
problems facing the African continent. We believe that
dealing with these problems requires a multisectoral
approach. The strategies for resolving the disputes
besetting many countries in Africa must take into
consideration the true causes of such conflicts, as well
their economic and social dimensions.

All this is in addition to efforts to establish
security and build peace in Africa, including the
challenges of abject poverty and the problems of
deadly epidemics, such as AIDS and malaria. It is also
necessary that fair solutions be found to the
burdensome problem of external debts in many of these
countries.

We cannot deny that in the past few years the
international community has achieved concrete success
in dealing with conflicts and peace-building; nor can
we ignore the grave challenges that African
countries - among the least developed in the world -
continue to face: sustainable development, peace-
building in post-conflict situations, the prevention of
new conflicts, negative repercussions due to sanctions,
and refugees and internally displaced persons.

This month there have been many items
pertaining to Africa on the Security Council's agenda.
We are pleased to note that the peace process in Sierra
Leone has achieved concrete progress, with the end of
the disarmament process, and progress in the
legislative and presidential elections to be held next
May. We would also like to express our satisfaction at
the progress made in the comprehensive peace
Agreement signed in Algiers in December 2000
between Eritrea and Ethiopia. We look forward to the
outcome of the deliberations of the Boundary
Commission, which is to issue its ruling on the
delimitation and demarcation of borders between the
two countries at the end of next February in order to
put an end to their border dispute. At the same time,
however, we believe that more efforts ought to be made
in other regions. There are other disputes to be defused,
since they threaten to spread to neighbouring countries.
On this subject, we believe that the following
methodology should be taken up.

First, dealing with disputes in the African
continent requires a comprehensive methodology based
on preventive diplomacy aimed at peacekeeping and
peacemaking, In this context we agree with the
Secretary-General's statement in his periodic report
entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa",
which he presented to the fifty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, that the United Nations should
move from a culture of reaction to conflict towards a
culture of preventing conflict. We believe that an ounce
of prevention is worth more than a pound of cure, and
that long-term strategies are required to prevent
conflict and to build peace. We believe that such
strategies should take into consideration the root causes
of conflict and the link between sustainable
development and peace. Even when peace accords are
reached, there is still need to mobilize and coordinate
the efforts of international institutions and donors in
peace-building. Failure to provide the necessary
financial resources and to achieve economic revival
carries grave dangers, namely, a return to conflict.
Perhaps the problems faced by many African countries
in the beginning stages of peace-building -
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and the absence of necessary financial resources - are
the best proof of that. This morning we heard the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo express his country's grave concern. We also
heard many comments on the importance of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
in other countries.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for the greatest
possible coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the OAU when dealing with
conflicts in Africa, as well as for regular consultation
between the two organizations. We believe that there is
a need to continue promoting African capabilities in
the maintenance of peace with a view towards building
an effective partnership with the United Nations. We
are pleased that cooperation with the OAU and
subregional organizations in the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts has had
positive results in West Africa, the Great Lakes region
and the Horn of Africa. Progress in implementing the
many recommendations within the United Nations that
the Secretary-General referred to in his above-
mentioned report will surely improve prospects for
solving a larger number of conflicts in Africa.

Thirdly, there is a need for regional and
subregional strategies in dealing with many conflicts
having a regional dimension. Perhaps the challenges
confronting the Mano River Union countries point this
out rather well. The issues of refugees, illegal
trafficking in small arms and DDR programmes are all
inter-linked in the region. Failure to tackle these issues
comprehensively carries the threat of widening conflict
among the States of the region. We hope that progress
will be made in promoting subregional initiatives for
peace and development, for institutional linkages and
confidence-building and for complementary policies in
the political, humanitarian, development and security
fields.

Fourthly, there is an urgent need to consider
appropriately the negative repercussions of long-term
economic sanctions imposed on African countries that
are among the poorest and least developed in the
world. We do not believe that the imposition of such
sanctions can contribute positively over the medium-
and long-term to the eradication of the causes of
conflict or towards stability in these countries. On the
contrary, we believe that they will only increase
poverty and tension.

Fifthly, we believe that the commitment of
African leaders to the New Partnership for Africa's
Development deserves the full support of the donor
community. It offers an appropriate opportunity to
analyse and assess the prospects for development and
to set agreed objectives. We believe that the success of
such an initiative requires the serious support and
commitment of the international community to
providing resources and necessary expertise. The
Economic and Social Council stressed this issue at its
most recent substantive meeting in Geneva through the
Ministerial Declaration issued at the high-level
segment from 16 to 18 July 2001, which was presided
over by the Permanent Representative of Cameroon.
We were very pleased in that regard by the
participation in today's meeting of Ambassador Ivan
Simonovie, President of the Economic and Social
Council, who made an important contribution to the
drafting of the Declaration and is now responsible for
its follow-up.

The commitment of the international community,
in addition to that of African leaders to achieving the
objectives they set for themselves, are two essential
preconditions for meeting the challenges of peace and
development in Africa, which are complementary and
interlinked. In that regard, we believe that the
establishment of the African Union is a promising
opportunity to rebuild the African continent on a firm
and methodical basis, allowing it to join the
mainstream of globalization. We share the opinion that
peace is an essential prerequisite of economic and
social progress, which in turn is necessary to a life of
peace and stability in Africa, so long as the root causes
of African conflicts are addressed and development
prospects are found that can lead to the necessary
solutions to the problems of poverty and disease and to
economic growth.

In conclusion, we hope that this important
exchange of opinions today will give new impetus to
efforts to rebuild a continent of such promise, wealth,
resources and potential on the basis of peace,
cooperation, sustainable development and non-
marginalization so that it may join the mainstream of
globalization and benefit from it. We hope that the
Security Council and the United Nations will not fail to
assist Africa to contain and manage its crises in order
to promote peace and security in that great continent,
particularly since there are many resolutions,
mechanisms, declarations and programmes that we
believe to be adequate to address African crises.
However, this will require genuine political will. A
number of valuable proposals have been made this
morning and this afternoon that we feel should be set
out in a single list for the consideration and follow-up
of the Security Council, which might devote a special
meeting to making it an operational reality.

