Ms. Rice (United States of America): It gives me
great pleasure to join my colleagues in thanking you,
Sir, for your extraordinary leadership as President of
the Security Council, for your distinguished career and
for the many contributions you have made - not only
to your Government but to the relationship between our
two countries, given your service in Washington - as
well as for the tremendous wisdom, friendship and
leadership that you have shown throughout your tenure
here. We - and I - will miss you enormously. We
wish you all the best. I hope we all have an open
invitation to come and see you.

I want to begin also by thanking Special
Representative Kai Eide for his comprehensive briefing
today and for all of his exceptional efforts as head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

The United States strongly supports UNAMA and
its pursuit, together with the international community
and especially with the Government of Afghanistan, of
the goals set out in resolution 1868 (2009). Much work
remains for all of us to do as we help the Afghan
Government to better serve and protect its people.

On the heels of the launch of the United States
own comprehensive new strategy in Afghanistan, the
Hague ministerial meeting and the Paris Conference
earlier this month, the United States welcomes the
Secretary-General's first quarterly report (S/2009/323)
on the situation in Afghanistan. As the Secretary-
General indicates, the security situation remains

challenging. But our partnership is indeed making
progress as we work to address key security,
humanitarian, human rights and governance concerns
on the ground. At the Hague ministerial, the
international community spoke with a strong and
united voice: UNAMA will continue to play a key role
in Afghanistan's security and development. The
international community clearly put UNAMA in the
lead for coordinating international action and
assistance in support of the Government of
Afghanistan.

As the Council knows, President Obama has
made Afghanistan a top national security priority. Our
goals are clear: to disrupt, defeat and dismantle
Al-Qaida and to build up the Afghan Government's
capacity to secure its people and its territory. UNAMA
is doing outstanding work, and it will remain key to
our common efforts.

In that light, permit me to touch on a few critical
areas.

Afghanistan's presidential and provincial
elections on 20 August will be a critical milestone in
the Government of Afghanistan's efforts to expand
governance. The elections offer the Afghan
Government an opportunity to give its citizens a voice
and to underscore to the international community its
ongoing drive to strengthen democracy and good
governance in the country. The international
community and the United Nations are working hard
with the Independent Election Commission to help
make sure that those election-related efforts succeed.
We must all make that our top priority in the weeks
ahead. Let me note in that regard that the United States
has given $120 million to the United Nations-
administered donor fund for the elections. We call on
all other donors to rapidly deliver on their pledges as
well.
The United States does not support or oppose any
particular presidential or provincial council candidate.
Instead, we support the right of the Afghan people to
choose their own leaders. That is why we are working
with Afghan electoral authorities and the United
Nations to help Afghans ensure a credible, secure and
inclusive electoral process. The United States applauds
efforts by UNAMA towards that goal. We welcome the
establishment of the Political Rights monitoring
programme, which will watch the protection of the
freedom of expression, association, peaceful assembly
and movement. We will also remain vigilant for cases
of intimidation, partiality and discrimination, and we
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to fully
enforce its decree on non-intervention in the election
affairs of 2009.

The United States also welcomes the efforts of
UNAMA to encourage Afghan women to participate in
the political process, as both candidates and voters. We
are working in parallel to empower women and end
gender discrimination in Afghanistan. Allow me to note
that President Obama's Ambassador-at-Large for
Global Women's Issues, Melanne Verveer, completed a
trip to Afghanistan just yesterday. While in the country,
she promoted the launch of a $27 million grants
programme to support gender equality by strengthening
Afghan-led civil society organizations, particularly
through providing technical assistance and smaller
grants to Afghan non-governmental organizations.

UNAMA will only be as effective as its resources
and presence throughout Afghanistan will allow.
Expanding the presence of UNAMA in Afghanistan's
regions and provinces, as called for in resolution 1868
(2009), is also essential.

We welcome stronger leadership by UNAMA in
donor coordination, and we have committed ourselves
to new levels of cooperation and transparency as we
work with UNAMA and other donors. It is critical to
coordinate capitals' preparation of their 2009 to 2013
assistance plans with the Government of Afghanistan
as well as among donors. Donor-implementation
meetings at the international level would help reach
this goal, and such efforts would be a useful
supplement to coordination in the field. We must help
donors align their high-level plans and funding
requests with Afghan priorities.

The proposed civilian increase to implement an
enhanced, targeted, capacity-building programme
comes in direct response to the Afghan Government's
requests and geographic priorities. UNAMA must lie at
the heart of efforts to coordinate the international
aspects of the civilian increase, but the Afghan
Government must also take ownership of that increase
for it to be effective. Afghanistan needs a dramatic
increase of civilian expertise to help develop key
systems and institutions, extend basic infrastructure
and create lawful economic alternatives to poppy
production. On counter-narcotics, the United States
recently announced that it is phasing out eradication
and channelling significantly more resources into
agriculture, interdiction and public information efforts.
Allow me to single out a creative programme that
will also support the work of UNAMA, that is, the
United Nations efforts to support the Afghan economy
through, in the Secretary-General's words, its

"local procurement campaign with members of
the Government, donors and a number of Afghan
private-sector suppliers. This campaign is
intended to encourage the international
community to buy Afghan products and reduce
reliance on more expensive imports"
(S/2009/323, para. 35).

The United States is very supportive of efforts to
expand bilateral and regional trade, including more
United States purchases from Afghan producers and
businesses. My Government will also do its part to
increase regional trade through the launch of a regional
infrastructure and trade development initiative and by
encouraging Afghanistan and Pakistan to conclude an
updated transit trade treaty.

We must also do more to develop Afghan
agriculture, which will require better technology,
marketing, building of infrastructure, irrigation, rural
electrification, cold storage and roads from farms to
markets. We should all be working together with the
people and Government of Afghanistan to deliver the
basic needs and infrastructure necessary to improve the
lives of the 76 per cent of Afghans who live in rural
areas.

Finally, my Government would be remiss if it did
not comment on the report's discussion of civilian
casualties. The United States deeply regrets any injury
or loss of life among innocent Afghans from operations
involving United States forces and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Any loss of innocent
human life is tragic. We try to promptly provide
humanitarian assistance to affected communities after
incidents occur. We take all reports of such incidents
seriously, and we will continue to conduct thorough,
joint investigations with the Afghan Government to
determine exactly what happened in each incident
involving allegations of civilian casualties.

United States and international forces take
extensive precautions to avoid loss of life among
Afghan civilians, as well as international and Afghan
forces, during operations against insurgents and
terrorists. We understand that civilian casualties
undermine Afghan public and government backing for
all that we do together. In fact, shortly after assuming
command of the United States forces in Afghanistan
and ISAF on 14 June, General Stanley McChrystal
announced that reducing civilian casualties will be a
top priority as he pursues the military efforts necessary
to provide a secure environment in which
Afghanistan's society and Government can be
strengthened.

But we must not forget that, as we pursue these
goals, we are fighting against an enemy - the Taliban
and other militants - that employs appalling tactics,
including using child soldiers as suicide bombers and
using civilians as human shields. Most civilian
causalities in Afghanistan, as the Special
Representative just said, are caused by insurgents, not
by the international forces working to improve the
capacity of the Afghan Government to protect the
Afghan people.

The international community has made UNAMA
a guiding force in achieving our goals in Afghanistan.
The United States stands steadfast in its support for the
Afghan people as they seek to overcome the challenges
of the past 30 years and work with the international
community to defeat a common enemy. We must now
work together to succeed in Afghanistan for the sake of
the Afghan people, for the sake of the region and for
the sake of international peace and security.

