Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his briefing. We believe that
Mr. Egeland's visit to northern Uganda and Darfur
once again focused increased attention by the
international community on the situation in the region.
His briefing indicated that the humanitarian situation in
Darfur and northern Uganda remains serious. The
Security Council should continue to pay attention to
the humanitarian situation in those two regions.
Moreover, we should intensify efforts to resolve the
problems in those areas. The humanitarian, political
and security issues are interrelated and affect one
another. The absence of the necessary stability makes it
difficult to fundamentally alleviate the humanitarian
cr1s1s.

Turning to the situation in northern Uganda, an
adequate resolution to the question of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) will have a major impact on
the situation in northern Uganda and the stability of the
entire country. China welcomes last August's signing
of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities between
the Ugandan Government and the LRA. We expect to
see the implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Agreement.

We appreciate the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to raise funds for
the peace talks and to provide assistance and support
for the secretariat of the peace talks and the monitoring
group on the cessation of hostilities. We hope that the
Government of Uganda and the representatives of the
LRA will quickly reach agreement on the relevant
political issues, make progress in the peace talks and
achieve positive results.

China is concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Darfur, the Sudan, as well as along the
border between the Sudan and Chad. Fundamentally
alleviating the humanitarian situation depends upon
restoring security and making progress in the peace
process. We appeal to the Government of the Sudan
and the parties concerned to provide assistance and
access to humanitarian workers. Important consensus
in that regard was recently reached at the high-level
talks in Addis Ababa.

We are aware that the African Union's Peace and
Security Council has also taken important decisions
with regard to resolving the problem of Darfur. We
hope that all parties will seize this rare historic
opportunity to step up consultations and make progress
on a proper and comprehensive resolution to the issue
of Darfur. We also hope that the humanitarian situation
will improve as the process to achieve a political
settlement in Darfur is accelerated.

