The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/l999/460.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l999/392, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 April 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 21 April 1999 (S/ 1999/460).

"The Security Council reiterates its demand that
both sides widen their commitment to the United
Nations-led peace process, continue to seek and
engage in dialogue, expand their bilateral contacts and
display without delay the necessary will to achieve
substantial results on the key issues of the
negotiations, and underlines the necessity for the
parties to achieve an early and comprehensive political
settlement, which includes a settlement on the political
status of Abkhazia Within the State of Georgia, which
fully respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia within its internationally recognized
borders.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
unacceptability of the demographic changes resulting
from the conflict and the imprescriptible right of all
refugees and displaced persons affected by the conflict

to return to their homes in secure conditions and
calls upon the parties to address this issue urgently
by agreeing and implementing effective measures to
guarantee the security of those who exercise their
unconditional right to return.

"The Security Council welcomes in this context
the decision of the Council of Heads of State of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) of
2 April 1999 on further measures to settle the
conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/ 1999/392). The
Council notes the conclusions of the eighth session
of the Coordinating Council of the Georgian and
Abkhaz sides held on 29 April 1999.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the failure of the parties to reach an
agreement on the terms for the return of refugees
and displaced persons to the Gali region and
measures for economic rehabilitation. The Council
stresses the need for them to conclude urgently such
an agreement, which would make it possible for the
international community to participate in this effort,
as well as an agreement on peace and guarantees for
the prevention of armed confrontation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
improvements in the security situation but notes that
the general situation in the conflict zone still remains
tense and unstable.

"The Security Council urges the parties to
exercise great restraint in their responses to any
incidents arising on the ground and to take concrete
steps to improve their cooperation in this field. The
Council demands that both sides take immediate and
determined measures to put a stop to the activities
by armed groups, including the continued laying of
mines, and to establish a climate of confidence
allowing refugees and displaced persons to return.
The Council further demands that both sides ensure
a full separation of forces from the ceasefire line, in
accordance with the ceasefire protocol signed on
25 May 1998, and establish a joint investigation
mechanism without further delay.

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
contribution that the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the C15 (C15 Peacekeeping Force) have made to stabilizing the situation in the
zone of conflict and notes that the working
 

relationship between UNOMIG and the CIS
Peacekeeping Force has remained good.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
it attaches to the security of UNOMIG and of all
international personnel and recalls the obligations of
both sides in this regard. The Council welcomes the
steps taken to enhance the operations and security of
UNOMIG.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
sustained efforts made by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative with the assistance of the
Russian Federation in its capacity as facilitator as
well as of the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to prevent hostilities, to
protect human rights, and to advance a settlement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/ ll.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
