Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Just a few days
ago we commended leaders of Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for
having signed the Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Shortly before that, we suspended economic
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
These developments will, we hope, stanch the torrent of
destruction in the former Yugoslavia. The deployment of
the Implementation Force (IFOR) constitutes a serious
commitment by the international community to assist in
this.

Today, however, we have to deal with what
seemingly is another issue - namely, violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights.
During our two-year tenure on this Council, this is at
least the tenth time my delegation is addressing this issue,
and we have again joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution before the Council. We also note that we are
addressing the issue on the eve of the visit of my
President, Vaclav Havel, to Sarajevo.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
report, which - in his words - provides

"undeniable evidence of a consistent pattern of
summary executions, rape, mass expulsions, arbitrary
detentions, forced labour and large-scale
disappearances". (S/1995/988, para. 74)

Only the worst possible fate can be inferred concerning
the thousands missing in Srebrenica. And, of course, the
more time that elapses since the tragedies under
discussion, the less chance there is that we shall ever find
out exactly what really happened and who exactly is
responsible. This should not stop us from trying, however.

 

Some have described the Secretary-General's report as
containing "shortcomings", as providing "insufficient
evidence", as containing "arbitrary statements". They have
argued that the "alleged" mass killings and disappearances
furthered a "propaganda campaign" of the Bosnian
Government, and even that it was renegade Muslims who
slaughtered thousands of their co-religionists.

My delegation would be the first to welcome factual
rebuttals of the information contained in the Secretary-
General's report. We would welcome a factual explication
of its alleged shortcomings, the marshalling of factual
evidence to make up for its alleged insufficiencies. We
would, most of all, delight in finding out that the Srebrenica
thousands were not killed at all, that they had merely been
forgotten - sequestered, perhaps, in some barn in a hidden
mountain valley. However, we are not aware of any such
factual evidence. We are not aware of any evidence better
than that provided in the Secretary-General's report, and we
agree with him that it is indeed undeniable.

We are profoundly shocked that some parties are still
not cooperating with the international community in
allowing a search for the necessary additional evidence. By
not cooperating, they contravene the obligations they
undertook in signing the Peace Agreement. We urge
Bosnian Serbs to comply with their obligations, including
providing access to persons displaced, detained or reported
missing.

The Security Council has always insisted on individual
responsibility of the perpetrators of "ethnic cleansing".
Individual responsibility applies, of course, to all parties. In
this connection, my delegation is deeply concerned by
recent reports of violations of human rights of the civilian
population and of arson and looting in those areas of
Bosnia and Herzegovina that the Peace Agreement would
transfer to another authority. In particular, this concerns
crimes of which we suspect the Bosnian Croats - the
HVO - in the areas of Mrkonjic-Grad and Sipovo.

A durable peace in the Balkans is, first of all, in the
interests of the parties to the conflict themselves. By
contributing a substantial unit to IFOR, the Czech Republic
expresses its confidence in the sincerity of the parties'
commitment to all aspects of this Agreement. Compliance
with Security Council resolutions and with requests of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia constitutes
an essential aspect of implementing the Peace Agreement.
And this is where today's matter is only seemingly of a
different cloth than was the suspension of economic
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or the
resolutions concerning the Peace Agreement. We fear that
there will not be a lasting peace in Bosnia until we will
have dug out the truth - literally perhaps - about the
massacres under consideration here today and until the
perpetrators have been tried and punished.

