I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this briefing to allow me to share some of my personal reflections as the Chair of three of the Council's subsidiary bodies, namely, the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Two years ago, my predecessors, Ambassador Umarov, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, and Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Soliz, Permanent Representative of Bolivia, reminded us of some criticism that the subsidiary Committees usually received from Member States about the lack of transparency, fairness and accountability in the work of the Committees. We took such views seriously. In response, I tried to be frank, transparent and fair, and closely upheld the Committees' rules and procedures. Our track record proves that we went the extra mile in political consultations to find common ground in reaching consensus in order to bridge various views to ensure the effective functioning of the regimes, from deciding on the status of a meeting during the pandemic to the process of listing individual decisions, for example. That said, I am happy to report that the 1267 Committee was the first Sanctions Committee that managed to convene a video-teleconference meeting during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Following consultations and based on our creative problem-solving and collective decision-making, and without compromising our rules and guidelines, the committee members agreed to meet virtually to discuss several issues related to our mandate implementation, including the reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Ombudsperson, as well as the global threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida. Furthermore, with regard to the 1267 Committee, during 2019 and 2020, we also successfully concluded our sanctions list review to keep it up-to-date with the latest and most reliable information. I am proud to report that this year we received a record-breaking number of responses, thanks to the continued support and contributions of Member States. As for the 1988 Committee, one of its main goals, as the Council is aware, is to support the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. We contribute to that end not only by listing and de-listing activities, but also through the process of granting exemptions to enable listed individuals to engage in peace and reconciliation activities. Accordingly, there are now 14 listed individuals who are exempted from the travel ban to participate in peace talks in a range of countries until January next year. We believe that the continued collaboration and unity of the Committee are a prerequisite for further development of our important work. I commend the members of the Committees for their efforts to preserve the credibility and sanctity of the Committee. We need the Committees to be united once again to support our common endeavour to increase transparency, fairness and the effectiveness of our Sanctions Committees, which is currently being negotiated by our experts. This will be our common achievement and an important milestone for the Committees. With regard to the 1540 Committee, my chairmanship started at a unique time leading up to the comprehensive review and mandate renewal deadline in April 2021. Therefore, I set three priorities, namely: to increase reporting by States, to raise awareness and the comprehensive review process itself. We have gone the extra mile for those priorities. In almost all my bilateral meetings, I raised 1540-related issues. I attended strategic 1540-related events and sent video messages to ensure that the 1540 cause was heard. We also facilitated discussions for early adoption of comprehensive review-related documents. So far, we have seen positive feedback. Among others, we have reduced the number of non- reporting States from 11 to 9 and significantly increased the number of submissions from States, as well as international organizations. In the past two years, the Committee received 58 updated national reports, 66 responses on the Committee's matrices, 12 views on the comprehensive review, as well as a 20 per cent increase of points of contact. Those are among the highest submission numbers that the Committee has ever received. On the comprehensive review, the preparation and work began last year with the adoption of the modalities paper and planned activities. In October 2019, the Committee held its first open consultation with States and international organizations. Despite the postponement and challenges due to COVID-19, we have done our best to put the incoming Chair, as well as the Committee, in a good position to continue the work in 2021. The Committee has finalized the majority of the update of the national implementation matrix and, to ensure a smooth transition, held discussions to provide the incoming members our institutional memories. With regard to housekeeping issues, I am pleased to inform that during our chairmanship we have facilitated a transparent process in the Group of Experts of the 1540 Committee and its coordinator selection process. I am also pleased to inform that the Committee has adopted streamlined procedures and templates, particularly to process correspondence, towards greater efficiency and faster response by the Committee. I must acknowledge just how much COVID-19 has affected the work of the Committee. Just to give a glimpse, based on the data to date, the Committee dispatched 489 internal notes and 82 letters in 2020, compared to 760 internal notes and 351 letters in 2019. However, we maintained consistency in the figures of notes verbales sent by the Committee - 626 notes verbales in 2019 and 667 notes verbales in 2019. We also recorded a decrease in our participation in external events, from 59 in 2019 to 19 in 2020, primarily because the majority of the planned events were cancelled by the host and our experts were unable to travel. However, we have done our best to ensure that the Committee can exercise its mandate. At the beginning of the pandemic, we did everything in writing, including my annual briefing as Chair of the Committee to the Council, to meet the deadline requirement of the resolution. We also held numerous video-teleconference meetings. Eventually, when the situation permitted and following strict health and safety protocols, the 1540 Committee was the first subsidiary body to hold an in- person meeting in October 2020. On the subject of recommendations, like my Belgian colleagues, we share the need for an equitable division of labour in chairing the Committees. All members of the Council, including the permanent members, should chair Committees and share the responsibility and burden. That is an important point that I would like to underline. I would also like to recommend that the guidelines of the Committees and subsidiary Committees be renewed, as time has passed since they were discussed and they have not been adapted to the current challenge. The Council and its subsidiaries must avoid being criticized by non-members of the Council. It is time for us to renew ourselves; it is time for us to join the modern age. On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the Coordinator and members of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Ombudsperson and members of his Office, and the 1540 Group of Experts for their support and cooperation. I also would like to thank the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and other members of the Secretariat for their support of the Committee. I would also like to thank the members of the Committee, and through them, the ambassadors. I ask them to convey my deepest appreciation to all their experts in the Committees who have been influential in ensuring that the Committees are able to undertake their mandates. Allow me also in my national capacity to thank all of the outgoing Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, as well as the Facilitator, for their leadership in the past two years. I also wish the next Chairs of the Committees and the incoming members the best for their future work in the Committees. Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to my experts in the Indonesian mission in charge of those Committees, Rayyanul Muniah Sangadji and Haryo Budi Nugroho, who have worked diligently to ensure that we could undertake our mandates as Chair in the best way possible. We always try to have a consensus, and we always try ensure that we have done our duties. Like the saying goes, all good things must come to an end. I bow away humbly and wish that the incoming Chair may do better. TA9
