Sir Jeremy: I am very grateful to members of the
Council and to Members of the United Nations for their
interventions today, and I have especially appreciated
those delegations that have spoken for their regional
groups. I think that the more we take forward the
regional and subregional collective approach on this
subject, the more progress we are going to make.

Let me just take up a few points that came out of
the debate. I will not take long, because many of the
points are familiar to members. But I am sure that
Ambassador Arias and his team will want to follow up
with the Committee on some of these points. Pakistan,
warmly supported by Chile, Mexico, Peru and others,
referred to the need to follow up on the interplay
between counter-terrorism and human rights and
suggested a meeting with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other human
rights bodies on that interplay. Certainly, the United
Kingdom delegation would warmly welcome that. We
are in close liaison with the Office of the High
Commissioner and with human rights bodies, and quite
soon we shall organize, as members know, a meeting
with a visitor from the Human Rights Committee.

But that can be taken further. The role of civil
society is important, and I think that in taking this
aspect of our work forward, we need to be conscious,
with perhaps a touch of pride, that the Security Council
is constantly making advances in the way in which it
identifies the fulfilment of human rights obligations
with the promotion of peace and security. I think that is
a good thing.

The representative of France suggested that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) should identify,
to a greater extent, the generic difficulties faced by
Member States in meeting the obligations under in
resolution 1373 (2001) and find answers to those
difficulties. I think we have begun in some respects to
do that, but I think I agree with the Ambassador that he
is pointing to something which we have not yet done
enough of, and perhaps it is something that can be
taken up in the future. It goes together with the
promotion of concrete results on the ground, and it
keeps the nose of the Committee to the grindstone of
results, rather than just bureaucratic activity. And I
appreciate the spirit of that comment.

In the same vein, the United States referred to the
possibility of increasing the number of out site visits in
the future, which I think is another point that we need
to follow up. We just heard a request from the
Ambassador of Afghanistan to have a team visit to help
his Government carry through obligations that are quite
difficult to implement on the ground. I myself think
that this should be done by experts rather than by the
delegations on the Committee, but site visits - visits
on the ground - are something that perhaps we might
consider over the next period.

Likewise - and this is also related to
concretizing our results - I think that in my period we
did not do enough to tease out the fraternal relationship
between the 1373 Committee and the 1267 Committee.
I hope that the Hispanic brotherhood will do better than
I have done. But we do not do lists; the 1267
Committee does. But there is more than that to the
correlation between the two, and I think there again
there are results on the ground to be teased out of that
relationship.

I would like quickly to touch on the six questions
raised by the representative of India, because there is
interesting information and substance in that and
perhaps, also, a touch of needle. Let me give some
answers to the questions he raised. First, how do we
deal with a situation where a Member State is not
enforcing effective compliance? Well, we are going to
get into that in the next period. It is the firmness bit of
the sensitivity and firmness that I mentioned earlier.
We are going to have to demand performance up to the
standards of resolution 1373 (2001).

Secondly, it will also help - there is no getting
away from this, although so far we have not addressed
it in the Committee since it is not our job - to have a
definition of terrorism from the General Assembly. I
believe we should be making more progress on that
than we are.

Thirdly, doing what the representative of India
has asked for means that we have to address all
regional problems that touch on terrorism - some of
them not so far from his own country - and the
regional mechanisms for addressing them also have to
be effective. All these three things, I think, have to be
taken forward.

Can we avoid intrusiveness into Member States'
affairs? Yes, because we set up, way back in our
business, arrangements for confidentiality, and the
CTC can still follow those rules if Member States want
to take difficult questions to the area of the experts
only and not share them with other Member States. The
arrangements are there.
Is there a need for us to concentrate more on
internationally negotiated and agreed arrangements?
Well, we are based on resolution 1373 (2001); that is
our internationally agreed basis. If we use other
standards, such as those of the Financial Action Task
Force on Money Laundering (FATT), it is only because
they are entirely compatible and consistent with
resolution 1373 (2001).

Should we have a more representative, regional
balance? Well, that is up to the regions. We are open to
all the regions and to any subregional group that
Member States would like to form. You have got to
come halfway to meet us; we are not going to create
new regional arrangements just for our own business.
They come out of Member States' obligations and the
easier implementation of international obligations
through collective activity.

Should we not move at the pace of the slowest or
of the fastest? Well, we do not. This is the tailored
approached. I think that I made that very clear in my
remarks this morning. It is the policy of the Committee
to ask every Member State to move no faster and no
slower than their best pace under their own capability.

Finally, concerning information on assistance, we
recognize that we need to improve our web site. We
would like to have more information from donor
States. I am sure that the next period will see advances
in that area. But they were all constructive criticisms. I
hope that we can persuade Member States that in all
those areas we are doing the right things, even if we
have to do them faster.

I would like to make a final, general remark,
inspired perhaps by the Ambassador of Japan, who
spoke to us this afternoon. Terrorism does not come out
of differences between peoples or between
Governments, or arguments between different parts of
the United Nations and the inter-governmental system.
It comes out of barbarism and a lack of respect for the
most fundamental human values. In combating
terrorism, I think that in the Security Council and in the
Committee, we are standing up for the core objectives
of the United Nations. That is why the Committee itself
has had such an overwhelming response of support
from the United Nations membership at large. I,
myself, over my 18 months here, am extremely grateful
for that support.

The more we do, the more we see we need to do.
In that respect, I think Ambassador Arias has got a
huge task in front of him. But he will meet it. I wish
him luck with it. He will have the full support of the
United Kingdom delegation.
Thank you, Mr. President. Over and out.

