Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, and your country on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and to extend my thanks to the previous President, the
Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of
China, for his efforts during the month of June.

I also would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary- General for Iraq, Mr. Martin Kobler,
and his team in Baghdad and New York for their tireless
efforts to assist the Government and people of Iraq.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-General
on UNAMI's work in Iraq, document (S/2012/535), I
would like to present the following comments.

On the political and security situation, the Iraqi
people lived for decades under the brutal and dictatorial
regime of Saddam Hussein, which destroyed the
country and had severe and negative effects on the
mentality of the Iraqi people. However, after the fall of
Saddam's regime in 2003, the Iraqi people decided to go
through the process of building a new Iraq, which is a
constitutional, parliamentary and a federal democracy.
Until today, in Iraq we have faced difficulties, problems
and challenges, many of which are the product of
Saddam's legacy. Despite the problems among the
political groups in Iraq regarding many important
political issues, it is notable that they have conducted
their differences within peaceful means, as stipulayed
in the Iraqi Constitution for which the Iraqi people
voted.

These political differences have not crossed legal
and constitutional boundaries, and no political party
has threatened to use force or violence to impose its
will and political agenda. Therefore, I can say that
the Iraqi people started to learn to shout at each other
instead of shooting at each other, and to use ballots
rather than bullets to achieve their political objectives
and to express their views.

Iraq's President, Mr. Jalal Talabani, as a guardian
of the Constitution and within his mission to resolve the
current political situation, which was described by my
friend Mr. Kobler as a stalemate, has made intensive
efforts and held many meetings with senior leaders of
the country, parliamentary blocs and political parties,
in which he called on all parties to put the interests of
the country and its citizens above any other interest or
consideration.

In a statement on 17 May, he called on all political
rivals to stop reciprocal media campaigns, to reject
convulsive speech, to adopt constructive dialogue aimed
at reaching and promoting the commonalities, and not
to deepen and expand their differences. He also called
on them in his statement to consider the Constitution as
their point of reference and to commit themselves to the
basic principle the Government is based on, which is a
true partnership in managing authority and in taking
responsibility.

In that context, during his meeting with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Martin Kobler, on 12 June, the President affirmed
his ongoing efforts to bring the views of the political
rivals closer together and to prevent the dangers of
segregation in the country. He also mentioned that Iraq
is in dire need of political harmony among political
rivals and of achieving a national partnership in
administrating the country.

On the other hand, the Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri
Kamel al-Maliki, issued a press statement on 10 June
in which he called on all political partners to come
at the dialogue table and to be open to discussing all
the differences that have been set out in all papers and
initiatives, in the spirit of national responsibility. He
also called on them to strive to find solutions and move
towards the construction and reconstruction process,
including State-building and establishing State
institutions on a constitutional basis, and to accelerate
the allocation of services to citizens. He affirmed in
another statement, issued on 27 June, his commitment
to developing the political process and enforcing
democracy, and he renewed his call for a dialogue
based on the Constitution and for reforms in all State
institutions.

Within the framework of the intensive efforts
made by the Iraqi Government to grant more authority
to provincial councils, the Prime Minister chaired a
meeting ofthe regular session ofthe Council ofMinisters
in Dhi Qar province on 12 June. In the meeting, the
Prime Minister renewed his assertion that the purpose
of holding the Council's meetings in the provinces, as
has been done in Mosul, Kirkuk and Basra provinces,
is to get a closer look at their problems and needs and
to support and help local Governments to improve the
provinces and accelerate services provided to citizens
in all sectors.

The security situation in Iraq has witnessed an
enormous and noticeable improvement. Statistics
provided by the Ministry of Health point to a continuing
decline in the numbers of civilian victims of terrorism
in 2011 as compared to statistics recorded in 2009 and
2010. The number of terrorism victims declined by
20 per cent in 2010, as compared with its level in 2009,
and decreased by 14 per cent in 2011, as compared to
2010. This year, as Mr. Kobler mentioned, there have
been more terrorist attacks, but we hope that for the rest
of the year we will see more and more improvements in
security as the Government is taking all measures to
try to stop the terrorists from achieving their cynical
objectives.

The improved security situation has encouraged
many Iraqi refugees to return to Iraq, and statistics of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees point to the fact that the number of Iraqi
refugees, for example in Syria, has declined to 87,000
this year from 150,000 last year.

On the social and economic situation, the
Government of Iraq has stressed that the duty of
all officials in all Government sectors is to meet
the demands of Iraqi citizens with all its available
resources and to improve services for the Iraqi people.
The Government has called on everyone to cooperate
with it in order to alleviate the suffering of the citizens
and to provide them with all possible services. The
Government of Iraq also affirms its commitment to the
economic openness plan towards all countries of the
world.

In that regard, I would like to point to the increase in
crude oil exports for the month of May and its positive
effect on the economy in Iraq. Total exports reached
76 million barrels in May, with a value of$7,831,000,000
and with an average price of approximately $103 per
barrel.

I would also like to point to the fourth licensing
round in the Ministry ofOil, which granted a consortium
of Kuwait Energy, the Turkish Petroleum Corporation
and the United Arab Emirates Dragon Oil company
with a service and investment contract for exploration
of block 9 in Basra province over an area of 900 square
kilometres with oil potential. This licensing round came
as part of the policy ofreceiving and opening offers, in a
very transparent way, from international oil companies
that are eligible to compete for service contracts for
exploration areas listed in the fourth licensing round,
which includes 12 locations with six exploration areas
spread over a number of provinces.

The fourth licensing round for the exploration of
oil and gas was opened in the presence of Mr. Hussein
al-Shahristani, Deputy Prime Minister for Energy
Affairs, Mr. Abdul-Kareem Luaibi, Minister of Oil,
and a number of members of Parliament, presidents of
provincial councils, Ambassadors and representatives of
the international oil companies. Forty-seven companies
from Egypt, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom, Russia, China, France, Italy, Japan,
the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Romania,
Croatia, South Korea, India, Pakistan, Indonesia,
Vietnam, Thailand, Turkey and Angola participated in
this round.

The Ministry of Oil also announced that Iraq's
oil production for the next 20 years will be 60 billion
barrels, with an estimated value of $5 trillion, based
on estimated price of $85 per barrel. The Ministry is
currently working on constructing four new refineries in
Iraqi provinces through a process of foreign investment.
The establishment of those refineries will have a
positive effect on the Iraqi economy by increasing the
production of oil products, which will reflect positively
on the fuel distribution to Iraqi citizens.

Iraq has started oil production at the new Al-Ahdab
oil field in Wasit province in central Iraq, which is
managed by the Chinese National Petroleum Company
with a production level of 60,000 barrels per day. The
accompanied natural gas from this field will be used
to provide fuel for Al-Kahlaa power station in Misan
province. Through the licensing rounds, Iraq is seeking
to increase its oil production to meet domestic demand
and to export the surplus, in addition to increasing its
oil reserves by new discoveries in the new block offered
to international companies for exploration. Those
steps affirm that, after less than a year and a half of
implementation of the previous round of contracts, Iraq
has been able to increase its oil production by more
than 500,000 barrels of oil a day.

I also would like to point out that an Iraqi delegation
headed by Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, signed in Brussels on 11 May the European
Union-Iraq Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
That agreement is a comprehensive long-term treaty
between parties that believe in the goals and principles
of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and are committed to the principles
of democracy. During the visit, discussions were held
regarding work procedures that would contribute to the
implementation of the Agreement for joint cooperation
on issues relating to investment and energy. Iraq
and the European Union also touched on the timing
of implementing the most important issues covered
by this Agreement, including political dialogue, in
addition to touching on political issues relating to the
achievement of stability and peace in the Arab region.
I also would like to point to the visit of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Bulgaria and Poland, as
representatives of the European Union, to Baghdad on
23 June to discuss the implementation mechanism of
the Agreement with Iraqi officials.

With regard to the human rights situation, Iraq is
entering a new era in which the Iraqis are building the
foundation of democracy and all kinds of freedoms:
freedom of the press, freedom to establish political
parties and freedom of expression, as well as pluralism
and the peaceful transition of power. Iraq has also
continued to move towards deepening the bonds of
friendship and cooperation with neighbouring countries
in order to regain its positive role and live in peace with
its people and neighbours in a way that strengthens the
chances for stability and peace in the region.

Iraq is also committed to abiding by the decisions of
the Human Rights Council and has made considerable
progress and achieved important accomplishments in
protecting and respecting human rights, despite the
challenges and difficulties. It has done so through
the work of the competent institutions specialized in
that field, starting with the Human Rights Committee
in Parliament, the Ministry of Human Rights and its
offices located throughout Baghdad and the provinces,
and human rights committees in the provincial councils,
and ending with the establishment of the Independent
High Commission for Human Rights. Also, many
important regulations have been issued regarding
human rights and several laws and decrees issued by
the former regime that were contrary to the principles
of human rights were either cancelled or amended.

Iraq presented its report during the Universal
Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council in
Geneva and agreed on the Council's recommendations,
which were formulated with the vision and ideas of the
Ministry of Human Rights within the framework of
the national plan for human rights, which is considered
to be the first plan in the history of the Iraqi State to
become a road map in that field. Iraq also submitted
its report regarding the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights ofthe
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
and is preparing to welcome the Special Rapporteur on
torture, following an invitation from Iraq.

In this regard, I would like to point to the creation of
the Independent High Commission for Human Rights,
which is a historic achievement for Iraq and a sign of
its true intention to respect and promote human rights
in the country. What makes its creation unique is the
mechanism formulated by the Commission's Law No. 54
of 2009, which ensures transparency, professionalism,
democracy and the Paris standards in creating an
Independent Commission by the Parliamentary Human
Rights Committee, the Parliamentary Committee of
Experts, and the rest of the participants, which was
crowned by the House of Representatives' approval
of the members of the Board of the Commissioners.
It added an important institution to the process of
building a comprehensive system for promoting human
rights that enjoys the backing and support of the United
Nations and its agencies.

The freedoms of the press and expression are
two of the most important safeguards for an effective
monitoring mechanism for the fourth authority on
the situation of human rights and the rule of law in
Iraq. The Constitution ensures freedom of expression
and opinion by all means and the freedom of the
press, print, advertising, the media and publishing.
Freedom of expression and opinion are centre pillars
in democracy-building, which has continued to evolve
since 2003.

Law No. 22 on protecting journalists was adopted;
the reason stated for its adoption was to respect
freedom of the press and opinion, to guarantee the
rights of journalists and to emphasize their role in
establishing democracy in the new Iraq. The important
role ofjournalists is to complement the role of human
rights observers. Pursuant to article 2, the law aims to
promote the rights of journalists and provide them with
protection in the Republic. Several items in the law
deal with the legal assurances forjournalists to perform
their work with freedom and ease.

I would like to affirm that Iraq has fulfilled its
humanitarian and international obligations towards the
residents of Camp New Iraq, which used to be called
Camp Ashraf. As Mr. Kobler mentioned, the Iraqi
Government has showed flexibility in relocating the
Camp's residents. Iraq has also collaborated fully with
Special Representative Kobler and with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in solving the
issue of the Camp and relocating its residents to Camp
Hurriya. The Iraqi Government calls on the members
of the European Union and other countries to facilitate
the process of relocating the Camp's residents as a final
solution to this problem.

With regard to the regional and international
situation, in accordance with Iraq's responsibility
towards the region and the world, as a peaceful State
aiming to establish international peace and security
through cooperative work to achieve the goals and aims
of the United Nations Charter, the Iraqi Government,
after hosting the Arab summit in March, worked on
holding a meeting of the five plus one group (PS-l-l)
and the European Union with the delegation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran regarding the Iranian nuclear
programme, on 23 and 24 May. The meeting was
held to discuss this important and sensitive issue in
an Arab capital, which reflects the interest of Arab
countries and their people in dealing with that issue
through peaceful means and in taking responsibility
in protecting the region and its people from any war
or conflict. In a statement issued by the P5+1 and
delivered by Ms. Catherine Ashton, European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, in a press conference on 24 May, she expressed
her thanks to the Iraqi Government, and especially to
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, for
the exceptional hospitality and organization of those
meetings.

Within the framework of Iraq's openness to all
countries of the world, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari visited Moscow on 14 June upon
invitation from his Russian counterpart, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov. During the visit, the two Ministers discussed
the results of the nuclear talks conducted in Baghdad
between the six countries and Iran and the role played
by Iraq in facilitating that meeting as a prelude to the
meeting that followed in Moscow. An agreement was
reached on a protocol for political and diplomatic
collaboration between the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and the Russian Federation. Furthermore, the
work ofRussian companies in the oil, gas and electricity
sectors was discussed during the meeting, in addition to
military collaboration and the idea of establishing an
air travel route between Baghdad and Moscow.

I would also like to point to the active role of
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs, who
headed the Iraqi delegation participating in the meeting
of the international working group on Syria in Geneva
on 30 June and the high-level ministerial meeting held
to prepare the final document that was produced by the
group's meeting. Iraq offered significant observations
that reflected its position in dealing with the Syrian
crisis, which was agreed in the outcome document.
Iraq's Minister of Foreign Affairs also participated in
the Syrian opposition conference on 2 July in Cairo in
his capacity as Chair of the League of Arab States.

In the framework of Iraq's desire to strengthen
its bonds with Arab countries, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari
met with Mr. Mohamed Morsy, President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt. In the meeting, Mr. Zebari conveyed
the greetings and congratulations of President of Iraq
Jalal Talabani, Prime Minister Nuri Al-Maliki and
the Iraqi people upon the election of Mr. Morsy as the
new President. Mr. Zebari stressed the importance of
the bilateral relations between the two countries on the
official and popular levels, and Iraq's desire to improve
their relations, which would serve the interests of the
two countries.

In the light of implementing Iraq's obligations
imposed under resolution 1957 (2010) in December 2010,
which lifted the sanctions against Iraq, and following
Iraq's voluntary implementation of the Additional
Protocol to its Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Iraqi
Parliament ratified the Additional Protocol on 28 June.

Concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, I would like to affirm that Iraq is committed
to resolving all unresolved issues with our neighbour
Kuwait through friendly relations and negotiations.
I also assure the Council that there is positive
collaboration and exchange between the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait with a view to settling all the
unresolved issues between the two countries resulting
from Saddam's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Resolving
these remaining issues is a top priority for us in Iraq.
I affirm my country's commitment to fulfilling the
remaining obligations within the framework of the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council on
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

In this context, the Iraqi Government, in
collaboration with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and with some friendly countries, has
made intensive efforts to locate the remains of missing
Kuwaitis. The Iraqi authorities have searched official
records and mass graves for the purpose of finding the
remains of the missing Kuwaitis. We have achieved
good results in this regard and are pursuing our earnest
efforts to close this file.
In the context of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and of efforts made by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs to close the file of Kuwaiti property
taken over by the former regime in 1990, on 16 April, in
the headquarters of the Central Bank of Kuwait, paper
notes, metal currency, documents and keys belonging
to the Central Bank of Kuwait were handed over to
the Kuwaiti side. On 17 April, 15 microfilm cassettes
containing the archives of the Kuwaiti newspaper
Al Anbar were transferred to the Kuwaiti authorities in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

I would also like to point to the meeting of the joint
Iraqi-Kuwaiti Ministerial Committee that was held
in Baghdad on 29 April, at which a number of issues
were discussed, most importantly Iraq's obligations
towards international resolutions, land borders,
freedom of navigation in Khor Abdallah, missing Iraqis
and Kuwaitis, Kuwaiti loans to Iraq, compensations,
Kuwait's new Mubarak Port, the establishment of a Gulf
hunting area, and the opening of a Kuwaiti consulates
in Basra and Erbil.

At the end of the meeting, the following documents
were signed: the minutes of the meeting of the second
session of the High Committee, at which an inventory
of all issues was identified, signed by the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries; the agreement to
establish a joint collaboration committee between Iraq
and Kuwait, signed by the Foreign Ministers of the two
countries; and an agreement between Iraq and Kuwait
regarding the establishment of a joint management
committee to facilitate and organize navigation in Khor
Abdullah, signed by the Transportation Ministers of
the two countries. An agreement was also reached to
sign other accords after concluding the legal steps in
each country during the visit of the Prime Minister of
Kuwait to Baghdad before the end of this year.

A positive environment has prevailed at the
meetings of the committee and sub-committees, as has
a common dedication to the importance of achieving
noticeable improvement in Iraqi-Kuwaiti relations.
All these things have been achieved as a result of the
political will of the leaders of the two countries. We
hope that the achievements of the 29 April meeting
will pave the way for Iraq's exit from the provisions
of Chapter VII, especially when an understanding on
specific mechanisms and joint vision for the future
steps is reached.

In conclusion, I would like to point to the letter
of the Foreign Minister of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
addressed to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and dated
28 June 2012, which states Iraq's desire for the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq to be
extended for a period of 12 months (S/2012/520, annex).
I also affirm my Government's appreciation for the role
played by UNAMI in Iraq and New York in helping
Iraq, and for the efforts made by Special Representative
Martin Kobler to provide the support requested by the
Iraqi Government in line with the mechanisms agreed
upon between the two sides. I agree with the statement
made by my friend Martin Kobler to the effect that
UNAMI is needed now more than ever in Iraq.

