I congratulate you, Mr. President, and the friendly Republic of Indonesia on presiding over the Security Council for the current month. I also extend my deep condolences to my colleague, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, and his friendly country for the painful incident that occurred yesterday, causing the death of a major general and the injury of two soldiers of the Russian army by an explosive device planted by terrorists as their convoy was targeted after its return from a humanitarian mission in Syria's Deir-ez-Zor governorate. Since the Security Council endorsed the political process as a basis for resolving the crisis in my country, some Permanent Members of the Council have endeavoured to undermine that approach day after day, month after month and year after year to the extent that those same members have, unfortunately, started misusing the Council to practically support the terrorist war on Syria and to justify their occupation of its lands and their unbridled investment in terrorism. Every time we have submitted a complaint to the Security Council or informed it of facts about acts of support for terrorism, aggression, occupation, plunder and destruction of the resources of my country, the more Western pressure increased to deflect the efforts of the Council and prevent it from carrying out its role in upholding the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and ensuring respect for the content of its own resolutions relevant to the situation in Syria, foremost of which is ensuring full commitment to its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. That only raises numerous questions. What has the Security Council done to end the American occupation of parts of my country? What has it done to put an end to the Turkish occupation and the practices of the terrorism-sponsoring Erdogan regime? What steps have been taken by the Security Council to support the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies in combating terrorism, confronting the tens of thousands of terrorists without borders, also known in United Nations language as foreign terrorist fighters, and holding the Governments recruiting, funding and supporting them accountable? At a time when members of the Security Council pledged, at the outset of their resolutions relevant to the situation in my country, a strong commitment to respecting the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, the United States occupation forces, in full view of the United Nations and the international community, took a new step to plunder Syria's natural resources, including Syrian oil and gas. Recently, the United States company Crescent Delta Energy, with the sponsorship and support of the United States Administration, has entered into a contract with the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) separatist militia, an agent of the United States occupation forces in north-eastern Syria, with the aim of stealing Syrian oil and depriving the Syrian State and Syrian people of the basic revenues necessary to improve the humanitarian situation, provide for livelihood needs and reconstruction. Imagine an unknown company born out of nowhere, headed by former United States Ambassador to Denmark James Cain, a retired American Delta Force officer named James Reese, and an oil expert, all with the blessing of the American Administration, which has actually established this company. This hostile American behaviour towards Syria, which violates international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Security Council's resolutions, did not come as a surprise, as the United States Administration had facilitated the possession and trafficking of the terrorist organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) with looted Syrian oil and its smuggling to Turkey in cooperation with the terrorism- sponsoring Erdogan Regime. Furthermore, the United States Administration has continued, through its illegal alliance, to launch repeated attacks on the Syrian Arab Army forces to prevent them from liberating the areas occupied by the terrorist organization ISIS in north-eastern Syria. Just two days ago, two American military helicopters attacked a checkpoint of the Syrian Arab Army south-east of Qamishli, killing one soldier and wounding two others. We all remember the sinful attack by the American occupation forces on the sites of the Syrian Arab Army on Mount Tharda in Deir ez-Zor, on 17 September 2016, to enable the terrorist organization ISIS to control those sites. Furthermore, United States President Donald Trump previously announced, on 27 October 2019, that he "intends to conclude a deal with an American company to go to Syria and obtain its share of Syrian oil". Trump reaffirmed his endeavour on 1 November 2019 by announcing his intention to keep Syrian oil because he "loves oil". It is well known to all that the United States Administration has allowed United States oil companies, whose work was supervised by former United States Vice President Dick Cheney, to extract Syrian oil from the occupied Syrian Golan in flagrant violation of relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. In that regard, we ask: Does this express the respect of the United States - the host country of United Nations Headquarters and a permanent member of the Security Council, which is entrusted with contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security - for international law, the Charter of the United Nations and a political solution in Syria? The recent period has also seen the American company Creative Associates International conclude a cooperation agreement with the so-called Civil Council in Deir ez-Zor, which operates under the umbrella of the Syrian Democratic Forces militias. These are the same militias that issued, a few days ago, the so-called protection and management of absentee property law, which is aimed at looting the property of Syrians who were displaced by the concerted efforts of ISIS and SDF to change the demographic composition of those areas. Is this agreement, sponsored by the American Administration and its occupying forces, consistent with the commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of my country? The shameful record of the United States of America against dozens of States Members of the Organization answers this question and reveals the lack of belief of American Administrations in the principles and purposes of this international Organization. My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, condemns these practices and any similar acts or suspicious deals that take place with proxy militias and terrorist entities or artificial bodies that do not have any legal capacity or status. Syria affirms that these practices are null and void and have no legal effect, as they constitute a shameless assault against the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic and the resources of its people. The late international law must be turning in its grave now, lamenting such behaviour. For its part, the Turkish regime continues its practices aimed at strengthening its occupation of parts of my country. The Turkish regime is trying to change the legal, demographic, economic and financial character of those occupied territories by the Turkification and displacement of inhabitants, plundering their real estate and property, imposing the use of Turkish currency, and naming squares and streets after Turkish and Ottoman figures. The Turkish regime even uses Ottoman names for the terrorist organizations and entities that it supervises, operates and invests in for its foreign wars in Libya and elsewhere. These terrorist groups with historic Ottoman names include the Sultan Murad Brigade, the Sultan Muhammad AI Fateh Brigade and the Nur al-Din al-Zanki movement and others. These are the tip of the iceberg of the crimes perpetrated by the Erdogan regime, which has never respected its pledges under the Astana agreements and the Sochi understandings and has committed every single prescribed crime, such as supporting terrorism, facilitating the infiltration of foreign terrorist fighters into Syria, supplying terrorist organizations with toxic chemicals to use against civilians and fabricating accusations against the Syrian Government. The Turkish Regime has launched acts of aggression and occupation, including the aggression against the city of Kessab and the so-called Operation Peace Spring and the Turkish military incursion into north and north-western Syria, looting the factories and property of the Syrians in Aleppo and its countryside, and burning or looting agricultural crops, and trading with ISIS and terrorist organizations in oil and looted antiquities, and others. At the time this session is being held, more than a million Syrians from Hasakah and its countryside live without drinking water in intense heat and fear of the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). This is all a result of the Security Council's silence on the Turkish regime's continued use of water as a weapon of war against civilians, by cutting drinking water off at Allouk station more than 15 times for periods ranging from two to ten days and by reducing its production capacity to its minimum levels. How long will the Security Council remain silent in the face of war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by Erdogan? Do members have an answer? The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that the presence of the Turkish military forces on Syrian territory is an act of aggression, occupation and a gross violation of the principles of international law, the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of friendly relations and good neighbourliness between adjacent countries. My country also affirms that the Turkish regime's confiscation and annexation of swaths of Syrian lands and its construction of a so-called separation wall on them will not change the legal status of those lands or the fact that they belong to the Syrian Arab Republic, nor will it in any way affect the legal and sovereign rights of the Syrian Arab Republic or be a precursor to any future binary demarcation. The use by the Turkish regime of its NATO membership as a shield in order to antagonize the neighbouring countries and violate the sovereign rights of these countries increases the responsibility of this alliance for the absence of stability in the entire Mediterranean region and escalates tensions to unprecedented levels. The national delegation continues its preparations to participate in the next round of meetings of the Constitutional Committee, which will be held in Geneva a few days later. We reaffirm that this process is and must always be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, without any external interference, and that the foundations that have been agreed upon and the terms of reference that have been reached must be upheld and respected and not allowed to be manipulated to divert it from its assigned tasks and goals under any pretext. Yes, we say over and over again that the solution is political and exclusively Syrian-owned without any foreign interference - a solution whose parameters are set by Syrians themselves in order to protect their country from vultures lurking in it, not according to criteria set by the American Administration and Erdogan, who attack Syria and occupy its precious territories. It seems from the statement of my colleague, the American Permanent Representative, that her Administration's policy towards my country is based on settling scores with any country standing with my country against the conspiracy targeting Syria and those same countries. Therefore, it is not strange that the American representative would start her statement speaking about Iran as if the subject of today's meeting were the predicament of the American Administration after its withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The Syrian Arab Republic again reiterates its demand that the Secretary- General and the Security Council take urgent action in response to the complaint submitted on 31 May, condemning the acts of aggression, occupation and external interference in the internal affairs of Syria, as well as the disastrous effects of unilateral coercive measures imposed by the United State Administration and the European Union, despite the pleas of the Secretary-General, the Special Envoy and many others. These measures prevent the Syrians from meeting their basic need for food, medicine and medical equipment, especially in the light of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and its dire impacts. They also represent a crime of deliberate killing of the people of the countries affected by those sanctions. A final friendly word for the Special Envoy Mr. Pederson. I heard him describe in his statement the American occupation forces as "the International Coalition forces". Naturally, the defunct international law, the martyred Charter of the United Nations, the Envoy himself, the Security Council and I - all of us - know that the presence of American forces in my country is illegitimate and a mere occupation. Therefore, I call upon my friend Mr. Pederson to reconsider the use of that term.
