Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like, on behalf of the delegation of Chile, to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this public debate
on the mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), thus
providing us with an opportunity to express once again
our view on a process of self-determination with which
we feel very closely identified. It is also gratifying to
have the opportunity to speak during your presidency,
Sir, as the Russian Federation has staunchly supported
UNTAET since the very beginning of this difficult and
successful endeavour.

Since 1961, Chile has been a member of the
Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. In
that forum, as well as in others, it has worked hard in
favour of the principle of the self-determination of non-
self-governing territories on the agenda of the United
Nations.

We therefore fully appreciate the real significance
for the people of East Timor of having achieved, after
so many years of struggle, the right to decide freely,
and within a framework of respect for democratic
values, the form of government that will determine
their first steps as a viable and independent nation.

We welcome the climate of peace and order that
characterized the recent electoral process, which
culminated in the election, by a large majority, of the
presidential candidate Mr. Xanana Gusmao, to whom
we again extend our most sincere congratulations and
wish every success in the discharge of his important
functions.

Chile shares the View expressed by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report that, even given the
substantial progress that has been made in
consolidating the political and institutional structure of
East Timor, the process will remain fragile when
independence is declared on 20 May and will require
the assistance and solidarity of the international
community.

Because of that, the international community
must assume its inescapable responsibility to prepare
the people of East Timor to exercise its most cherished
and fundamental rights within a framework that
guarantees freedom and democracy. A future United
Nations presence, if possible for a period of no more
than two years, with a clear mandate and with the
consent and active support of the East Timorese
people, seems to be the best way to achieve that end.

Chile therefore supports the establishment of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and welcomes the proposal of the
Secretary-General to establish a comprehensive plan
for implementing the mandate of the mission, which, as
the Council knows, will focus on three main
programmes, dealing with stability, democracy and
justice; internal security and law enforcement; and
external security and border control.

We cannot fail to acknowledge and express our
appreciation for the help and constant guidance that the
Security Council provided throughout this process. We
value in particular the commendable work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
East Timor and Transitional Administrator, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and by the Senior Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional Cabinet, Mr. Jose Ramos
Horta. We wish Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, the
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, every success in discharging his
challenging new functions, and we reiterate our
willingness to cooperate with him.

Even as I speak, a Chilean squadron of
helicopters assigned to East Timor is reaffirming,
through its actions, our commitment to see through to a
successful conclusion the process of political transition
there. Likewise, in a spirit of cooperation and
selflessness, we will respond, within our means, to the
appeal for any cooperation that may be required for the
reconstruction of what will be the first new nation of
the millennium.

