Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking the Secretary-General for his
presence here today, for his commitment and for his
briefing. We would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations and the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for their work on the ground. I take this
opportunity to reiterate France's full support for
Mr. Mladenov.

We find ourselves, on the eve of the beginning of
the ministerial segment seventy-first session of the
General Assembly, at a moment where it is appropriate
to take stock. The results of the past year have been
indisputable. What we are seeing here is the inexorable
marginalization of two-State solution, which is a
solution, let us be clear, that is today at risk. Israeli
settlement policy constitutes one of the main threats
to the implementation of a two-State solution. By
splintering Palestine's future territory, the settlement
policy undermines the prospects for a Palestinian
State. The settlement policy is demonstrated by
the de facto annexation of Area C, the transfer of
populations, impediments to movement, and the
destruction of housing and humanitarian infrastructure
for Palestinians. The radicalization of public opinion,
acts of violence, incitements to violence and terrorism
seriously undermine the prospects for seeing two States
coexist - a State ofIsrael and a Palestinian State living
side by side in peace and security. Progress in terms
of Palestinian reconciliation are also indispensable and
urgent.

Following two years of interruption of the
negotiations process, France vigorously advocates
for the need for renewed international assistance for
the peace process and the preservation of a two-State
solution. We must act collectively to place this conflict
at the very core of our priorities and extricate ourselves
from the current impasse, which is an impasse that
weakens the Palestinian Authority, jeopardizes security
for Israelis and fuels the radicalization of public opinion
throughout the region and beyond.

It is in that context that France has presented to the
parties and their main partners an initiative aimed at
recreating collective political mobilization in favour
of the peace process. Our approach is both progressive
and collective. It is progressive because all of us know
that the conditions for the immediate relaunch of the
negotiations are simply not in place today. It is therefore
the responsibility of the international community to
urge the parties to return to the negotiating table by
creating around them a conducive climate coupled with
a positive agenda, with a set of incentives to that end.
This is the very heart of our initiative. It is a collective
approach because we are attempting to tailor each stage
of our initiative to existing efforts, in particular those
of the Quartet and our Arab partners. Furthermore,
France has always yearned to see the Security Council,
when the time is right, play a key role in assisting and
consolidating the negotiations process.

The ministerial conference that was held in Paris
on 3 June was a decisive moment that enabled us to take
a first step. The international community reaffirmed its
commitment to the two-State solution and expressed
its determination to engage collectively to recreate
the necessary conditions for the resumption of peace
negotiations. On 19 September, in New York, at the
margins of the General Assembly, France will organize
a working meeting at the level of high officials to
take stock of work already carried out and to identify
measures that should enable us to preserve the two-
State solution and make progress on the conditions
necessary for a resumption of the peace process. It
goes without saying that we will continue to involve
the parties and inform them of our work in the most
transparent manner, as we have always done at all
stages of the process.

If we do not act with resolve, the two-State solution
will die, and it will gradually make way for a situation
of fait accompli, which will never guarantee a just
and lasting settlement of the conflictl; rather, it will
continue to weigh upon the region's equilibrium. France
will therefore spare no effort to prevent this drift and
will work to recreate a political momentum based on
the two-State solution.

We will never give up. Together with all of our
partners, we will continue to work unstintingly to this
end.

