Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I would
like to begin by acknowledging the presence of Special
Coordinator Mladenov and thanking him for his good
work and his excellent briefing this morning.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its 28 member States. The candidate
countries Montenegro and Albania align themselves
with this statement.
The Middle East peace process continues to be a
top priority for the European Union, and our policies on
the issue remain clear and consistent. We believe that
it is more important than ever to uphold international
consensus on the key principles underpinning the
Middle East peace process, which are the indispensable
cornerstones for a just and enduring peace for Israelis
and Palestinians, based on a two-State solution, with
the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.

There is no viable alternative to a negotiated two-
State solution, based on the parameters set out in the
European Council Conclusions of July 2014, that fulfils
the legitimate aspirations of both parties - including
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty - ends
the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent status issues. On 23 December 2016, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which
reiterates some of the key threats to the viability of a
two-State solution that were also identified in the July
report of the Quartet, including continued settlement
activities and acts of violence, terror and incitement.

The European Union would like to recall that
settlements are illegal under international law,
constitute an obstacle to peace and threaten to make
a two-State solution impossible. The European Union
will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed on by the parties. The EU will continue to
distinguish, in its relevant dealings, between the territory
of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since
1967. As for Jerusalem, the EU will continue to respect
the international consensus embodied in resolution 478
(1980). A way must be found through negotiations to
resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
both States.

Unfortunately, actions on the ground continue to
imperil the prospects for a two-State solution. Since
January, the Israeli authorities have advanced plans
and tenders for nearly 6,000 settlement units in the
occupied Palestinian territory. In late March, the
Israeli Government decided, for the first time in more
than two decades, to establish a new settlement deep
inside the West Bank. It also declared further land deep
inside the West Bank to be State land. The EU is deeply
concerned about the enactment in February of the so-
called regularization law, which would mean crossing a
new threshold, even under Israeli law, for the settlement
enterprise in the West Bank. We urge Israel to end all
settlement activity and dismantle the outposts erected
since March 2001, in line with prior obligations.

The EU is also deeply concerned about the
significant increase in Israeli demolitions and
confiscations of Palestinian structures, including EU-
funded projects, in Area C, which is critical to the
viability and contiguity of a future Palestinian State.
Many affected communities, such as Khan Al-Ahmar,
are at imminent risk of eviction and forced transfer.
The EU remains committed to protecting the rights
of Palestinians, including their human rights, and to
providing assistance to people in vulnerable situations
in their current place of residence in Area C. We urge
Israel to meet its obligations under international law,
including human rights and humanitarian law, allow the
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid and accelerate
the approval of master plans and building permits for
Palestinians in Area C.

The EU firmly rejects terror and any acts of
violence that take innocent lives, as well as any
incitement to hatred and violence, which we see as
fundamentally incompatible with advancing a peaceful
settlement. It will be critical to uphold commitments
to acting effectively against violence and incitement
if mutual trust is to be rebuilt and another escalation
avoided. Alleged violations and abuses of human rights
by all sides must be investigated in accordance with
international standards. The European Union would
like to emphasize that the compliance of States and
non-State actors with international humanitarian and
human rights law, including their accountability, is
fundamental to peace and security in the region.

We call on Palestinian leaders to consistently and
clearly condemn terrorist attacks and take all steps
within their capacity to end incitement to hatred and
violence. We also urge Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process, which is an
important element in reaching an eventual two-State
solution. The European Union urges all parties in the
West Bank and Gaza to advance that process with a view
to holding democratic elections in the West Bank and
Gaza. A single, legitimate and democratic Palestinian
authority, with full control over Gaza, is critical to
achieving a viable Palestinian State. To that end, the
EU calls on all Palestinian factions to find common
ground and work together to address the needs of the
Palestinian people.

Last but not least, the situation in Gaza is
unsustainable. All parties must act swiftly to produce
a fundamental change in the political, security and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip in accordance
with resolution 1860 (2009), including ending the
closure of the crossing points and opening them fully,
while addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns.
The EU stands ready to support the consolidation of
Palestinian State capacities and efforts to strengthen the
Palestinian economy, both in the West Bank and Gaza.

To make progress, we need the parties to
demonstrate, through policies and actions, their
genuine commitment to the two-State solution in order
to prevent the irreversible loss of this solution and to
find a new path to successful final status negotiations.
The EU will support all serious peacemaking efforts
and will continue to work closely with the parties and
with partners in the region and beyond, including
within the framework of the Quartet.

As reflected in discussions at the Summit of the
League of Arab States in March, the Arab Peace
Initiative provides key elements for the settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the opportunity
for building a regional security framework. The EU
strongly believes that further dialogue on that basis will
bring results. A comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict could provide a new impetus for
peace and security throughout the wider region, and
therefore that opportunity must be seized.

I would like to say a few words about Syria. Syria
has been the geostrategic link between Europe and
the Middle East. It was the core of the Mediterranean
civilization that shaped our culture, our traditions and
our way of thinking. That role as a bridge between
civilizations and continents is what has made that
country so important throughout its entire history.
Today Syria is at war - a war that is killing its people
and destroying its cultural heritage. We condemn the
systematic, widespread and gross violations and abuses
of human rights and all violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties, particularly the
Syrian Government and its allies. The EU continues
to call for full unhindered humanitarian access and for
accountability for all violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
The historic bridge is collapsing, and we cannot
simply wait for the conflict to end while we spend
billions to contain the crisis and keep the refugees
fed and sheltered. The United Nations - the Security
Council - can build bridges, and Europe is here to
help. That is why the European Union endorsed the
strategy for Syria in early April, aimed at promoting
a political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique' of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). We are focused on putting all our
weight behind achieving a framework agreement in the
United Nations-mediated intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
that will contain a political package so that a negotiated
transitional political process can be implemented, in
line with the previously mentioned resolution.

Earlier this month, we hosted in Brussels a
conference on the theme "Supporting the future of Syria
and the region", together with six co-chairs - Germany,
Kuwait, Norway, Qatar, the United Kingdom and the
United Nations. It was a very successful conference, on
which I briefed the General Assembly yesterday.

The EU condemns in the strongest terms the
chemical attack on the town of Khan Shaykhun in Idlib
province on 4 April, which had horrific consequences,
causing the deaths and injuries of scores of civilians,
including children and relief workers, with many
victims displaying symptoms of gas poisoning. The
use of chemical weapons or chemical substances as
weapons amounts to a war crime. Their use, including
by the regime and Da'esh, must stop, and identified
perpetrators must be held accountable for that violation
of international law.

We strongly support the investigation by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in Syria, which is in
the process of gathering and analysing information
from all available sources, as a precursor to further
investigations by the United Nations-OPCW Joint
Investigative Mechanism. The European Union is
united behind their work and committed to bringing
impunity to an end.

We strongly condemn the horrific attack in
Rashidin on 15 April, which killed at least 126 persons,
many of them children, and injured dozens.
Accountability for gross and systematic violations
perpetrated in Syria is paramount. Any inability to
ensure accountability of the perpetrators can result in
additional brutality and in the continued flouting of
international norms. The EU calls on all parties to the
conflict to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.

In concluding, I would also like to speakbriefly about
Lebanon. The European Union welcomes Lebanon's
recent progress to end the political stalemate, with the
election of a president and a new Government in place.
The next important milestone for Lebanon's democratic
process is an agreement on a new electoral framework
before the expiration of parliament's mandate on 20 June
and the holding of timely elections. The EU reaffirms
its commitment to the unity, sovereignty, stability,
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon. It
reiterates the importance of an ongoing commitment to
a policy of disassociation from all regional conflicts, in
line with the Baabda Declaration.

The European Union stresses the importance
of Lebanon's continued commitment to the full
implementation of its international obligations,
including Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004),
1680 (2006), 1701 (2006) and 1757 (2007). The EU
also commends Lebanon's extraordinary efforts in
continuing to host more than 1.1 million refugees from
Syria until conditions for their return are met, and
stresses the importance of living up to commitments
with regard to rights and protection of refugees. As
confirmed at the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, the EU is determined
to continue its support to Lebanon's stabilization and
development and calls upon the regional partners and
the international community to do the same.

