Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of the State of Bahrain wishes at the
outset to express its great appreciation to all the members
of the Security Council for responding to the Arab

 

Group's request to consider the grave situation resulting
from the Israeli Government's decision of 21 June 1998 on
expanding the municipal boundaries of the city of
Jerusalem. That decision would change the legal status of
the city as a Holy City for all three major monotheistic
religions, would increase Israel's grip on the Holy City, and
would eradicate its Arab character by changing its
demographic and population makeup. This is in
contravention of all relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

Since taking power, the current Israeli Government has
taken actions that are inimical to the Palestinian people in
the occupied Arab territories. That Government has
abandoned all its commitments. It has turned its back on
the peace agreements concluded with the Palestinians. As
a result of the policies and practices of the Israeli
Government, the Middle East peace process is now at an
impasse. The Israeli Government' s attacks against the peace
process have continued in spite of intense efforts by the
sponsors of that process - the United States of America
and the Russian Federation - and by the States of the
European Union to save it and return it to the right course.
But the Israeli Government has persisted in its
intransigence, flouting all agreements signed with the Arab
side based on the principle of land for peace and on
complete withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian lands,
including Jerusalem, from southern Lebanon and from
occupied Syrian Golan.

This month, the Israeli authorities of the present Israeli
Government have taken a number of illegal measures,
which include the following. First, they have created a so-
called civil guard in the Israeli settlements on the West
Bank. These armed groups, whose members surely belong
to extremist settler circles, pose a threat to the security of
Palestinians. This step was taken in clear contravention of
Security Council resolution 904 (1994), which called upon
Israel to confiscate the arms of settlers to prevent their use
against unarmed Palestinians.

Secondly, the Ariel settlement has now been officially
declared a city, which means that it no longer falls within
the occupied territories and is therefore non-negotiable.

Thirdly, there has been systematic demolition of
Palestinian homes in Jerusalem on hollow and varied
pretexts. People have been forcibly thrown out of their
homes, and their homes have been confiscated by settlers
under the very noses of the Israeli police - and, indeed,
with their protection.

 

Fourthly, the municipal boundaries of the city of
Jerusalem have been expanded to include illegal
settlements adjacent to Jerusalem, with the aim of
judaizing the city. This plan includes the speedy
construction of roads and the expansion of services
between the settlements and Jerusalem, and an increase in
the number of settlements.

When it was occupied by Israel in 1967, the Holy
City of Jerusalem was about 7 square kilometres in area;
72 square kilometres have since been added. The
expansionist plan will increase the area to 184 square
kilometres. This plan constitutes an attempt to change the
demographic composition of the city of Jerusalem by
increasing the number of Jewish inhabitants to nearly 1
million in order to make them the majority.

The Council of Ministers of the Arab Gulf
Cooperation Council met at Riyadh on Sunday, 28 June
1998, and declared that

"It utterly and completely rejects and condemns
the decision of the Israeli Government to expand the
geographic boundaries of the Holy City of Jerusalem
and to attempt to change its demographic and
population makeup, because such measures are
contrary to the norms of international law and to
binding international resolutions.

"It further rejects the Israeli policy of
expanding Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian and other Arab territories and the
creation of armed militias composed of Israeli
settlers, believing that such acts constitute a breach
of the framework of the Madrid peace conference
and of all relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, in particular Security Council
resolution 252 (1968), which declares such measures
by Israel in Jerusalem to be null and void."

Moreover, the final communique of the twenty-fifth
session of the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference contained the following statement.

"The Conference urged the international
community, particularly the co-sponsors of the peace
process, to pressure Israel to comply with the
resolutions of international legality and to end its
settlement policy. It called on the Security Council
to revive the International Committee for supervising
and monitoring the ban on settlements in Al-Quds
and the other occupied Palestinian and Arab

 

territories. It also urged the international community
and all States providing economic and financial
assistance to Israel to stop such assistance which Israel
uses to carry out its settler colonization scheme in
occupied Arab territories, in occupied Palestine and
the occupied Syrian Golan." [5/1998/311, para. 34]

Such illegal Israeli policies are a clear breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the 16 Security Council
resolutions on holy Jerusalem. They are a breach of the
General Assembly resolutions adopted at the tenth
emergency special session, all of which call upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to refrain from making any
administrative or demographic changes in Jerusalem until
agreement is reached within the framework of the peace
process, which will decide the fate of Holy Jerusalem.

It is clear that this official Israeli policy does not
support a just peace. Indeed, it is a premeditated act against
the peace process. Instead of refraining from such
measures, we find Israel attempting to prevent any genuine
progress in the peace talks so that it may continue to take
illegal measures to change the facts on the ground in the
occupied Arab territories, including in Holy Jerusalem.

The grave situation resulting from these Israeli
measures is the reason the Group of Arab States called for
this urgent meeting of the Security Council today. We
expect the Security Council to fully shoulder its
responsibility to compel Israel to respect previous Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem and to live up to its
commitments under the Fourth Geneva Convention. We
hope that the Security Council, in response to the request
of the Group of Arab States, will take the appropriate
measures to confront the illegal Israeli actions.

A firm Security Council position, based on its
responsibilities to deter illegal Israeli action, in accordance
with the Charter, will reaffirm the Security Council's
credibility, imposing international legitimacy based on
international law for Palestinian and all Arab occupied
territories.

