Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing, and the representatives of Israel and
Palestine for their statements.

The United Kingdom deplores the recent
escalation in violence and Israel's recent settlement
announcements. We remain concerned about tensions
and continued restrictions on Palestinian worshippers
at the Haram Al-Sharif Temple Mount compound in
recent months. Attempts to alter the long-standing
status quo have serious political and security
implications. We strongly urge the Israeli authorities to
live up to their commitment to upholding the status quo
by complying with their obligations under international
law as an occupying Power in East Jerusalem, including
with regard to the protection of holy sites. We value
Jordan's important role as custodian of the holy sites
in Jerusalem, and urge the Israelis to work with the
Jordanian Waqf in order to reduce tensions and avoid
potential flashpoints, including by using a heavy
police presence to prevent a worsening of the situation
following the high-profile visits by extremists.

The United Kingdom has long made it clear that
we condemn any actions that make it more difficult to
reach a peace agreement. In that regard, we strongly
condemn the recent increase in violence in Jerusalem
this year, which has resulted in the deaths of five
Palestinians and a terrorist incident in the Ammunition
Hill area that led to the deaths of two Israelis. The
United Kingdom is also profoundly concerned about
recent settlement announcements in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank. Our long-standing national position
on Israeli settlements is clear. They are illegal under
international law, present an obstacle to peace and take
us further away from a two-State solution. We therefore
deplore Israel's recent decisions to advance plans for
settlement units in Givat Hamatos, expropriate land
near Bethlehem and make a further announcement this
week to advance plans for 1,060 new housing units in
East Jerusalem. We are also deeply concerned about
plans to relocate the Bedouin population from around
the sensitive E-l area, and by recent demolitions of
Palestinian structures in East Jerusalem and Area C of
the West Bank. The movement by Israeli settlers into
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem in the last
two months has further fuelled tensions in Jerusalem.

All of those developments undermine prospects for
a two-State solution and make it much more difficult
for Israel's friends to defend it against accusations
that it is not serious about peace. We strongly urge the
Government of Israel to reverse its policy on illegal
settlements.

We urge all parties to urgently take steps to reduce
tensions and to create a climate conducive to peace. We
urge the parties to focus efforts on resuming serious
and comprehensive negotiations towards resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as well as making swift
progress in the Cairo talks on Gaza. Bold political steps
and leadership are necessary to end the conflict, and
they are needed now.

