Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
My country considers that by adopting the draft resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), the Security Council will
have complied with its responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that the draft resolution extending MIPONUH's
mandate is the appropriate response to the needs of the
Haitian people and Government. At the same time, it is an
expression of the United Nations commitment to the peace
and security of one of its Members.

My country, as a member of the group of Friends of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, is particularly pleased by
the support given by the members of the Council to a draft
resolution which we consider benefits the Haitian people
and responds to an express request by President Preval. We
also value the contributions which enriched its text, and the
flexibility shown in the negotiations by interested
delegations.

The task of reconciliation in Haiti remains unfinished.
We are aware that there continues to be a need for the
authorities and the political actors in Haiti in general to
make additional efforts to solve the serious political crisis
in the country. Here there is an inescapable, direct
responsibility of the people of Haiti. The international
community, in its role of supporting such efforts, should
continue making its contribution and not abandon the
Haitian people at this time.

Judicial reform should solve shortcomings which are
incompatible with the rule of law and human rights and
fundamental freedoms. There the task is great,
encompassing not only judicial institutions and procedures,
but also the design of a judiciary respectful of the basic
principles of the administration of justice, such as the
principle of due process. The task also includes appropriate
treatment of the prison system, as we can see in the text of
the draft resolution. We welcome the steps in this
direction taken by the Haitian authorities, and in particular
by the Preparatory Commission on Legal and Judicial
Reform, and we urge them to continue on that path. Once
again, in this field as in others, the sustained support of
the international community is essential.

We welcome the progress made by the Haitian
National Police in recent months, reflected in a
professional institution which now enjoys the respect of
the citizenry, as is recognized by independent sources. In
such progress we see that we are not far from the
objective of providing Haiti with an efficient police
respectful of human rights, an objective which underlies
the work of MIPONUH.

In conclusion, I wish to convey the gratitude of my
Government to the personnel of MIPONUH and the 11
countries which have contributed to its composition as
well as to the representative of the Secretary-General. We
urge them to continue their efforts in achieving the
objectives of MIPONUH.

