Mr. Staur (Denmark): Allow me first of all to
express our appreciation to Mexico for organizing this
important event, building upon the first thematic
debate on strengthening international law held under
the Danish presidency of the Council back in 2006 (see S/PV.5474).

Allow me also to thank the Mexican presidency
for its excellent concept note (S/2010/322) which
addresses three important issues in building the rule of
law both nationally and internationally.

My first point is the key message which we are
re-cmphasizing today, namely, the interlinkage between
international law and the maintenance of peace and
security. This is not an abstract notion, but a clear
expression of the Council's conviction and intent - the
conviction that a rules-based international community
promotes peace and stability, and the intent of the
Council to be guided by international law in all aspects
of its work on conflict resolution.

Denmark believes that the case for the
interrelationship between law and security is made
every day. Together with many other States and
organizations, we seek to do our part in promoting
international law. In the Copenhagen Process on the
Handling of Detainees, for instance, we seek to
elaborate principles to address the challenges in regard
to detention in armed conflict.

The second point of the concept note points to
another central issue for the strengthening of
international law - that international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes are key to
operationalizing the rule of law and to promoting peace
and security. The International Court of Justice has real
value in preventing the escalation of conflict, and
increasingly so. The settlement of what may seem a
trivial boundary issue may, in fact, have the effect of
solving a territorial dispute which, left open, could
devolve into serious tensions and conflict. Let me take
this opportunity to also congratulate the Court on its
election today of a new member, Ms. Xue Hanqin.

Other international courts are gaining prominence
as well. The central issue of fighting impunity remains
high on the agenda, and just a few weeks ago the first
2

International Criminal Court (ICC) Review Conference
was completed in Kampala. The Conference
resoundingly reaffirmed the ICC'S position as the
universal permanent criminal court. The stocktaking
exercise at the Kampala Conference focused, among
other issues, on the question of complementarity -
how to ensure that national jurisdictions will be able to
deal with mass atrocities without the need for
international courts. This is a prime example of how
the rule of law, at both the national and international
levels, can be integrated and become mutually
reinforcing. The ICC is a court of last resort. No one
wants to disempower national jurisdictions or to
overburden the Court, and the joint effort, including of
donor countries, in building national capacity in this
area creates a win-win situation.

Significantly for this body, the Review
Conference also adopted a consensus decision on the
crime of aggression. This issue goes to the core of the
relationship between the Security Council and the ICC,
and Denmark wishes to express its appreciation for the
constructive role played, including by Security Council
members, in finding a compromise acceptable to all in
Kampala.

With respect to the third issue - that of sanctions
regimes - Denmark welcomes the important decisions
taken by the Security Council to strengthen the legal
framework for the sanctions regimes by enhancing the
transparency and fairness of listing and de-listing
procedures. We are especially pleased to see that the
establishment of an Ombudsperson institution under
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime - an idea
originally promoted by Denmark in 2005 - has now
become a reality. We congratulate Ms. Kimberly Prost
on her appointment to this position. However, more
needs to be done.

Procedures for listing and de-listing need to be
kept under constant review, and Denmark will continue
to push for even more transparent and even fairer
procedures within the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, as well as other United Nations sanctions
regimes. Denmark still firmly believes that only
through respect for human rights can the sanctions
regimes obtain the legitimacy necessary for their
effectiveness.

The changing security environment and the rise
of non-State actors in conflicts present the international
community with new threats and challenges, of which
10-4285]
the piracy issue is but one. Denmark is honoured to be
chairing the working group on legal issues under the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The
seriousness with which the Council addresses these
legal issues is another striking example of the rule of
law as one element in a multi-pronged effort, which
also includes political, development and security
initiatives.

We very much welcome the work being done to
integrate these elements into all aspects of the work of
the United Nations. The Secretary-General's 2004
report on the rule of law (S/2004/616) and his 2009
report on the responsibility to protect (A/63/677) stand
out for us as prime examples of how international law
may contribute to meeting the high aspirations of this
Organization. Denmark trusts and expects the Council
to do its part in strengthening international law, and we
will continue to give our full support to the work of the
Council in this respect.

