Ms. Palacio (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by joining those who have expressed their
gratification, Sir, at seeing your country, Guinea - and
with Guinea, Africa - presiding over the Council at
this crucial time for peace and security in the world.
On behalf of Spain, I wish you a successful and
effective conduct of our activities.

I also wish to highlight the excellent work
accomplished by Germany at a very complex moment.

On 14 February, I opened my statement by
pointing out that, along with millions of citizens of the
world, I was hoping to hear just one sentence from the
inspectors: that Saddam Hussain was fully,
unconditionally and actively complying with resolution
1441 (2002).

I did not hear it on that day, nor have I heard it
today. I also have the feeling today that we run the risk
of not seeing the forest for the trees. The concrete
progress achieved by the inspectors in their
commendable work, to which I pay tribute on behalf of
Spain, and the gestures made by Saddam Hussain are
distracting us from the objective defined by the
international community 12 years ago: the complete
disarmament of the Iraqi regime.

We have been marking time for 12 years. I have
two questions to raise that I believe are fundamental
for us all: Are we discharging our obligations as
members of the Security Council? What message are
we sending to the world? According to the United
Nations Charter, the mission of the Security Council is
to maintain international peace and security, to identify
threats thereto and to define action to be taken.

I can only say that the threat remains and that
Saddam Hussain has yet to comply with the resolutions
of this Council. This is happening 12 years after the
adoption of resolution 687 (1991) and four months
after the adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), which, as
the Council will remember, constituted the final
opportunity.

So, 12 years later, we still find ourselves in the
same situation as in 1991. Twelve years later, the
principal actor is the same: Saddam Hussain. Twelve
years later, the threat is the same: his weapons of mass
destruction. Twelve years later, his attitude is identical:
a profound contempt for international law and the clear
intention to divide us. Twelve years later, his strategy
remains the same: to deceive us. How much longer?
How much time is needed to take the strategic decision
to collaborate fully, actively and unconditionally? I am
afraid that we are facing a question whose answer
everyone knows but which many prefer to ignore.

Instead of sending a solid and cohesive message,
the Council runs the risk of becoming a media platform
showcasing our differences and making our work even
harder.

Through continuous and systematic
misrepresentation of the facts, Saddam is achieving
something extraordinarily dangerous. He has managed
to get many to identify the Security Council- the
guarantor of international legitimacy - as the
aggressor, while he identifies himself as the victim. He
has managed to divide the international community, as
the Foreign Minister of Mexico said so well a moment
ago. He has also managed to reverse the burden of
proof, shifting onto us a responsibility that is his alone.

How could we have come to a situation where a
dictator that has provoked wars, invaded countries,
gassed his own population, trampled all existing human
rights and flouted the law for 12 years is now putting
the credibility of the Council in jeopardy?

My second question is, what message are we
sending? It is impossible not to realize that only
maximum pressure and the credible threat of force
make an impression on the Iraqi regime. Let me recall
that this is the underlying logic of resolution 1441
(2002) and of the draft resolution sponsored by the
United States, the United Kingdom and Spain, which
will soon be submitted to the Council.

I welcome and appreciate the progress that has
been achieved by the inspectors, in particular the
destruction of the Al Samoud missiles. But all of a
sudden proof of the existence of programmes of
weapons of mass destruction, whose existence was
denied until now, appears as if by magic - because of
the 300,000 soldiers deployed in the region. Or we
suddenly hear of the existence of missiles and motors
that are banned under international law. That conduct
confirms our fears. Those weapons exist. They have
not been destroyed. They can be used again.

As Secretary of State Powell said, if Saddam
Hussain was lying before when he was hiding those
weapons, why should we believe him now when, after
revealing their presence, he claims that he has
destroyed all remaining weapons, without our being
able to detect a genuine will to disarm.

Given those questions, what message should the
Council send? First, we will not tolerate any more of
Saddam Hussain's games. He did not comply in 1991.
He deceived the United Nations Special Commission in
1995. He remained free of inspections for almost four
years. And now, even when resolution 1441 (2002)
indicates that it represents the final opportunity, he is
once again trying to prevent its implementation.

The Council has to state also that we cannot
encourage, through action or failure to act, those
possessing weapons of mass destruction who feel that
they can systematically violate international law with
impunity. The Council should send the clear message
that it is very aware that the threat looming over us is
more serious than ever and that it concerns the
confluence of the existence of weapons of mass
destruction, their possible use by terrorist groups and
the criminality of political leaders who make use of
both those weapons and terrorists.

The Security Council has to send a clear message
that it considers that the time has come to stop being a
hostage to those, who in seeking their own objectives,
mistakenly interpret our aspiration to peace as a sign of
weakness. The Council must make it clear that it has
always advocated not Iraq's containment or its partial
disarmament but its complete disarmament of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular chemical and
bacteriological weapons, and that this should be done
peacefully, which requires full Iraqi cooperation. And
if such cooperation is lacking, Iraq alone will be
responsible for the consequences.

Finally, it must be made very clear that the
Council must assume its responsibility before the entire
world to respond to this situation.

Disarming Iraq is not a question of more
inspectors or more time. That, to paraphrase a French
thinker, is merely the strategy of impotence. With
respect to nuclear material and missiles, we can
envisage the possibility of achieving results without the
regime's willingness to disarm or even its proactive
collaboration. But that is not true for chemical and
bacteriological weapons. We all know that. It is
particularly in the area of the disarmament of chemical
and bacteriological weapons that disarmament can be
achieved only if there is political will on the part of the
Iraqi regime. Inspectors will naturally have to continue
for the time that is necessary and with the means that
are necessary. But it must be done on the basis of a
radical change in the willingness of Saddam Hussain's
regime to disarm. So far, Iraq has given no credible
signs of possessing the will to disarm.

I have listened to those who consider that
decisions the Council may adopt will provoke a great
loss of human lives and great damage in Iraq. They
criticize that and hold us responsible for it. No, it is
others such as Saddam Hussain who are responsible for
the deaths of millions through their wars, invasions,
actions and decisions. It is others such as Saddam
Hussain who use chemical weapons. It is others such as
Saddam Hussain who destroy entire families, peoples,
nations. It is not the Security Council that is
responsible. We are seeking international peace and
security, because we all want peace. But we want a
peace that is safe and that ensures that those weapons
will not be used by Iraq and that they will not fall into
the hands of terrorist groups, which could use them to
achieve their own ends. To act otherwise is to harbour
false hopes and to look for arrangements that could
only seriously undermine the credibility and
effectiveness of the Council and even the international
peace and stability that we all seek.

