Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is an honour
for us to have you, Mr. Foreign Minister, presiding
over the Council today. We are grateful to the
Singapore presidency for taking the initiative in
arranging this debate on a theme that is very relevant to
the work of the Council and closely connected to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
also applaud the Singapore presidency for the format of
today's meeting: giving an opportunity to the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) to present their views
ahead of the Council members. We find that some
TCCs will speak later, and we hope that their views,
too, will be taken into account. We are very grateful to
Ambassador Mahbubani for providing a comprehensive
background paper facilitating today's deliberations.

This morning, your own opening statement,
Mr. President, and that of the Deputy Secretary-
General, Louise Frechette, elaborated effectively the
fundamental issues of our debate. The question of
cooperation with troop-contributing countries has
assumed greater significance with the evolving nature
of United Nations peace operations. As a major troop-
contributing country, with two decades of experience in
different parts of the world, Bangladesh naturally
attaches substantial importance to strengthening the
collaboration of the TCCs with the Council and the
Secretariat. We have found the statements made by
TCCs to be full of useful ideas and assessments. These
statements and those of others deserve to be reflected
in a presidential statement, the issuance of which
Bangladesh will support.

As a policy issue, we are strongly in favour of
involving TCCs in the decisions of the Council, as per
the provisions of Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council's commitment to this
effect was expressed in November 1994 and March
1996 presidential statements.

As for the format of such consultations, the two
presidential statements envisaged three types of
meetings: the regular Council-TCC-Secretariat
meetings, ad hoc or emergency consultations between
the Council and the Secretariat, and TCC-Secretariat
meetings for briefings by special representatives of the
Secretary-General and force commanders. It was,
however, specified that these arrangements were not
exclusive and could effectively take a variety of forms,
including informal communication by the TCCs with
the Council's President and its members.
Further, the Council, in its resolution 1327 (2000)
of 13 November 2000, made specific provisions for the
substantive improvement of these consultations as an
institutional mechanism for strengthening cooperation.
These provisions, coming as part of the follow-up to
the Brahimi report, are particularly important. In the
resolution, the Council decided that the existing system
of consultations should be strengthened significantly;
such consultations will be held through private
meetings with troop-contributing countries; these
meetings can be held, inter alia, at the request of a
TCC; and these consultations will take place at
different stages of an operation, and in particular when
a change in a peacekeeping mandate is being
considered. The objective of such consultations is to
foster a common understanding of the situation on the
ground, of the mission's mandate and of its
implementation.

Clearly, the necessary provisions are there. We
have to see their implementation in practice. We
recognize that improvements have been made in the
Council-TCC-Secretariat consultations over the years.
The experience of the recent past, however, shows that
there is a serious need for further progress in
implementing relevant decisions and in making use of
the existing mandated mechanism. Improving
interaction - and I mean substantive interaction with
the TCCs - is at the heart of our peacekeeping reform.

It is important to note that, in its follow-up to the
Brahimi report, the Council has resolved to give
peacekeeping operations clear, credible and achievable
mandates. We have also recognized the critical
importance of peacekeeping operations having, where
appropriate and within their mandates, a credible
deterrent capability. The Council has also committed
itself to ensure that the mandated tasks of peacekeeping
operations are appropriate to the situation on the
ground. The implementation of these commitments will
meet some of the fundamental concerns of the TCCs.
The adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) has not brought
substantive changes in the practice as yet. Our task
here is to see to it that the Council commitments do not
become empty rhetoric.

We have heard very loud and clear the concerns
and the views of the TCCs. Sharing many of the views
expressed here by them, and based on our own
experience as a TCC and as a current Council member,
we urge action in five areas.

First, the substantive content and nature of the
Secretariat briefing must be in line with the letter and
spirit of Council resolution 1327 (2000). The
Secretariat should go beyond generally available
information and analysis of situations. The TCCs
should be taken into confidence. Political briefings
should include a frank assessment of the developments,
and they should tell the TCCs what they need to know.
Military briefings by the Secretariat should include
concept of operations and should report on key military
factors such as chain of command, force structure,
unity and cohesion of the force, training and
equipment, risk assessment and rules of engagement.

The presidential statements that have been
mentioned provide for the circulation of an informal
paper or background information prior to the holding
of such meetings. In addition, many TCCs feel that, if
need be, the Secretariat should share briefing notes
informally with them.

Secondly, Council-TCC-Secretariat consultations
should be in a format that allows for the free exchange
of views in a truly interactive manner. It should
continue to be possible for the TCCs to exchange views
with the Council through its President. Many TCCs at
the meeting this morning favoured the setting up of a
practical and worthwhile mechanism for consultation
between the TCCs and the Security Council, in line
with the Brahimi Panel recommendations. We believe
that there is a lot of merit in the proposal to set up an
ad hoc subsidiary organ of the Council for effective
participation of the TCCs in the decision-making
process of the Council. We would favour the inclusion
of this proposal in a presidential statement that the
Council could adopt as a follow-up to this debate.

Thirdly, we should recognize TCCs as concerned
parties in respect of a given conflict area with regard to
the issues, including the question of calling for a
Council meeting.

Fourthly, let me touch on Council follow-up of
the consultations with the TCCs. Under the existing
practice, the President is required to give to the
Council, in the course of informal consultations, a
summary of the views expressed at each meeting with
the TCCs. Council Presidents have been making only
brief references to such meetings. We believe that there
is room for more substantive discussion in the Council
on the content of such meetings. Secretariat support for
keeping a record of such meetings should be made
available as necessary.

Fifthly and finally, we should provide peace
operations, where necessary, with contingency
arrangements. We feel that missions in volatile
situations should, from the beginning, have a
contingency plan with the necessary provisions and
facilities.

This last point brings me to the question of the
gap in troop commitment. This constitutes a major
concern for many countries, including potential troop
contributors. As recognized in resolution 1327 (2000),
addressing this problem will require the assumption of
this shared responsibility by all Member States.
Members of the Council, in particular the permanent
members, cannot shy away from assuming their own.
Bangladesh has proposed that the permanent members
contribute 5 per cent of the troops of all peacekeeping
missions, thereby showing that they intend to live up to
their Charter responsibility. Consultation cannot be
meaningful unless there is real partnership. Procedural
refinements, as we said before, cannot resolve the
substantive problem of the commitment gap.

We see Council-TCC-Secretariat consultation as
part of a continuous exercise in the decision-making
process on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Better consultation mechanisms involving TCCs at
different stages of Council decisions on peacekeeping
missions would certainly provide the key to avoiding
some of the difficulties experienced in the recent past.
The lessons learned should guide us through our future
actions.

