Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Argentina would like to express its
gratitude to the delegations of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg for driving this initiative forward and for
their efforts to achieve a consensus text, in which they
conducted themselves with openness and transparency.
We also wish to highlight the constructive attitude
taken by all members of the Council, who, despite their
different positions on the situation in Syria, managed to
put unity first and agreed to speak with a single voice to
help alleviate the grave humanitarian crisis afflicting
the Syrian people.

It is clear that neither the presidential statement of
2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15), despite its binding
character, nor the various initiatives undertaken by
the United Nations and the international community
to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria have
been able to attain the results we sought - insofar as
the violence and killing have not stopped, and almost
half of the population of the country is now in need of
assistance.

The number of victims, while hard to pinpoint, is
nonetheless compelling, demanding that the Security
Council fulfil its institutional mandate, historic
responsibility and moral conscience by ensuring it
is not an obstacle but an instrument up to the task of
helping reverse this tragic situation by taking new and
more effective decisions.

The reports we receive week after week
bring us to the realization that Syria and all of its
people - especially the weakest and most vulnerable:
women , young people and children - cannot and do
not deserve to continue to be torn apart in the spiral of
violence, cruelty, suffering, death, fear, despair, pain,
slaughter, desolation and hunger. Nor do they deserve
to be plunged into the even more chilling darkness of
feeling that their suffering will never end.

While it is true that there have been some recent
positive developments - such as the Horns ceasefire
agreement, access to the Yarmouk camp, the positive
results of the polio-vaccination campaign, the greater
flexibility from the Government in issuing visas for
humanitarian workers or the progress in establishing
humanitarian aid distribution centres for in Aleppo and
Qamishli - all ofthose things, even though they can be
taken as encouraging signs, are clearly insufficient. We
say this because, at the same time, flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law continue unabated,
as do deliberate attacks against people and property
that are under specific protections f aid workers,
medical personnel, patients, hospitals and schools.
Indiscriminate attacks continue, with no distinction
being made between civilians and combatants, as do
horrendous sectarian massacres, such as that which
occurred in Ma'an on 9 February. Without a doubt,
these bleak events do nothing to slow the shocking
deterioration of the humanitarian situation; on the
contrary, their effect is to exacerbate the downward
spiral.

Argentina voted in favour of resolution 2139 (2014)
based on the conviction that the Security Council
must assume its responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations and explore all means and actions
that may have a positive impact on the ground in order
to alleviate the suffering the Syrian people and help
the countries of the region affected directly by the
consequences of this crisis, who have not shied away
from accepting thousands ofpeople on a daily basis, the
vast majority of whom are fragile, frightened victims.

The resolution adopted today contains elements of
great significance for Argentina, ofwhich I will mention
only a few. I underscore the fundamental importance
of ensuring unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance. We must emphasize the responsibility to
protect civilians, combat terrorism in all of its forms,
call upon all of the parties to put an end to violence,
ensure respect for human rights and for the norms of
international humanitarian law, and urge the Syrian
people to demonstrate, through pacific means and
dialogue, their will to live in a society that respect life,
preserves diversity and safeguards its cultural heritage.

As we reaffirm Argentina's commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria, we reiterate that the fight against
impunity and the full applicability of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
are not an obstacle to peace but, rather, an indispensable
prerequisite for achieving it.

Along the same lines, we reiterate that those
responsible for serious crimes and crimes against
humanity must be held accountable for their actions and
brought to justice. We also believe that humanitarian
assistance is urgent and crucial and that the suffering
and deprivation experienced by the Syrian people are
a consequence and not the cause of the conflict. We
fully agree with those who believe that there can be no
military solution to the conflict, only a political one.
Death cannot be resolved by causing more death, said
our President in this very forum.

Only through an inclusive political dialogue without
preconditions or extortion can the Syrian people move
forward and find a path that will lead them to lasting
peace and security. For that reason, we reiterate our
call on all parties to make a decisive commitment to
the negotiations begun in Geneva last month and the
need for the principal regional and international players
to help create the conditions necessary for all of the
different actors in the Syrian conflict to overcome
their differences through peaceful means, dialogue and
substantive agreements.

As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Argentina
said at the Security Council meeting at which resolution
2118 (2013) was adopted:

"With today's resolution, the Council is finally
assuming its responsibility for stabilizing the
situation in Syria and contributing to achieving
a lasting peace, reaffirming the strength of
multilateralism as a cornerstone of the collective
security system established by the Charter of
the United Nations as the world's only guarantee
against the hegemony of might-is-right." (see S/PV.7038, p. 13).

Argentina believes that this resolution, which
focuses on the humanitarian emergency affecting Syria,
can in no way be used as an excuse for any unilateral
use of force, nor can it give rise to militarization as a
way of resolving the conflict.

Allow me to conclude by recalling what Pope
Francis said on 7 September 2013, in a homily calling
for dialogue and reconciliation in Syria. I am sure that
the words of Pope Francis convey with deep simplicity
the silent cry of the victims:

"We have perfected our weapons, our conscience
has fallen asleep, and we have sharpened our
ideas to justify ourselves. As if it were normal, we
continue to sow destruction, pain, death. Violence
lead[s] only to death Peace expresses itself
only in peace."

We hope that this resolution, the step we are taking
today, will help to achieve this much-needed, long-
sought-after objective.

