Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
constant efforts to enhance the United Nations support
for security sector reform. I also want to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on organizing this debate on a
topic that is central to the Council's role in preserving
international stability and peace. I applaud Nigeria's
leadership on this issue.

My Government looks forward to the adoption this
afternoon of the Council's first draft resolution on the
subject, which spells out the need to the strengthen our
collective commitment to improve governance with an
emphasis on security structures that are better designed,
more capable and more fully respectful of public needs
and individual rights. We all know that basic security
is a fundamental civic need. Without it, families live
in fear, economic investments are not made and the
rules by which a society can live in harmony are not
enforced. Furthermore, the lack of effective security at
the national level has harmful transnational impacts. A
State without security is a State where terrorists and
criminals will thrive, the smugglers of illegal arms
and narcotics will base their operations, internal strife
may generate a flood of refugees, corruption runs
rampant and shortages of food and other resources lead
to humanitarian disaster. We cannot forget that public
security is a prerequisite for economic and social well-

being. Freedom from fear is critical to achieve freedom
from want.

It is highly appropriate, therefore, that the
United Nations do all it can in partnership with
Governments and other international actors to support
the establishment of effective security structures.
That task is especially relevant when a country is in
the process of recovery from conflict. The absence of
credible security sector reform (SSR) has had dramatic
consequences for such societies. For example, in
Liberia inadequate management of the security sector
contributed to a resumption of civil conflict in the
mid-1990s. The transition from weak or non-existent
security institutions to ones that are viable and strong
is never easy. That is why security sector reform has
become a more important part of United Nations efforts
in post-conflict rebuilding.

The creation of effective, accountable, rights-
respecting and sustainable security structures that
respond to national needs and priorities is critical to
forestall a return to Violence. It is also an essential
ingredient for the successful exit of United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions. Last
month, the United Nations was able to conclude 20 years
of peacekeeping and political activities in Sierra Leone
in part because improved security institutions were
in place. Sierra Leone now contributes peacekeeping
forces to the African Union Mission in Somalia.

Too often, approaches to SSR are limited to base
training or the building up of individual security
units and fail to create security institutions that can
effectively manage national forces and be responsive to
the complex needs of societies. Reforms to the security
sector- for example, in places like Mali and the Central
African Republic - have to be nested within broader
political reforms aimed at national reconciliation and
transitional justice. In places like the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is imperative that security
sector reform include not only training in military
tactics, but also in responding to threats to civilians and
guarding against sexual violence in conflict.

In that connection, my Government welcomes the
development of the Integrated Technical Guidance
Notes on Security Sector Reform drafted by the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and
including guidance on such critical issues as national
ownership, gender responsiveness and consistency
with democratic principles. That guidance should
give rise to a United Nations system-wide training
regimen. We support the United Nations' work with
host Governments on strategic planning, international
dialogues and the sharpening of oversight capacity. We
appreciate the United Nations commitment to acquire
the diverse expertise needed to implement its security-

sector-reform programmes in countries with specialized
requirements, and we have seen the benefits of this
in the rapid deployment of support to United Nations
missions, such as that in Somalia.

Finally, we firmly endorse both the Secretary-
General's emphasis on national ownership of the SSR
process and the need for appropriate SSR capacities
within United Nations missions. We will take those
imperatives into account when formulating future
mandates for United Nations peacekeeping and political
operations. We also share his expressed desire to build
stronger partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations to support
security sector reform in countries recovering from
conflict and undergoing transitions.

In conclusion, I want to thank you again,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his leadership and guidance.
Security sector reform is one of many topics that come
before the Council where the problems are easy to
identify yet extremely difficult to solve. We know what
a good security system looks like, but we also know
that creating one involves a multitude of variables
and requires a major investment of energy, resources
and time. Without a strong and enduring political
commitment by the State itself, international efforts
cannot succeed. But where national partners truly
desire progress, we must do all we can to assist them in
that quest. Lasting international peace and security and
reliable respect for human rights around the world will
not be possible without additional meaningful progress
on security sector reform.

