Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): It is my
pleasure at the outset to express to the United States
presidency the profound gratitude of the Guinean
people and Government, especially of His Excellency
Mr. Alpha Conde, President of the Republic, for
having granted the joint request of three States of our
Organization - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - to
include a crucial issue on the agenda of the Security
Council. I am speaking of the terrible epidemic of
haemorrhagic fever of the Ebola virus. I would also
like to thank all of the other members of the Council
and welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan, and Dr. David
Nabarro, Senior United Nations System Coordinator
for Ebola.

My delegation welcomes the Council's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2177 (2014) and
the very impressive number of States - 130 - that
co-sponsored it. The Council has thereby demonstrated
its correct understanding of the urgent need for a global,
comprehensive solution to face an unprecedented
scourge that truly threatens peace and security in the
entire West African region - our collective security,
I would say.

Beyond the health aspect and widespread panic
that has gripped our peoples, the economic and social
consequences of the disease have negatively affected
the development of our countries and the well-being of
our peoples. Ebola is hampering economic activity and
affecting all sectors, particularly transportation, trade,
tourism and agriculture. That could result in a decline
in the gross domestic product by about 2.5 per cent,
suddenly undermining all of the development efforts
and strategies undertaken by our three countries.

Despite the courageous preventive measures taken
by our States to contain and stop the spread of the
disease, the scourge has continued its devastation and
continues to defy human intelligence. At this stage,
without appropriate measures, a humanitarian crisis is
just over the horizon. We must stop it. We must stop it
or risk jeopardizing the stability that was won at such
great cost by our three countries, which are emerging
from a long period of political and institutional crisis,
or from a fratricidal war.

It is important to stress that the three countries are
all on the agenda ofthe Peacebuilding Commission. That
is why we applaud the mobilization of the international
community, which understands the need to take
ownership of the fight to eradicate the scourge, which
is truly an obstacle to the sustainable development to
which we aspire.

Also, the decision taken by the Executive Council
of the African Union in Addis Ababa on 8 September
is aimed at strengthening solidarity among our
States, because border closures, flight restrictions,
stigmatization of victims, isolation of affected
countries and repatriation of their citizens constitute a
weapon that is more dangerous than the scourge being
combatted. As highlighted recently by President Conde,
we should not isolate the countries affected by Ebola,
but all efforts should be implemented to isolate Ebola
and eradicate the epidemic.

The Security Council must provide oversight
and lend all its weight to ensure compliance with the
recommendations of the World Health Organization
and the International Air Transport Association to that
end. Similarly, all bilateral and multilateral partners, in
the same spirit of solidarity, will work to provide the
appropriate and necessary support to ensure care for
victims and prevention and eradication of the virus.

For its part, beginning with the declaration of
21 March 2014 on the outbreak of the Ebola virus, the
Guinean Government and its partners have been deeply
involved in the response to the disease. The outbreak
seemed to be under control by mid-May. However, a
resurgence in the number of confirmed cases and the
appearance of new areas of outbreak were reported in
early June. The epidemic also spread to Sierra Leone
and Liberia, countries that border Guinea, thereby
leading to a subregional crisis. Several thousand people
have already been affected. More than 2,400 deaths
have been recorded in the three affected countries,
including almost 600 in Guinea, the majority of whom
were women.

A national health-care emergency was immediately
declared by the President of the Republic, as part of the
response to the Ebola virus disease. Several days ago,
the national committee to manage the epidemic adopted
an accelerated plan to respond over two to six months.
A set of preventive measures has been implemented,
including the establishment of safety zones at all border
crossings and restrictions on movements of individuals
and screening them in bus stations and at all of the
country's border crossings, including the Conakry
international airport. Those security and prevention
measures at the departure area of the Conakry airport
have proven reliable, and they justify maintaining the
flight timetables of the airline companies Air France,
Brussels Airlines and Royal Air Maroc.

Furthermore, there are many other actions on
the ground, particularly awareness-raising among
the population on preventive measures, strengthened
monitoring, tracking contacts, establishing a regulatory
committee, secure management of burials and
disinfection, and distribution of personal protection
and hygiene kits.

Today, the Government has focused on local
communications in order to influence the perception
that some communities have of the disease. Through
awareness messages in the national languages, more
people can be alerted, especially in the rural areas
where people are still reticent in the presence of health-
care workers involved in the fight against the Ebola
Virus.

Despite all efforts by the Government and its
partners, many challenges remain and urgent needs to
address in order to check the spread of the epidemic. We
have ever-growing needs in terms of human, financial
and material resources. We need essential equipment:
protection and hygiene kits, medicines, mobile
hospitals, thermoflashes, stretchers, hospital beds, et
cetera. We particularly need ambulances and transport
vehicles for the medical personnel. The complete list of
our requests is available.

It is appropriate here to again thank France, the
United States, the Russian Federation, China, Japan,
the United Kingdom, the European Union and several
other bilateral and multilateral partners that - together
with the World Health Organization, Medecins
Sans Frontieres, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta and countries such as Morocco
and Mali - from the very outset have demonstrated the
principle of solidarity, fraternity and friendship.

Naturally, our dedicated Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, has again given, and continues
to give, the best of himself in this important period
to ensure the very future of some of our States. His
initiative in establishing the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response is evidence of that.
We are grateful to him for that and dare to hope that
the Security Council, as the guarantor of international
peace and security, will take a strong part in that
momentum and that the global scientific community
will be able to overcome the Ebola virus soon, as it has
succeeded in doing in the case of other, more deadly
viruses.

