Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation has been following
closely the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
is deeply sympathetic with the Bosnian people in the
sufferings brought on them by war. We sincerely hope to
see an early end to the conflict and war there.

The Bosnian crisis is now at a critical moment. It is
therefore imperative for the international community and
all the parties concerned to do whatever they can to
ensure that the cease-fire be restored between the parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, all hostilities, bloodshed and
conflicts be stopped and a solution acceptable to all be
found through patient and pragmatic negotiations so that
the cease-fire will become a lasting peace and a new
stable peace mechanism will be established in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, we wish to reiterate that
any solution should ensure the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that the legitimate rights and interests of all ethnic groups
in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be fully respected.

A United Nations peace-keeping operation, as the
name indicates, is for the purpose of keeping peace rather
than fighting. United Nations peace-keeping efforts should
therefore be aimed at creating conditions for peace rather
than aggravating crises. This is the fundamental starting
point and ultimate objective of the Security Council in
making decisions on peace-keeping operations. The draft
resolution before us calls for the establishment a rapid
reaction force in Bosnia and Herzegovina under Chapter
VII of the Charter. The establishment of this force is for
the purpose of enforcement actions and brings about a de
facto change to the peace-keeping status of UNPROFOR.
Once the force is put into operation, it is bound to
become a party to the conflict, thus depriving
UNPROFOR of its status as a peace-keeping force. There
have already been important lessons for United Nations
peace-keeping operations in this regard, and one should
avoid committing similar errors.

However, while the ambiguity in the mandate of
UNPROFOR referred to in the Secretary-General's report
still exists, calls have been made consistently to expand
UNPROFOR further before certain major issues are
resolved, in total disregard of the basic principles

 
governing peace-keeping operations. This trend, if it
continues, will not help settle the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but rather will severely damage the credibility
of the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole,
which cannot but cause grave concern.

We are of the view that the establishment of a rapid
reaction force will lead to many political and military
complications. Moreover, it will substantially increase
United Nations peace-keeping expenditure. At a time when
the United Nations is in a financial crisis, it is all the more
necessary for the Security Council to act within the means
available to it, without wilfully increasing the burden of the
States Members of the United Nations. It is therefore
neither appropriate nor desirable to finance the
establishment of the rapid reaction force from the United
Nations peace-keeping budget. According to the amended
text, financing modalities will be determined later. This is
unprecedented in the history of United Nations peace-
keeping operations and may not prove beneficial to this
operation either.

It is on this basis that we repeatedly put forward an
amendment on this issue in the informal consultations.
However, our reasonable amendment was not fully
accepted, which the Chinese delegation regrets.

The Chinese delegation cannot support this draft
resolution, since many of its elements run counter to our
principled position, a position which we wish to place on
record. However, taking into account the fact that many
developing countries wish the Security Council to take
appropriate measures to alleviate the very pressing crisis in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the fact that the draft
resolution stresses the importance of a political settlement
to the Bosnian question and of protecting the security of
United Nations peace-keeping personnel and that it has
incorporated some of our amendments, the Chinese
delegation will abstain on the draft resolution before us.

