Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Let me
thank Ambassador Denisov for briefing the Council on
the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). I should like also to take this opportunity
to commend the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
Ambassador Ruperez, for his effective work and his
firm dedication to the mission that has been entrusted
to him.

No country can feel safe from the threat of
terrorism, and no country alone can feel strong enough
to deal with it. We therefore need to continue to pool
our efforts and to strengthen international cooperation,
which remains the best means to counter terrorism.

The CTC and its Executive Directorate therefore
need to continue resolutely their efforts on the ground
by strengthening a constructive dialogue with States in
order to provide them with the necessary assistance
and to ensure that the legal, institutional and
operational conditions are in place to monitor the
movement of funds, trans-border activities on the part
of terrorist groups or individuals, and the circulation of
weapons and other chemical products.

In that respect, the framework document for on-
site assessments remains a valuable tool that must be
finalized as soon as possible to serve as a context for
CTC visits on the ground. My delegation believes that
visits to Member States are of great importance, as
they make it possible to determine the level of
implementation by States of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001); assess their capacities to meet
their obligations; and, in particular, to identify the
measures that must be taken to help States to
strengthen their protection, in particular in the area of
technical assistance.

The ultimate goal in this respect is to help States
to protect their peoples from threats and to contribute
to protecting the peoples of other States. From that
standpoint, the CTC must work proactively to increase
the productivity and effectiveness of its actions in the
area of the provision of assistance. That is all the more
necessary because the effectiveness of measures to
combat terrorism depends on their full implementation
by all States members of the international community.

Furthermore, the States that have not yet done so
should consider becoming parties to the various
conventions and protocols related to terrorism. They
need to take the appropriate legislative measures that
will enable them to honour their international counter-
terrorism commitments. Here, the submission of
periodic reports is an equally important aspect. States
must strive to ensure that the measures they take in the
context of fighting terrorism are in full accordance
with human rights and international humanitarian law.

But, beyond all those activities, the international
community must address social inequalities and
injustice - in short, underdevelopment - and
conflict, because these indicate dysfunctionality in the
system that can generate violence and extremism. In
particular, we must undertake further efforts to prevent
the collapse of vulnerable States. Failed States - or
States under stress, as we tend to call them today -
are ideal safe havens for terrorist networks. In fact, the
international community must place greater priority on
promoting mutual respect and understanding among
peoples to make our world more friendly and united. In
that way, we can deprive terrorism of its breeding
ground and eliminate this scourge in order to
strengthen international peace and security.

