Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on once again
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
current month. It is, indeed, a pleasure to see you
presiding over the Council as the representative of a
country with which we value our strong fraternal
relations.

Since this meeting is ostensibly devoted to the
report of the Committee of Experts on the
implementation of sanctions, it is for the members of
the Council to discuss and examine the content of the
Committee's report. For our part, we are in the process
of examining the recommendations and will formulate
our position on the proposed monitoring mechanism,
keeping in mind its feasibility, practicality and
effectiveness, given the length and porous nature of the
Afghan border.

While we categorically reject some baseless
allegations contained in the report, let me take this
opportunity to reaffirm, on behalf of my Government,
that Pakistan, as a responsible and law-abiding Member
of the United Nations, has been, and will remain, in
full compliance with Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1333 (2000). We have been extending our
fullest cooperation to the Security Council, and, as I
said earlier, we will continue to do so. We welcomed
the Committee of Experts to Pakistan, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Menkerios, during its
fact-finding visit. We extended to it full cooperation in
good faith as part of our policy of compliance with all
Security Council resolutions, without any
discrimination. We are adhering to the resolutions on
Afghanistan, even though we are not in favour of
sanctions as a matter of principle. We believe that
sanctions are an unjust instrument, and that they are
never productive. They never produce the desired
results; they only hurt the common people. There are
no smart sanctions; there are only dumb sanctions. The
question is, what have these sanctions achieved?

There is a symbolic link between the sanctions
and the tragedy in Afghanistan. The latest sanctions -
those provided for in resolution 1333 (2000) - were
enacted in the very week last December that marked
the twenty-first anniversary of the invasion of
Afghanistan by the former Soviet Union. That invasion
triggered a tragic conflict which has yet to come to an
end. So much has happened since that fateful
December: the Berlin Wall has fallen; the cold war has
come to an end; the Soviet Union has become history;
the map of the world has changed; the dawn of the new
millennium has arrived; and, strangely enough, old
enemies have become new partners. Yet in
Afghanistan, the victims remain the same. The anguish
and pain of the people of Afghanistan remain
undiminished, while their torment continues unabated.

Afghanistan was the last battle front of the cold
war. It served as a catalyst to release energies that
eventually brought about an end to that era of
confrontation. The world as we know it today might
not be the same had it not been for the immense
sacrifices that the valiant people of Afghanistan made
for the cause of freedom and the free world. With the
end of Soviet occupation, the Afghan people rightly
expected an environment of peace and reconstruction
for their country, with external help and assistance.
Unfortunately, the international community did not
respond to the legitimate expectations of the Afghan
people, who found themselves left by the wayside.
After having used them to secure certain strategic
objectives, the international community abandoned the
Afghan people at the time when they needed the
maximum external support and involvement in order to
reconstruct their war-ravaged country and rebuild their
shattered lives.

The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was
followed by a fratricidal civil war. The warlords-
some of whom are still there a who fought against the
Soviet occupation forces started fighting one another
after the Soviet withdrawal. The misery and suffering
of the Afghans continued unabated.

Obviously the plight of the Afghan people cannot
be attributed to the Taliban, who emerged on the scene
only some six years ago. The Afghans have been
suffering for more than two decades.

What has the international community done to
alleviate their sufferings during these two decades? The
Afghanistan problem is not about the Taliban. It is not
about terrorism or drugs alone. It is about 25 million
Afghan people who continue to suffer, and they
continue to suffer because they have given so much for
the cause of freedom. They suffered when they were
forced to fight the Soviet forces. They suffered when
warlords were pillaging the country. And they suffer
today because this esteemed Council, which is charged
with maintaining international peace and security, has
been enacting punitive measures against them.

These sanctions are said to be a smart and sharp
instrument, like a scalpel, to remove a tumour without
harming any other part of the body. We wish it were so.
Instead, the sanctions have achieved precious little and
yet destroyed much. One victim has been the peace
process initiated by the Secretary-General through his
Personal Representative, Francesc Vendrell. Mr.
Vendrell, who had made a spectacular breakthrough in
negotiations between the warring sides just before
resolution 1333 (2000) was bulldozed through this
Council, now finds himself on the sidelines, with the
United Nations being accused of bias, discrimination
and partisanship.

Another victim is the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. Much is being said about how the
sanctions have no, or very little, impact on the
humanitarian plight of the Afghans. This is blamed on
the protracted conflict and the drought. This is at least
what the world is being given to understand.

Well, while these two factors have contributed to
the humanitarian situation, they do not explain why
Afghans did not begin their internal and external
exodus until after December 2000, when this
resolution- 1333 (2000) - was adopted. After the
adoption of that resolution, what had been a trickle
became a flood. With almost 1 million internally
displaced Afghans - and this is not my figure; this is
the figure that has been given by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), a part
of this very United Nations system a and with almost
200,000 people becoming refugees after the adoption
of sanctions last year, no one can possibility deny the
link between the sanctions and the grave humanitarian
crisis afflicting the Afghan people. Innocent children
have been dying in the freezing cold. You, Sir, must
have seen the photographs in newspapers. Innocent
children have been dying in the freezing cold of winter
and the scorching heat of this summer, while the world
looks the other way.

The question is, why has the international
community turned its back on a nation of 25 million
people? It appears that an inimical and rigid mindset
prevails in this Council against a Government which is
in control of more than 95 per cent of the country's
territory.

With peace becoming even more elusive than
before, the misery of the Afghan people increasing by
the hour, and the issues that motivated the sanctions
remaining unresolved, the sanctions have done every
harm, but no good. The scalpel has turned out to be a
bludgeon which has destroyed the body, while the
tumour festers unmolested.

The wrong done now needs to be corrected. The
damage done to the Afghan people needs to be
reversed, and the ground lost by the peace process must
be recovered. Isolation and ostracism have not helped,
and they will not help. The sanctions have to be lifted
and replaced with a system that aims at resolving all of
Afghanistan's problems by addressing the bigger
picture.

The time has come to stop the obsession with one
aspect of the Afghan problem and to concentrate on
solving the entire problem comprehensively. To start
with, efforts need to be made by all concerned to re-
engage the Taliban and to bring them back from the
position of insulation and intransigence. Engagement is
the only solution.

The peace process of Francesc Vendrell, which
the Secretary-General launched with great enthusiasm,
also needs to be put back on track. In addition, more
concerted efforts and generous financial assistance
should be forthcoming to alleviate the plight of
hundreds of thousands of Afghans, both inside
Afghanistan and in refugee camps in Pakistan.

It is important, however, that while providing
humanitarian assistance, international relief agencies
must respect the religious and cultural sensitivities of
the Afghan people. The international community also
needs to appreciate the efforts that the Taliban have
made to eradicate the cultivation of poppies, even at
the cost of added hardship to Afghan farmers. The time
has come to move away from the sanctions and towards
a comprehensive strategy - one that heals the wounds
and revives the body without damaging any part of it.

Pakistan shouldered the main burden of the
decade-long war against foreign occupation of
Afghanistan. At that time we sheltered more than 4.5
million Afghan refugees, and we are still bearing the
burden of the ongoing conflict, with the continued
presence of more than 2 million refugees in Pakistan
and an additional tens of thousands who have recently
arrived.

We have exhausted our patience and capacity to
absorb any more refugees. We shelter the largest-ever
refugee population anywhere in the world. What we
need now are practical steps by the world community
to deliver humanitarian relief inside Afghanistan to
prevent the Afghans from fleeing their homes for
neighbouring countries, and, for those already
displaced, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
international organizations should set up camps on the
other side of the Afghan border to prevent any further
influx into Pakistan.

Due to our proximity to Afghanistan, our
difficulties as a neighbouring country need to be
viewed from this perspective. Pronouncements from
afar may appear convenient, but are flawed in their
appreciation of the circumstances that are peculiar to
Afghanistan.

A one-sided arms embargo, for instance, is not
the solution. It encourages the side exempt from the
embargo to continue the conflict. There are credible
reports that the northern alliance still continues to
receive arms from the outside and is engaged in
launching offensives, and arms are coming not only
from the neighbouring countries, but also from those
outside the neighbourhood.

If the Council is really interested in solving
Afghanistan's problems, it must instead impose a
comprehensive arms embargo - for which we have
been pleading for years - which should be imposed
under Chapter VII on all parties in Afghanistan. That
would give both sides the same incentive to return to
the negotiating table.
The Council, as part of its Charter obligation,
should seek to promote peace through engagement with
the realities on the ground, and not through isolation
and ostracism. The Council must not fuel the
continuation of the conflict through a one-sided arms
embargo. The Council should let the Secretary-General
pursue his peace mission through dialogue and
conciliation.

While we are giving the Security Council our full
cooperation - and will continue to do so - in the
implementation of the sanctions regime in Afghanistan,
unfair though it is, we would not like either the report
of the Experts Committee which is under consideration
by the Council or the creation of a monitoring
mechanism to be used to unjustly implicate Pakistan.
Baseless allegations, implicit or explicit, have been
rejected by us in the past, and we reject them now.

Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1333 (2000) must not be allowed to serve the narrow
ulterior motives of a few. We have said it before, and I
will say it again: no country in the world stands to gain
more than Pakistan from the return of peace and
stability in Afghanistan.

Accordingly, we follow a policy towards
Afghanistan that seeks to support and supplement
international efforts to promote a peaceful solution to
the conflict and, indeed, a comprehensive solution to
all of Afghanistan's problems. It is a comprehensive
strategy we urge the international community to devise.
Pakistan will not lag behind in contributing to this
endeavour.

