Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
The Tunisian delegation is grateful to you, Sir, for
having scheduled this formal meeting of the Security
Council to consider a question of such importance as
that of the prevention of armed conflict. This issue is at
the very heart of the concerns of the United Nations
and the international community as a whole, and for
good reason.

The experience that has been gained by the
United Nations over the years, particularly from its
intense and diverse actions to settle conflicts during the
past decade, offers us many lessons that are worthy of
greater attention on the part of the Security Council as
the body with the principal responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Prevention is better than cure, as per the well-
known old saw, whose wisdom remains unchanged. In
the geopolitical field, prevention can save thousands of
human lives and preserve valuable resources for
development. We have seen how the human and
material costs of conflicts have risen in the many
conflict situations of the 1990s - situations in which
some 80,000 United Nations Blue Helmets have been
involved in peacekeeping operations.

Today more than ever, conflict prevention should
be elevated to the level of a global, integrated strategy,
with the aim of ensuring not only the absence of
conflicts but also conditions most conducive to peace.
These conditions could be of a political, economic,
social or cultural nature. The international community
has the means of pursuing this strategy. It must also
have the constant determination to do so.

Per its prerogatives under the Charter regarding
the preservation of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a part to play in the prevention of
armed conflicts, whether this involves preventing the
outbreak of conflicts or preventing their resurgence.
Here, one means available to the Council is preventive
deployment, to which it should resort whenever
necessary. Of course this should be done while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned and acting with the consent of
the relevant Governments.

Preventive disarmament is another means of
action available to the Council. In the context of
peacekeeping operations, the programmes for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants have undoubtedly had a decisive affect on
preventing the recurrence of conflicts, but also, in the
longer term, in consolidating the foundations of peace.
Also decisive are all actions aimed at supporting the
fight against the trafficking in and circulation of arms,
particularly small arms and light weapons. The
excessive and destablizing stockpiling of these
weapons encourages violence and is a means of waging
war. It is up to the Security Council to ensure respect
for the various arms embargos that it imposes on
countries in which armed conflicts are occurring.

Regional organizations have an important role to
play in conflict prevention. Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations provides an appropriate
framework for cooperation and coordination among the
regional organizations and the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. The ways and means of this cooperation have
to be strengthened by setting up appropriate strategies
of cooperation, including in the areas of early warning
and information exchange.

In this context, my delegation emphasizes the
need to strengthen the conflict-prevention capacity of
the Organization of African Unity, in particular its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution. The creation of this Mechanism several
years ago demonstrates the determination of Africa to
reduce the impact of conflicts, a determination that
requires the political and financial support of the
international community.

The role of the Secretary-General in conflict
prevention is an essential one, which he exercises in
accordance with Article 99 of the Charter. This Article
authorizes him to bring to the attention of the Security
Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, preventive diplomacy provides the
Secretary-General considerable leeway with respect to
conflict prevention, which he can make use of either
directly or through his special envoys.

We believe that a sound and viable long-term
strategy for conflict prevention must take into account
the underlying causes of conflicts and the violence that
feeds them and results from them. Such a strategy must
note that conflicts often originate in the poor economic
and social conditions- underdevelopment, poverty
and destitution - of the people in the countries
affected by conflicts. We believe that really tackling
economic and social development needs would make a
substantial contribution to eliminating the causes of the
conflict and violence that are rampant in several parts
of the world. The case of the African continent is
particularly instructive in this regard.

The international community must reiterate its
commitment to international economic cooperation for
development. This should include according to
development assistance the attention and importance it
deserves. Furthermore, sustained attention should be
given to post-conflict peace-building, which requires
the urgent mobilization of resources for economic
reconstruction. This is one of the bases for the
restoration of normalcy in a post-conflict situation. To
this end, there needs to be increased coordination
between the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Bretton Woods
institutions and aid donors.
In sum, what the international community has to
do now is to define a coherent conflict-prevention
strategy that takes into account all the dimensions of
the question, which are interdependent and
complementary. These dimensions are the political,
military and security issues, as well as economic and
social considerations and a renewed international
commitment to effectively preventing such conflicts
while, at the same time, preserving respect for the
fundamental principles that form the basis of the
system of international relations. These principles are
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
This is a true culture of prevention, which needs to be
developed in the framework of mutual respect.

