Mr. Shinyo (Japan): I join other colleagues in
thanking you for organizing this meeting and also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
comprehensive briefing on the latest events in the
situation in the Middle East.

The situation in the Middle East concerning
Palestine and Israel continues to present critical
challenges. We have expressed our concern about the
continuing fighting between Israel and Palestinian
military groups in Gaza, as well as the many casualties
caused by the fighting since the abduction of Corporal
Gilad Shalit at the end of June.

We are gravely disturbed by the report of many
new casualties in Beit Hanoun as the result of an Israeli
military action yesterday. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims. This incident is not only
a worrying development from the humanitarian
perspective, but also has a negative political impact. It
is necessary for all parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint in order to avoid further
aggravation of the situation.

Japan strongly calls upon the Government of
Israel, in particular, to avoid any action that may lead
to civilian casualties. We also hope that the
Government of Israel will make serious efforts to
determine the causes of the incident and to prevent the
recurrence of such a tragic incident, in particular
through the work of the investigatory panel established
in the Israeli Defense Forces.

We urge the Government of the Palestinian
Authority to take appropriate measures to bring an
immediate end to violence by the Palestinian extremist
groups, including rocket attacks against Israel. We also
reiterate our call on the Palestinian Government to
make every possible effort to secure the immediate
release of the Israeli soldiers abducted in June.
Mr. Tatsuo Arima, Special Envoy of the
Government of Japan for the Middle East Peace
Process, is currently in the Middle East, visiting Israel,
Palestine and Syria. Mr. Arima is appealing for an end
to the state of confrontation as mentioned above and is
carrying out consultations to encourage parties to make
further and more constructive efforts for the promotion
of peace in the Middle East.

Japan strongly hopes that the recent efforts for
the establishment of a new Palestinian Government
will continue. To break the current stalemate, we urge
Palestinians to find ways to overcome their differences
and support a new Government of the Palestinian
Authority, which will renew its efforts to achieve
coexistence and mutual prosperity with Israel. If the
Palestinian Authority makes clear that it will pursue the
realization of peace through peaceful negotiation with
Israel then the international community should actively
extend its support for such a policy. We expect that
Israel will support and respond positively to the efforts
of President Abbas that are aimed at achieving a
breakthrough.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation of the
Palestinians is a matter of deep concern to our
Government. We reiterate the importance for the
international community, including Israel, to continue
to provide the needed assistance in order to address the
situation. In this regard, we stress that an early
resumption by the Israeli Government of the transfer of
tax and customs revenues to the Palestinian Authority,
as well as the full implementation of the Agreement on
Movement and Access, concluded in November 2005,
are matters of the utmost priority.

For our part, we have been steadily implementing
our pledge of $25 million in humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinian people, made upon the visit of former
Prime Minister J unichiro Koizumi to Palestine in July.
At the same time, we are making efforts to realize the
creation of a corridor for peace and prosperity, which
aims at facilitating coexistence and mutual prosperity
in the region in the mid- to long-term, through
consultations among Government representatives of the
four parties concerned - Israel, Palestine, Jordan and
Japan. We have dispatched a study mission to the
region and are making efforts to implement the plan.

Japan will continue to cooperate with the
international community in achieving the mitigation of
tensions and the restoration of stability in the region.

