Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, like my colleagues who spoke before me,
I should like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
Mr. Covie, Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav
constituent Republic of Serbia, and we thank him for
his important statement. We endorse his views.

We believe that the top priorities in Kosovo at
present are, first, institution-building, and secondly, the
building of a genuinely multi-ethnic society.

In his statement, Deputy Prime Minister Covie
noted that all prisoners of Albanian origin have been
transferred from Serbia to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). This will
facilitate national reconciliation and mutual trust. We
deeply appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Covie in this
regard.

The overall situation in Kosovo has been stable
recently. Progress is being made with respect to the
political process and to economic development. Of note
is the fact that the various parties in Kosovo have
reached an agreement on a coalition Government. We
welcome this progress. However, we cannot overlook
the fact that transboundary organized crime and arms
trafficking remain serious concerns.

There has been no notable improvement in the
security situation in minority areas, and the return of
ethnic minorities is occurring at a slow pace. We hope
that UNMIK will strengthen its cooperation with
Belgrade to make further efforts to address the
problems I mentioned earlier.

We hope also that the Kosovo coalition
Government, with the help of UNMIK, will implement
strictly resolution 1244 (1999), so as to establish a
harmonious and multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the efforts
made in Skopje, with the facilitation of Mr. Steiner, to
establish a joint expert committee to address border
problems. We hope that this committee will play an
active role in helping both sides implement resolution
1244 (1999). On the basis of the border demarcation
agreement signed by the Government of Macedonia
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, it will be
possible effectively to address the practical border
issues between Pristina and Skopje, so as to ensure
normal living conditions for people on the ground.

We would note also that, not long ago, remarks
were made that are harmful to peaceful coexistence
among the countries of the region and that are
detrimental to the stability of Kosovo and ofthe region
as a whole. This has drawn the attention of the
international community. We hope that such events will
not be repeated.

In conclusion, we hope that the parties concerned
will effectively implement resolution 1244 (1999) and
continue to work towards peace, stability and economic
development in the region ofthe Balkans.

