Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General. We also welcome the work done by
the Head of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville, Ambassador Noel Sinclair, and his team.
I would also like to convey my appreciation to
Mr. Danilo Tiirk.

The conclusion of stage II of the disarmament
process has made it possible to make progress towards
autonomy for Bougainville. We hope that the Peace
Process Consultative Committee, which is meeting this
week, will determine the modalities for the destruction
of the weapons that have been surrendered, in
accordance with the recent agreement among the
parties, with which we are pleased.

The constitutional amendments and the Organic
Law on Peace-building in Bougainville represent a
milestone and lay the groundwork for the holding of
elections for an autonomous government, in
accordance with the autonomy arrangements. We hope
that the Bougainville Constitutional Commission will
soon complete its work, in order that the Constituent
Assembly may soon be convened. The active
cooperation of the countries of the region deserves our
full appreciation and is a model to be emulated. We
also recognize the ongoing commitment the national
Government has been demonstrating vis-a-vis the
Peace Agreement, as well as the determination of the
people of Bougainville to establish their institutions
and take charge of their destiny.

Spain believes it is appropriate to extend the
mission of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville until next year, so that it will continue to
provide assistance to conclude the matters pending
under the Peace Agreement. As progress is made in the
political process, emphasis needs to be placed on the
rehabilitation and the reintegration of ex-combatants
and on rebuilding the infrastructure and community
services. The United Nations Development Programme
will play a key role in that regard.

Finally, we trust that peace and stability will be
consolidated in Bougainville in such a way that the
peace process will be successfully concluded.

