Mr. Kasuri (Pakistan): It is a pleasure for me to
participate in this important meeting of the Security
Council under the presidency of France. We warmly
welcome the initiative of the French Government and
Foreign Minister De Villepin to convene this special
ministerial meeting. We believe that it is timely and
essential for the Security Council to consider the issue
of terrorism from a wider perspective in its various
manifestations and its multifarious origins and causes.

We welcome the important statements made today
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Pakistan has a strong interest in the
subject, as it has itself been a victim of terrorism for a
very long time.

The tragic events of 11 September 2001
mobilized the international community to launch a
comprehensive campaign against terrorism. The
Security Council has made a significant contribution to
this campaign. An international coalition has waged a
successful war against the Al Qaeda terrorist
organization in Afghanistan and elsewhere. Of course,
this process of seeking out, arresting and eliminating
the Al Qaeda elements wherever they may be will be a
long and painstaking one. Let me assure the Council
here that the Government of Pakistan will leave no
stone unturned to achieve that objective.

Pakistan is and will remain a key member of the
global coalition against international terrorism. As
President Musharraf said last year,

"the strategic decisions we took after 11
September are consistent with our moral
principles and national interests. Our unstinting
support has been critical in the battle against
terrorism. This support will continue until our
shared objectives are fully met and the evil of
terrorism is completely eliminated."

Pakistan's actions speak louder than our words.
Despite the constant threat on our eastern frontier,
70,000 Pakistani troops continue to conduct extensive
operations on our western border with Afghanistan to
interdict Al Qaeda infiltration. Our law enforcement
agencies are engaged in an extensive operation to hunt
down Al Qaeda and other terrorists who may have
infiltrated into Pakistan. Pakistan has arrested and
deported over 420 suspected members of Al Qaeda,
including some of its top leaders, such as Abu
Zubaydah and Ramzi bin al-Shibh. Several members of
our security forces have made the ultimate sacrifice in
this operation. Pakistan has also been the target of Al
Qaeda's retaliation and revenge attacks, in which
scores of innocent Pakistanis and some foreigners,
including 11 French nationals, have lost their lives.
But, despite these attacks, Pakistan has remained
resolute. We have achieved considerable success in this
anti-terrorism campaign, which will be pursued until
the terrorists have been eliminated.

In accordance with Security Council resolutions,
Pakistan has devised a legal and practical mechanism
to effectively halt financial and other support to
terrorist organizations and groups. Several sectarian
and extremist groups have been banned and their assets
frozen. We have signed or ratified 11 out of the 12
United Nations anti-terrorism conventions. We have
also signed the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Convention on Combating Terrorism.

The horrendous attacks of 11 September have
highlighted the vulnerability of the modern,
technologically advanced societies, as well as of those
that are backward. We share the fear that terrorists may
acquire sophisticated technology and weapons of great
destructive power. Let me reaffirm that Pakistan's
nuclear assets are under strict safeguards and credible
custodial controls. With a vigorous security and
monitoring system, there has never been any danger of
leakage of nuclear or sensitive technologies in
Pakistan, yet we must also acknowledge that the
instruments of terror can be multifarious. The focus of
the anti-terror campaign must therefore remain on
eliminating the terrorist organizations and groups and
in halting support for them.

Greater effort is necessary to identify those acts
of terrorism which are the consequence of incorrigible
fanaticism or criminal intent, and others which arise
from a sense of political or economic injustice. In the
latter case, attempts to address underlying causes could
be the most effective approach to arresting terrorist
actions.

At this juncture, however, I would like to point
out that some States have unfortunately sought to
misuse the campaign against terror to denigrate and
suppress the right of peoples to self-determination,
such as those in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and in
Palestine. Pakistan wishes to reaffirm emphatically that
the aspiration of the people of Jammu and Kashmir to
self-determination is sanctioned by the resolutions of
the Security Council. Their struggle against Indian
occupation is a just, legitimate and noble struggle.
Equating such a freedom struggle with terrorism is
unjust. The Kashmir dispute can and should be
resolved through dialogue between Pakistan and India
in accordance with the Security Council's resolutions
and the wishes of the Kashmiri people.

The international community cannot ignore the
phenomenon of State terrorism as a tool of foreign
occupation and defiance of United Nations resolutions.
Terrorism has no creed, culture or religion. Pakistan
resolutely rejects attempts to identify our noble
religion, Islam, with terrorism. Such attempts must be
collectively opposed by the international community
lest they sow the seeds of endemic confrontation
between cultures and civilizations. There should be no
double standards in combating terrorism. We are
surprised that acts of terrorism committed by other
religious fanatics in non-Muslim societies have not
been condemned as vigorously. I refer to the recent
killings of Muslims in the State of Gujarat, India, in
particular.

As President Musharraf has stated:

"Hate should have no market. It must be stamped
out with the same zeal with which the fight
against terrorism is being pursued."

We shall do this vigorously in Pakistan. We seek to
build Pakistan, as envisioned by our founding father,
the great leader Mohammad Ali Jinnah, as a tolerant,
modern and democratic Islamic State. While
collectively opposing terrorism, the international
community must also endeavour collectively to
promote greater cultural and religious harmony all over
the world. To this end, Pakistan has proposed the
adoption by the General Assembly of a declaration on
religious and cultural understanding, harmony and
cooperation.

In conclusion, let me state that Pakistan believes
that this ministerial meeting is the beginning of a
serious dialogue within the Security Council on ways
and means to combat terrorism collectively,
comprehensively, effectively and - I also hope -
equitably. Success in this historic endeavour will
strengthen international peace and security and put to
rest the prophecies of those who project a coming clash
of civilizations.

