Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We warmly welcome the
presence today of Her Excellency Ms. Kolinda Grabar-
Kitarovie, President of Croatia, and Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburovic', Minister for Justice of Serbia.
We thank Presidents Agius and Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their written reports (see S/2017/662 and S/2017/661, respectively) and comprehensive briefings.

My delegation would like to commend the team of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) for the successful completion of the crucial and
complex task of bringing to justice the perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Looking back at the tremendous work accomplished,
I would like to say that it is a job well done. We would
like to express our gratitude to the entire staff of the
Tribunal, in particular to the 87 judges, one of them
Mr. Volodymyr Vassylenko, is sitting right behind me,
and also the five prosecutors and four Registrars. They
have worked over the lifespan of the ICTY, contributed
their time, knowledge and experience and made every
effort to ensure the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Tribunal and of its successful closure this year.

As the first international criminal tribunal since
the Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals, the ICTY built
a significant record of accountability by concluding
proceedings against all 161 individuals indicted
for serious violations of international law, as well
as contempt proceedings against 25 persons. I will
touch upon the remaining contempt cases later in
my statement.

Some sceptics may criticize the ICTY activity and
question the importance of its decisions, the role of the
Tribunal in prevention and in legal history in general.
We are absolutely convinced that learning from
challenges faced by the Tribunal, highlighting its legal
achievements and their impact for combating impunity
is necessary for the Council to improve its practices to
achieve peace through justice. We all know about the
countless challenges the ICTY was bound to face. First,
it literally had to start from scratch with undeveloped
international criminal jurisprudence and no pre-exiting
adequate model to follow. In addition, the ICTY started
operating during ongoing conflicts where crimes under
its jurisdiction continued to be committed. Secondly,
logistical problems, such as distance - gathering
evidence for crimes that occurred hundred or thousands
of miles away - made it more difficult to meet the level
of proof required for a conviction and for an accused to
develop a comprehensive defence. Thirdly, the Tribunal
faced obstacles beyond the its control, including failure
ofwitnesses to appear, numerous contempt proceedings,
the health of the accused and many others. At the same
time, some incidents in the ICTY need to be properly
investigated and learned from, such as what happened
recently during the public pronouncement of the appeal
judgement for Slobodan Praljak.

Last but not least, the cooperation of States is the
basis for the functioning of the Tribunal. Unfortunately,
there are many examples of delayed cooperation or
unwillingness by States to do so. Among those examples
is the lack of cooperation by Serbia concerning the
arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal almost three
years ago against persons accused of contempt of the
ICTY. Taking into account the transfer of that case to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, we urge Serbia to demonstrate its political
will and cooperate fully with the Mechanism. Those
and other challenges, including staff attrition and the
loss of highly experienced experts as the mandate of
the ICTY nears its end, seriously affected the time
framework of proceedings and activity of the Tribunal
in general.

I would now like to focus on the judicial legacy
of the ICTY. There are many achievements in that
field. In particular, the Tribunal has played a historic
role in the persecution of war-time sexual violence
in the former Yugoslavia and has paved the way for
more robust adjudication of such crimes worldwide.
It has specified crucial elements of the crime of
genocide, especially the notion of specific intent and
the definition of targeted groups of that crime. The
Tribunal has identified a general prohibition of torture
in international law, which cannot be delegated from
a treaty, internal law or otherwise. It determined that
enslavement and persecution constitute crimes against
humanity. It has made contributions to the doctrine of
the criminal responsibility of superiors and command
responsibility. It has elaborated the definition of
armed conflict and contributed to the definition and
understanding of other international crimes, including
that the destruction of cultural heritage may amount to
a crime against humanity.

The Tribunal has made numerous contributions to
the issues of procedural law, some of which have to do
with protective measures for witnesses. Moreover, with
respect to criminal responsibility, the Tribunal clearly
indicated that not even Heads of State are beyond the
reach of the law, and succeeded in arresting and trying
suspects, regardless of their official status, which
resulted in the indictment of Slobodan Milosevic.
We consider that holding leaders accountable, along
with contributing to the development of international
criminal law and strengthening the rule oflaw, is one of
the Tribunal's most important achievements.

By holding individuals responsible, the ICTY
has brought justice and relief to victims and provided
thousands of them an opportunity to be heard. The
prosecution of persons responsible for committing
serious Violations of international humanitarian law
is a clear signal to all perpetrators in all conflicts that
sooner or later they will be held accountable. It gives
hope to my countrymen that war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other serious breaches of human rights
committed during the ongoing armed aggression of
the Russian Federation against Ukraine will not go
unpunished and that justice will prevail.

The establishment of the ICTY, as well as the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
was a huge step forward in the fight against impunity,
which inspired the world community to establish a
permanent institution - the International Criminal
Court. The Tribunal's knowledge and expertise will
therefore not be wasted. In that regard, we support the
conclusions of the reports regarding the necessity to
learn from the lessons of the ICTY to avoid mistakes,
improve the efficiency of criminal tribunals, identify
best practices and build on its legacy.

We are convinced that the heritage of the Tribunal
must be preserved for future generations of international
criminal courts - including the International Criminal
Court * and national courts and tribunals. We welcome
the legacy dialogues of the ICTY and the creation of
the ICTY information centres. The knowledge and
expertise of international criminal tribunals should be
accessible to a wider public, thereby contributing to
the efforts to maintain international peace and deliver
justice throughout the world.

In relation to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, we commend its active judicial
activities carried out during the period covered by
the report regarding the assumed responsibility for a
number of functions of the ICTR and the ICTY. We
welcome its close cooperation with the ICTY in enabling
the smooth and efficient transition of the remaining
functions and services, as well as the improvement of
the Mechanism's operations, procedures and working
methods. We also welcome the intensive efforts of
the Mechanism with the Office of the Prosecutor to
locate and arrest the remaining eight ICTR fugitives
and strengthen its fugitive tracking activities, as well
as to provide continuous support to national judicial
authorities prosecuting war crimes cases during
conflicts in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. We
are grateful to all States for their cooperation in those
activities, including in the provision of assistance
in the enforcement of sentences of the tribunals on
their territories.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
cooperation of States with international tribunals is
crucial in the achievement of their important objectives.
With that in mind, we regret that the timely proposal
by the Chair of the Council's Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals to adopt a draft presidential
statement related to the ICTY closure did not materialize
due to a lack of consensus. The failure on that purely
technical issue does not bode well for the Council, and
is regrettably an indicator of its many weaknesses.

As we have seen so often in the recent past, the
ability of the Council to rise to the challenges of the
present day is nowhere near that of the early 1990s.
We urge the international community to unite in
enhancing the development of international tribunals.
Let us recall the recent horrible event of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, murdering 298
innocent civilians. Unfortunately, the international
community could not provide justice for the victims
and their relatives by creating a tribunal by Security
Council decision. Such a failure must never be repeated
in the future.

The legacy of the Tribunal, however, gives us faith
that new and efficient ways and instruments to maintain
international peace and security are firmly establishing
themselves and will play an important part in saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

