Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to join
other delegations in thanking Mr. Kalomoh for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General. We
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting, because we welcome this
opportunity for an in-depth discussion of the situation
in the Central African subregion. The current political
climate in Central Africa offers the region the historic
opportunity to claim at last its rightful place as a major
economic and political force on that continent.

In addition to the statement that Ambassador
Ryan of Ireland will shortly deliver on behalf of the
European Union presidency, which we fully endorse,
allow me to highlight four short points that we believe
to be of major importance in this context.

First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
making great strides towards political stability. During
President Kabila's visit to Berlin on 6 February, the
German Government acknowledged the efforts of the
transitional national Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and underlined its willingness
to continue to support the peace process there
bilaterally as well as within the frameworks of the
European Union, the United Nations and the
international financial institutions.

Still, there are many obstacles that must be
overcome before sustainable peace is achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Security in the
eastern Congo has improved following the success of
Operation Artemis and the subsequent increase of the
strength and capabilities of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Let me say that we are deeply saddened by
the death of a Kenyan military observer in Ituri. We
express our condolences to the Kenyan Government
and we hope that those responsible for the crime will
be brought to justice swiftly.

One decisive element of peacekeeping in eastern
Congo is the weapons embargo for North and South
Kivu and Ituri, set forth in Security Council resolution
1493 (2003). The arms embargo must be strengthened
in order for it to have a deterrent effect. We hope that
the Security Council will soon be in a position to reach
a decision on this matter.

With regard to the security sector throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the high-level
meeting in New York a week ago developed a common
understanding on the way forward and identified the
most urgent tasks for the transitional national
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the international donor community to ensure that
the transition stays on track and that elections can be
held on schedule.

Secondly, the peace process in Burundi seems to
be on the right course with the opening of a dialogue
between the Burundian Government and the
Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation. The
Security Council has welcomed this development and
is looking forward to its next stage. In due course, the
Council will have to decide on the question of an
enlarged United Nations role in the Burundian peace
process.

The African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) has
contributed tremendously to the stabilization of that
country. Germany has supported AMIB bilaterally, in
addition to its share of the European Union's €25
million for the Mission. We commend the role AMIB
has played in stabilizing the country. South African
Vice-President Zuma reminded the Council, at the open
meeting in December, that one of the objectives of the
African Mission in Burundi was to help create
conditions that are favourable for the establishment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. My
Government believes that the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Burundi must now
be given serious consideration.

Thirdly, from a regional perspective, efforts to
normalize relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and neighbouring States are being
stepped up with the declaration of principles of good-
neighbourly relations and cooperation of September
2003, subsequent high-level visits between Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
agreements on the reopening of embassies. Such
confidence-building measures are indispensable
building blocks for the Great Lakes region conference.

This brings me to my fourth point. The initiative
for a Great Lakes region conference under the auspices
of the United Nations and the African Union is finally
taking shape. In this context, let me say that we are not
at all discouraged by the recent adjustment to the
conference's timetable. On the contrary, we are pleased
with the decision to shift the first summit to a date that
allows for careful and thorough preparation of the
substance, format and structure of that important
process.

Despite these encouraging developments, the
process of the political and economic stabilization of
the Central African subregion remains vulnerable and
is not yet irreversible. Many of the problems afflicting
the region can be dealt with effectively only at the
regional level. The disarmament, demobilization and
successful reintegration of former combatants into
regular armies or civilian life is a cross-cutting issue,
as are the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
the illegal flow of arms to belligerents.

All of these challenges can be met only through
joint efforts by the countries in the region and the
international community as a whole. Strong regional
involvement will remain a decisive factor. That means
strengthening existing subregional mechanisms,
supporting promising developments within the African
Union, and further coordination between mechanisms
as well as cooperation with the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and other
stakeholders.

Cooperation among mechanisms and
organizations also requires the identification of
respective strengths and areas of responsibility. Further
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, in particular, in our
view, will be of benefit.

