The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

At the outset, we would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame, Commissioner Chergui and Ambassador
Schulz for their briefings. We had hoped that
Mr. Salame would have come in person last month to
bring us good news, but apparently he has come to the
Security Council today to bring us grim news.

Indonesia would like to join others in expressing
its deep concern about the situation in Libya. I would
like to bring four points to the attention of the Council.

First, Indonesia calls for the cessation of hostilities
in Libya. We reiterate the call of the Security Council
on 10 May for all parties to commit to a ceasefire and
de-escalation and to return to the United Nations-led
political mediation. We also reiterate that lasting peace
and stability in Libya will come about only through a
political solution. No military solution will help. We
welcome the efforts made by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salame' to restore a unified
international position on Libya to end its current crisis.
The Council has repeatedly shown its support for the
work of the Special Representative and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and today Indonesia
would like to affirm its continued support. We call
on all partners - the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the African Union - to
continue their support and their work in pursuing peace
in Libya.

Secondly, Indonesia supports the convening of the
Libyan national conference. Although the scheduled
time for the national conference in April has come and
gone, we should not forget that we were once there. We
can come back to that point and pick up where we left
off. Indonesia supports the convening of the national
conference as soon as possible so that the Libyans can
peacefully discuss the future of Libya, but we need a
ceasefire in order for that to happen.

Thirdly, Indonesia would also like to reiterate
its call for a humanitarian pause during the month of
Ramadan. We are closely following the reports from
Libya. Sad to say, the numbers are disheartening. On
17 May, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported that 126 civilians had been killed,
including 29 confirmed civilian deaths; more than
75,000 people had been internally displaced due to
ongoing hostilities, 48 per cent of whom were children.
It is estimated that 100,000 men, women and children
remain trapped in immediate front-line areas, with over
400,000 more in areas directly impacted by clashes, as
mentioned by the Special Representative. Water and
electricity cuts are being reported from front-line areas,
while market access and the availability of food is very
limited. Every day of violence means more people
killed, injured or displaced. Every day of inaction in
the Council will lead to more deaths. The situation is
indeed deteriorating, and it must stop. We must heed
Mr. Salame's warning on the danger of civil war, which
would ultimately affect women, children and other
civilians. Nothing is more tragic than brothers and
sisters fighting one another.

Finally, Indonesia calls for the protection ofcivilians
in Tripoli and throughout the rest of Libya. We are
saddened by the increasing number ofcivilian casualties
in this crisis. Nevertheless, we are also concerned for
the safety of United Nations personnel, as well as the
medical and humanitarian workers on the ground. We
hear from Special Representative Salame that there are
attacks on health facilities and ambulances, which is in
violation of resolution 2286 (2016). It is important for
all parties to respect international humanitarian law and
human rights, and not target civilians or humanitarian
workers. Efforts should be made to help those in need,
and such efforts should be facilitated in order to reach
them and save innocent lives.

In conclusion, I call on all parties in Libya and all
countries that care for the people and children of Libya
to silence the guns and give peace a chance so that the
men, women and children of Libya can enjoy the end
of Ramadan and celebrate the festive day of Eid al-Fitr
this year and many years to come.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

