Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic):
We believe that today's formal Security Council
meeting and open debate is of crucial importance, because
it concerns the serious situation in the occupied Arab
territories.

For some weeks now, the Israeli authorities have
been taking extremely serious measures against the
Palestinian people. These measures have consisted of
imposing restrictions on the freedom of movement of
persons and goods in the Palestinian territories, isolating
Palestinian regions from each other and preventing any
interaction between Palestinian towns and villages, and
breaking the continuity of Palestinian territory under
Palestinian authority, between Gaza and the West Bank
and other Palestinian territories, and its links with the
outside world.

Israel has also closed its borders to Palestinian goods
from Gaza and the West Bank, and has prevented the
entrance of Israeli goods into Palestinian regions. It has
closed the borders between the West Bank and Jordan,
and between Gaza and Egypt. These steps, which have
been described in detail in the letter from President
Yasser Arafat addressed to the Secretary-General,
constitute a flagrant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, applicable to all territories occupied

 

by Israel since 1967, including Al-Quds. They also
constitute a violation of the international resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
as well as a serious violation of the agreements concluded
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization in Oslo and Washington, and the
subsequent Taba and Washington agreements between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority.

Apart from the illegal, illegitimate and heinous nature
of these actions by Israel, we all are aware of the
interaction between the activities and economic interests of
Israel and the Palestinian territories and the precarious
nature of the Palestinian economy. That is why Israel's
steps constitute reprisals against the Palestinian people as a
whole. These people are being suffocated in the economic
and social spheres. They are isolated from the outside world
and live in an almost ghetto-like situation. They suffer
terribly: women, children and the elderly are threatened
with death by starvation and disease. It is not difficult,
therefore, to foresee the negative impact on, and the serious
consequences for, peace in the Middle East and the
resulting threat to that process. The enemies of peace find
in this tumultuous situation a pretext for carrying out their
plans.

We recognize the right of each State to security and
stability and to reassure its population. This is a legitimate
goal. We condemned recent attacks, including the massacre
in Haram al-Ibrahimi and Haram Al-Quds al-Sharif, and we
also denounced, along with the Israeli people, the
assassination of the Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Yitzhak
Rabin. At the same time, we say that violence cannot be
countered with violence. One cannot use as a pretext the
actions of a group in order to suppress and starve an entire
people, as is the case of the Palestinian people. They too
have the right to enjoy security and to live in dignity, like
all other peoples of the region. There is no equality or
justice in punishing an entire people and making them pay
for the actions of a few.

The Summit of Peacemakers at Sharm El Sheikh
reaffirmed the importance of the speedy achievement of
peace in the Middle East and stressed the need to promote
the peace process and to eliminate the obstacles impeding
that process and the dangers threatening it. However, the
measures now being taken in the Palestinian territories do
not serve that end - quite the contrary. They fuel violence
and counter-violence, and the consequence will be to feed
hatred and hinder the peace efforts of peace-loving
countries and peoples within and outside the region.

Tunisia has supported every stage of the peace
process, and we continue to do so because of our
unwavering commitment to the principles of justice, peace
and self-determination, as well as to international law. We
call here upon the Israeli authorities to rescind the
measures taken against the Palestinian people and to put
an end to practices that limit their freedom and threaten
their security and their basic rights. Likewise, Tunisia
demands that Israel respect its commitments, in keeping
with the agreements concluded with the Palestinians,
including withdrawal from Palestinian territories
according to the agreed timetable.

The Palestinian people has chosen the path of peace.
It has made peace its fundamental goal, as it
demonstrated by supporting President Arafat and the
Palestinian Authority in the recent elections. If Israel
really wants peace - a peace based on justice, a lasting
peace and one that commands respect and commitment -
it must comply with its commitments and logically give
up policies that run counter to the objective sought.

We appeal to the United States and to the Russian
Federation, as co-sponsors of the peace process, to
intervene quickly to stop the serious escalation that
threatens the peace process and undermines the goal of
the Summit of Peacemakers held at Sharm El Sheikh: to
assure the pursuit of the process by giving it new
momentum to attain the aspirations of the peoples of the
region, indeed, the aspirations of the international
community as a whole.

We also appeal to donor countries to assist the
Palestinian people in the current crisis and to meet their
commitments towards the Palestinian Authority to relieve
the suffering of the Palestinian people and to rebuild their
devastated economy.

We call upon Israel to recognize the failure of force
in the settlement of conflicts. We ask them to give up this
cycle of violence and counter-violence, and its
consequences for the peace process, and to return quickly
to the path of negotiations.

We urgently appeal to the Security Council, which
bears primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to act quickly to put an
end to the violence and to call for restraint and the
resumption of dialogue to attain a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

 

