Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2296 (2016) on
the renewal and extension of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
because we believe that it is very important for the
Security Council to give its full support to the Mission
so it can discharge its mandate, as set out in resolution
1769 (2007).

My delegation stresses that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan are inviolable and
protected. We take this opportunity to reiterate our
support for our brothers in the Sudan in their efforts
to restore peace and security throughout Darfur.
We also note that the situation has improved in most
areas in Darfur. We also pay tribute to all the positive
efforts of the Government of the Sudan to reach a
settlement in Darfur and honour its commitments
under the Darfur peace agreement, in particular the
holding of a referendum on the administrative status
of Darfur within the Sudan, as well as for its positive
achievements, including the signing of the road map
agreement in April.

The situation in Darfur today is very different from
that which prevailed before the Mission was established
in 2007. The fact that the Mission shall remain in the
region without a time frame to determine its future is
therefore not realistic. We need a clearly formulated exit
strategy, with the full participation of the African Union,
including detailed, measurable benchmarks that could
be assessed in real terms. In that regard, I commend
the efforts of the Joint Working Group to formulate
the UNAMID exit strategy, the special report of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2016/510), and
the results and recommendations contained therein,
which seek to implement the benchmarks of the
UNAMID exit strategy. We also stress the importance
of focusing on the development of Darfur and the
reconstruction of its economic, political and judicial
institutions, in accordance with the priorities and the
needs and requirements of the Government of Sudan
and the five states of Darfur.

