Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank you wholeheartedly, Sir,
for convening this meeting. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Turkey and the members
of his delegation for their efforts last month. I further
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing to the Council this morning.

This open debate has been convened in
circumstances that do not augur well for the Middle
East, given Israel's feverish efforts to obliterate our last
hopes to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region through its unprecedented
aggressive policies in the Arab territories occupied
since 1967. While the entire world seeks to establish a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and
insists that the achievement of peace is an urgent
prerequisite for the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, it is astonished by Israel's
continued beating of the drums of war, appropriation of
land, ongoing settlement activity, blockade of Gaza and
threats to again expel millions of Palestinians from
their homeland under the racist pretext of affirming the
Jewish identity of the State of Israel - an outdated
policy whose consequences are known to all.

These practices in no way indicate Israel's real
intentions or a desire for peace on its part. Israel has
already made its rejection of peace clear by refusing
even to accept the modest request to extend the
moratorium on settlement activity. Israel claims these
days to be negotiating peace on the basis of the two-
State solution, yet its settlement activities are on the
verge of making that solution dead letter and without a
chance of survival.

Peace is only as viable as the desire to make
peace is translated into practical deeds. Political
manoeuvring behind the smokescreen of paying mere
lip service to peace only exacerbates an already tense
situation and pushes it towards the precipice. We would
stress once again that Syria's demands for peace are
not the type of compromises that Israel claims to be
making courageously and publicizing as painful. We
are talking about usurped lands and rights that must be
restored in full to their legitimate owners.

Syria and the Arab States have sought peace
through the adoption of the Arab Peace Initiative,
including the full restoration of usurped Arab rights,
Israel's complete withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories to the line of 4 June 1967, the establishment
of a Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, and
the settlement of the question of Palestinian refugees in
accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy.

However, Israel's answer to the Arab Peace
Initiative has been its invasion of the West Bank, its
2002 massacres of Jenin and Nablus, its policy of
continued expansion and settlement, and its
appropriation of land and usurpation of natural
resources and capabilities. Israel has not stopped at
these cumulative, provocative excesses. It committed
yet another act of aggression against Lebanon in the
summer of 2006, followed by its aggression against
Gaza in 2008, which killed thousands of Palestinian
civilians and injured many, many more. Israel's crimes
include the murder of humanitarian activists of various
nationalities who tried to deliver humanitarian
assistance to Gaza on the freedom flotilla.

Not satisfied with all this, Israel has continued to
pursue settlement policies, build the racist separation
wall, violate and desecrate holy shrines, lay siege to
the defenceless Palestinian people of Gaza, and
endorse decisions to Judaize the city of Jerusalem, the
most recent of which was the decision to renovate
certain parts of the old town. Moreover, Israel pursues
its policy of collective punishment, the detention of
thousands of Palestinian civilians and officials, and the
abuse of detainees, including women, by Israeli
soldiers.

The most recent of these racist Israeli decisions,
adopted only a few days ago, concerns the requirement
of non-Jews to pledge allegiance to the Jewish State. It
is yet another expression of Israeli fascism, manifest in
killings and racist laws that contradict twenty-first
century calls for freedom and equality. They also
contradict Israel's claim to be an oasis of democracy in
the Middle East.

The Palestinian people still await international
justice and expect us to come to their rescue. The
question we must ask ourselves, however, is how long
Israel will remain an entity above the law and
accountable to none. How can we explain to the world
the fact that the Security Council has chosen to remain
silent vis-a-vis these crimes? Today more than ever
before, the Council is called on to undertake practical
and concrete measures, commensurate with Israel's
10-59122
flagrant behaviour, to compel Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories. The international
community must also strive to lift the deeply unjust
siege of the Palestinian people of Gaza, open all the
checkpoints, and reconstruct Gaza while providing
international guarantees to prevent Israel from again
destroying facilities and infrastructure there.

Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Golan to its motherland, Syria, and to comply with the
decisions of international legitimacy, particularly
resolution 497 (1981). It pursues a policy of terror and
oppression of the Syrian people of the Golan. It detains
Syrian citizens of the Golan and continues to
confiscate land in order to plant mines and expand
settlements. We recall that Israeli mines in the
occupied Syrian Golan injured 531 people, of whom
202, for the most part children, died and 329 were
permanently disabled.

Israel continues to steal the water of the Golan. A
few days ago, it drew water from the al-Ram dam in
the occupied Syrian Golan, which led to a total loss of
the reservoir's water and to the death of all fish there.

Here, we stress that Syria's sovereign right to the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of4 June 1967 is not
subject to negotiation. Our full recovery of the Golan is
the basis on which any steps to build peace should be
founded. As President Bashar Al-Assad has said, it is
clear that the Israeli Government is not concerned
about peace. Its main concern has been security in a
very narrow sense - their settler, expansionist and
hostile security, which in their view can be achieved
only at the expense of our rights and our security.

It is illogical and not even acceptable that we
Arabs have to continue to provide proof and evidence
that we are seriously interested in peace, despite our
repeated declarations and statements to that end on
various occasions, in particular since the convening of
the 1991 Madrid Conference. The Israelis must prove
that. The Israelis must express in deeds, not only in
words, that they are ready for a just and comprehensive
peace. They should seek to convince us Arabs that they
are sincere about it, because they are the ones
occupying our land. It is they who aggress our people
and displace millions of them, not the other way
around. They are the ones who undertake all such acts
and, above all, they use protection and promises as a
guise to blackmail us and to gain further concessions.
10-59122

The Israeli Permanent Representative tried this
morning to distract the Council's attention from
focusing on the Israeli occupation of Arab land. He
vehemently tried to make the Council consider any
issue except the central issue of peace. Why? It is
simple - because its failure to mention ending the
occupation and achieving peace means that Israel is
trying to shirk its responsibility for ending the
occupation and achieving a just and comprehensive
peace, including the establishment of the Palestinian
State.

Israeli State terror, on the other hand, is known to
all. It is documented by many international and Israeli
institutions intent on trying to uncover Israeli
violations of the human rights of Arabs in occupied
Arab lands. There are reports of the carnage, crimes,
occupation and aggression of Israeli State terror, which
has continued for more than 60 years. Israel has
mastered State terror. It has committed all sorts of
crimes in Qana, Jenin, Nablus, Gaza, Bahr el-Baqar,
Deir Yassin and al-Quneitra. The terror has even
extended to United Nations representatives, such as
Count Bernadotte. Israeli State terror has targeted
United Nations Members and peace activists, including
the ship Rachel Corrie and Turkish victims.

It also included the first air piracy case in history
when Israel hijacked a Syrian civilian aircraft in 1954. I
repeat that Israel hijacked a plane in 1954 and shot
down a civilian Libyan jet in 1971. Recently, as
representatives well know, Israel forged passports of
some of its allies to assassinate Mahmoud Al-Mabhouh,
a Palestinian citizen in Dubai.

The list goes on. We recall what has recently been
disclosed by classified Israeli documents concerning
the 1973 war. These documents show that, by the
second day of the 1973 war, Israel had prepared a
nuclear bomb, with which it planned to attack the city
of Damascus. That is in an Israeli document. Israeli
State terror is a threat to the world's peace and security,
as was made clear at the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in New York in May, when it
unanimously decided to name Israel as the main
obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.

In conclusion, I wish to cite some excerpts from
the Israeli press.
5

First, Haaretz has stated that high- or low-ranking
Israeli leaders can expel any citizen from the occupied
West Bank or any other Palestinian territory and that
Israel may meet those who wish to extend their hand in
peace and good-neighbourliness with more settlements
and graves. Israel Today has written that if Israel really
wants to pursue peace, it must stop following a policy
of provocation and discrimination against the Israeli
Arabs. Maariv has stated that Israel cannot conclude
peace with Syria without giving up the Golan, but
Israel is not prepared to do so. Haaretz has asked
whether Israel's refusal even to discuss the Arab Peace
Initiative meant that it must once again sacrifice
thousands of soldiers, as it did in 1973, if it wishes to
start genuine peace negotiations.

Maariv has written that no one objected to a rabbi
publishing a book allowing a Jew to kill a non-Jew, and
then asked why Israelis were astonished when mosques
are quietly burned without any condemnation being
raised. Maariv also has stated that Israelis have become
a vindictive people who fail to see the misery of their
neighbours, having been brainwashed and taught that
the suffering of Arabs is not like their own, and that an
Arab woman's mourning of her son's death is not as
deep as a Jewish mother's grief.

Finally, Yediot Ahronot has stated that Israel is
the only State that has occupied a people for 40 years,
and yet it humiliates anyone who protests that fact.
Haaretz has written that Israel's image had never been
so low.

