Mr. Zbogar (Slovenia): My delegation wants to join
others, Sir, in expressing satisfaction at seeing Namibia, and
you personally, presiding over the work of the Security
Council in the month of August. We want to express our
full confidence in your guidance of the Council during
these turbulent times.

Today the peace process in Sierra Leone is entering a
new phase. By taking action on the draft resolution before
it and authorizing the provisional expansion of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), the
Security Council will make its first concrete contribution to
the implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his recent
report, the signing of the Peace Agreement on 7 July was
"a great step forward for Sierra Leone" [S/ 1999/836,
para. 52]. The successful implementation of its provisions
is therefore of utmost importance. Some notable progress
has already been made, especially concerning the release of
conflict-related prisoners and abductees. The bulk of the
work, however, has yet to be completed.

The source of our greatest concern in this critical
phase is the serious delay in disarming combatants. The
encampment, disarmament and demobilization process
began in earnest on 18 August, at the very end of the time-
frame stipulated by the Peace Agreement. It is thus
estimated that six weeks after the signing of the Lome
Peace Agreement only a few hundred of an estimated
20,000 rebel fighters have turned in their weapons. Some
combatants have even returned home without reporting to
demobilization centres.

We would also like to note that even though Mr.
Foday Sankoh's return to Sierra Leone is not addressed
in the peace accords, such a move by the leader of the
Revolutionary United Front would represent a symbolic
boost to the peace process. Mr. Sankoh should therefore
be encouraged to depart for Freetown as soon as possible
and by the most direct route available.

The signing of the Lome Peace Agreement has
highlighted the difficult choices that often confront the
peacemakers. We would therefore like to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the clear
statement his Special Representative made in the
disclaimer to article IX of the Lome Peace Agreement.
This was a statement of principle and, in our view, the
entire Security Council subscribes to it. We will therefore
keep this issue in mind and return to it at an appropriate
time in the future.

The current situation in Sierra Leone calls for more
active involvement by the international community and by
the United Nations in the peace process. It is important to
remember that the deployment of additional military
observers alone will not be sufficient for the
implementation of the provisions of the Peace Agreement.
We therefore look forward to the forthcoming
comprehensive proposals by the Secretary-General
regarding a new mandate and concept of operations for
UNOMSIL.

