Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the delegation of Senegal
for convening this important briefing on the issue of
improving the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
for confronting the violent extremist ideologies leading
to terrorism. I should like to thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions.

Egypt believes that the international community,
represented by the United Nations, should have a
comprehensive, coordinated and practical strategy
to confront the ideology of terrorism - one that
relies fundamentally on a partnership with States,
regional organizations and, indeed, the actual efforts
at that level, in an international legal framework that
takes into consideration the fact that confronting the
ideologies of terrorism is a very long-term endeavour.
The efforts of Islamic States are at the forefront of
combatting terrorism. Many of those States have taken
many steps through OIC. By way of example, rather
than as an exhaustive list, the 1999 Convention on
Combatting International Terrorism has been signed by
the membership of the organization; a number of very
important documents and resolutions on countering
terrorism and extremism that leads to terrorism have
been adopted; OIC has adopted an Action Plan for 2025
containing priorities that include combatting terrorism
and extremism, and their use of social media and the
media, in general; and OIC has established the Centre
for Dialogue, Peace and Understanding, which uses the
Internet and social networks to combat the messages of
extremism leading to terrorism.

As everyone knows, strengthening the strategic
partnership and cooperation between the United Nations
and OIC is necessary, indeed ineluctable, particularly
given that OIC is the second largest international
organization after the United Nations. Its membership
comprises 57 States, spread over four continents. It is
an organization with a great deal of experience over
many years of fighting terrorism and its consequences,
and thus, it is best equipped to combat its ideology.

In that context, we should like to stress the following
points, which we believe are necessary to promoting the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation in confronting
extremist ideologies leading to terrorism. First of all
and, most importantly, cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and OIC must be promoted
and more effective, and current links between United
Nations bodies pertaining to counter-terrorism must be
elevated to the highest possible level.

Secondly, there must be a comprehensive strategy
for confronting terrorist ideologies. Let me stress in
this regard the need to involve OIC in the drafting and
implementation of the comprehensive international
framework for confronting the messages of terrorist
groups, which was called for in S/PRST/20l6/6.

Thirdly, institutional cooperation among the bodies
of the United Nations and OIC - in particular the
OIC secretariat and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre - is important in order to
set priorities for identifying challenges and finding
the best means to cooperate and confront terrorist
ideologies, including by providing technical assistance
to Islamic States and strengthening their capacities in
this regard. Those States must be made more capable
of completely and effectively implementing relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, as
well as those of OIC.

Fourthly, this cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and OIC must be promoted
in confronting all types of violent extremism leading
to terrorism, in particular Islamophobia and other
political, economic and social factors that lead to
terrorism, including foreign occupation.
Fifthly, it is necessary to promote cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation in order to put an end to any
incitement to terrorism. Confronting the narrative of
terrorist groups, in particular on social media and the
Internet, all while respecting international law and
the principle of freedom of expression, human rights
and considering the possibility of launching a joint
campaign to confront all the erroneous messages used
by terrorist organizations to promote themselves for
recruitment purposes, while using religious symbols
and personalities that enjoy society's trust.

Sixthly and finally, the two organizations must
have an exchange of views to increase and diversify
their sources of financing and to implement their
various projects and programmes to confront
terrorist ideologies.

