The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, Estonia,
Fiji, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland,
Thailand, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations; and His Excellency Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Her
Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2017/692, which contains a letter dated
7 August 2017 from the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, of the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations; and Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

Egypt has convened this meeting because it believes
in the importance of pursuing efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of the international peace and security
system at the United Nations. Egypt is also concerned
about the need to identify a clear vision of the optimum
benefits to be drawn from the available tools in
addressing crises. There is no doubt that peacekeeping
operations are the most important and widely used tool
of the Security Council to maintain peace and security,
protect civilians and create a climate conducive to the
peaceful settlement of disputes.

Peacekeeping operations are also a means to
facilitate the recovery of societies from the tangible
and intangible destruction that is the legacy of warfare.
In that regard, Egypt believes that the credibility and
effectiveness of peacekeeping mandates are linked to
a fundamental restructuring of the philosophy of the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
the need to shift from the standard, accepted ways of
managing conflict in order to seek a true transformation
towards the achievement of sustainable peace.

Today's discussion is therefore aimed primarily
at developing a strategic approach to enhancing
the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations, and at considering the means available
to improving peacekeeping mandates in order to
make peace sustainable. This approach gains added
importance in the light of the huge challenges related
to armed conflict, which are interlinked with the threat
posed by the spread of terrorism, organized crime and
major population movements, not to mention weak
State structures, the torn social fabric, the lack of
employment opportunities and low standards of living
in certain societies.

We hope that we shall emerge from this meeting
with a clear vision and practical ideas that will
contribute to modifying the culture and the tools used
to design and review peacekeeping operations in a
manner that will guarantee the twofold goal of ending
violence and protecting civilians, on the one hand, and
paving the way towards sustainable peace, on the other.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.

