Fiji congratulates Estonia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. In early May, the world commemorated the end of the Second World War on European soil. This year, as the whole world faces the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in these unprecedented times, the United Nations celebrates its seventy-fifth anniversary. Fiji extends its warm congratulations to the Government of Estonia for convening a highly effective and inclusive Security Council Arria Formula meeting to mark the end of the War in Europe -a war in which Fijian soldiers fought and gave their lives in Europe and in the Pacific. Fiji shared in that heartfelt commemoration in the Council with all its members. The format, the breadth of participation and the inclusive approach that was adopted by the Council for that event was instructive of its potential for increased effectiveness and efficiency. Many of the world's leaders were able to speak directly from their countries to the international community. Through that event, the Council demonstrated its power to be inclusive and to inspire the world. Enhancing the transparency, effectiveness and efficiency of the Council's work is crucial to enhancing its role in global governance. On 23 March, the Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire and for everyone to focus their efforts on combating the COVID-19 pandemic. That call enjoyed the support of all States Members of the United Nations. The COVID-19 pandemic is the most destructive event since the Second World War. The world looks to the Security Council to lead a coordinated global response to this pandemic, which the Secretary- General has described as the true fight of our lives. In various ways, the pandemic sheds light on how the concepts of security are gradually being transformed. The United Nations and the Security Council have discussed how information and communications technology (ICT) developments have fuelled cybersecurity challenges for States and how ICT has been weaponized by armed groups and militant non-State actors in ways that affect inter-State tensions and conflict. In the same way, the Council has considered how climate change has been transforming the inter-State security context and how climate stress is increasingly reshaping the contours of inter- and intra-State conflicts. The pandemic has also exposed the changing nature of security in an interconnected world. By breaking down supply chains and overwhelming national systems, a health crisis has the potential to grow into a broader food crisis. In highly vulnerable regions, that can fuel conflict or give rise to new conflicts. As the international security environment changes, the Security Council will need to increase the transparency and effectiveness with which it operates, arrives at decisions and seeks to influence a far more diffuse global security context. New working methods will allow the Security Council to listen to more diverse views on factors that shape and affect peace and security. As such, they must better analyse the many unintended consequences that events such as climate catastrophes or pandemics have on peace and security. Fiji joined many colleagues in calling on the Council to lend its unambiguous voice to support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. That would enable the shaping of a global response and the operation of humanitarian interventions. Most important, it will allow for regions affected by conflicts to prevent the spread of the COVID-19. The rest of the United Nations system may have developed well-coordinated efforts to contain and eliminate COVID-19, but we all look to the Security Council to help destroy and contain the spread of COVID-19 in the regions most affected by conflict. Fiji acknowledges the work of the Security Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, and its current Chair, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, and commends its efforts to improve the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of the Security Council's working methods. The COVID-19 pandemic is a global problem in search of global solutions. Combating it has undoubtedly been a steep learning curve for the United Nations system and the Council. On 31 March, the Security Council adopted new working procedures that allow it to operate virtually, thus providing it with the needed agility and responsiveness to respond to the changing global circumstances. Fiji welcomes the improvements to the Council's working methods. We welcome access to information on Council meetings, Council reports, opportunities for non-Council members to participate in its open meetings and briefings made to non-Council members. They allow various Member States and experts to voice their views. In the end, they help to improve decision-making. Fiji acknowledges recent efforts to ensure the timely submission of annual Council reports, thus giving Member States time to analyse them before they are discussed in the General Assembly. We would welcome a deeper analysis of the general underlying trends and drivers, as well as those specific to the situations being reported on. Such an analysis could include lessons learned, challenges and recommended action for the Council, the United Nations system and other stakeholders. That may require more coordinated and collaborative action among Council members, the Secretariat and other stakeholders. The Council has subsidiary bodies, or committees, the workings of which are not visible to the broader membership, except when there are notices issued for the listing or delisting of individuals and entities. It is worth considering the participation of directly affected non-Member States in those committees' deliberations. The Security Council has been operating under provisional rules since its establishment. The Council presides over important issues relating to international peace and security. As befits its important role and responsibilities, it is time that the Council's rules be formalized. The Security Council must continue to strive to better fulfil its role and responsibilities. In a world of growing anxiety and unease, Fiji and people around the world look to the Council for leadership. On this our seventy-fifth anniversary, and given the changing global peace and security context, the Security Council's working methods must adapt so as to increase its effectiveness and impact, and thus build trust in the Council and in the United Nations system as a whole.
