Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank the Secretary-General
for the information he presented to us this morning,
as well as the statements made by my colleagues from
Palestine and Israel.

In less than two weeks we have met urgently more
than three times to address the latest developments
in Gaza. Despite our urgent calls for an immediatee
ceasefire, and despite the efforts of the Secretary-
General and the diplomatic pressure that has been
brought to bear, instead of establishing a truce, the
parties have decided to escalate the conflict. Chile
condemns the escalation of violence affecting the
Middle East, Israel's disproportionate use of force in
densely populated areas and the indiscriminate use of
rockets by Hamas. This is a conflict in which neither of
the parties will achieve its goals, but one that will exact
a high cost in innocent Victims.

We urgently call on all the parties to fulfil their
international obligations with respect to the protection
of the civilian population. As we indicated last Friday
(see S/PV.7220), we believe that attacks on civilians,
in Gaza or in Israel, violate international humanitarian
law and may constitute war crimes. We also noted the
need for United Nations personnel on the ground to
have proper protection.

Given the recent discovery by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East of some 20 rockets being housed in a school
and yesterday's attack on a hospital in the city of Deir
Al-Balah, we reiterate our call for the parties to take
urgent measures to halt attacks on schools and hospitals
and their military use, in accordance with resolution
2134 (2014).

My country is particularly concerned by the
growing number of civilian victims and by the grave
humanitarian situation that affects the residents of
the Gaza Strip. For that reason, in order to assist the
innocent victims of the conflict, we have made available
$150,000 to the United Nations agencies working in the
area under the umbrella of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East.

Chile believes that it is critically important to open
all the border crossings in the Gaza Strip, including
Rafah. It has been interesting to hear members of
the Council express the view that, once a ceasefire
is achieved, there needs to be adequate measures to
ensure its implementation, which could also be used to
guarantee the peaceful use of the border crossings.

As the Secretary-General has observed, once a
ceasefire is achieved, it would be unacceptable to return
to the status quo. We insist that it is absolutely vital that
the Council address the root causes of the conflict.

Chile notes the letter sent by President Abbas to the
Secretary-General, which requests that Palestine be put
under an international protection system administered
by the United Nations. There is a broad consensus in the
international community regarding the main obstacles
to peace, including the construction and expansion
of settlements in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
considered illegal according to the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. That and other elements
have led to an environment of extreme hostility, which
makes dialogue difficult, isolating moderate voices
who promote peace in Israel and Palestine and pushing
farther away the desired two-State solution.

The region cannot withstand more conflict. Along
those lines, Chile values the fact that the Lebanese
Government has condemned the launching of rockets
by fundamentalist groups from its territory against
Israel. We appreciate all efforts aimed at neutralizing
the actions of radical groups, and we highlight the
commitment of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which have
increased their control in the area.

Turning now to Syria, Chile welcomes the adoption
ofresolution 2165 (2014) on humanitarian access, which
we hope will help alleviate the suffering of millions of
Syrians and result in the delivery of more effective,
efficient and timely assistance in keeping with
humanitarian principles. We emphasize the binding
nature of the resolution, as well as the fact that it
complements resolution 2139 (2014) and the presidential
statement of2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15).

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, whose mission contributes to the quest for
a peaceful solution to the conflict based on dialogue
and reconciliation. The Government of Chile wishes
him every success in that task and offers him its strong
support in building more appropriate channels for
dialogue.

Finally, I would like to consider Iraq. Chile
expresses its deep concern for the grave humanitarian
and security situation in Iraq resulting from to the
military advance of terrorist groups, especially the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which has resulted
in a high number of civilian victims and over 1 million
displaced persons. We are alarmed by the persecution
of ethnic and religious minorities in the region.

