Mr. Baja (Philippines): The policy of the
Philippine Government is to condemn unequivocally
all extrajudicial executions committed by any party.
Such actions are a despicable violation of human rights
and contrary to international law. We are deeply
disturbed by the recent escalation of violence in the
Middle East which has continued the pattern of attack
and reprisal. The condemnable killings of Hamas
leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and six other Palestinians
yesterday, as well as the related acts of terrorism on 14
March in the port of Ashdod, constitute specific
elements in this deadly cycle. We are gravely
concerned that, unless strong political will on all sides
is exercised to curtail terrorism and violence, the path
to peace will ultimately be doomed. Regrettably, the
strong words this afternoon by the parties concerned
have not contributed to the constructive exercise of
such political will.

The Philippines has a strong interest in the
stability of the region. It is a region that is host to about
1 million Filipino workers and their families. We are
troubled by the wanton violence that we witness almost
on a daily basis, particularly the deliberate targeting of
civilians and the involvement of women and children in
the conflict. The conflict cannot be allowed to proceed
unabated without seriously imperilling the
opportunities of future generations of Israelis and
Palestinians to live in peace an harmony. We call on all
sides to exercise restraint and to refrain from violence,
which will further escalate the situation. We appeal to
them to follow the path of peaceful negotiations to
achieve the goal of two States, living side by side in
peace and security, in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).

The conflict in the Middle East will never be
resolved by violent means. Thus, we urge restarting the
peace process established under the Quartet's road
map, which the Council endorsed in resolution 1515
(2003). We ask the parties to fulfil their obligations
under the road map to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

