Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to congratulate our sister country
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and wish it every success in the fulfilment of
its mandate. Allow me to welcome you, Mr. President,
and express the full satisfaction of the delegation of the
Central African Republic in seeing you conduct this
important public debate, the topic of which is highly
relevant in view of the criminal activities carried out by
mercenaries in the Central African subregion.

Before going to the heart of the matter, I would like
to apologize on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera, President of the Central African
Republic, who very much wanted to be here but has
not been able to attend owing to the peace negotiations
taking place in Khartoum, which require his constant
monitoring and presence in Bangui.

Recurrent crises lead the perpetrators of such
crises to recruit mercenaries to fill the ranks of their
combatants. My country's case is instructive in that
regard, as the many rebellions that have taken place in
the Central African Republic have always included the
involvement of mercenaries from various countries. The
other reason for that recruitment is the fragmentation of
armed groups, which further complicates any attempts
to seek a solution to end the conflict.

Armed groups, supported by foreign fighters,
engage in various illicit and criminal activities, such as
the exploitation of mineral resources and smuggling in
diamonds and gold. As demonstrated during the Security
Council's debate on 16 October 2018 (see S/PV.8372),
natural resources are increasingly becoming the causes
of conflict and their deep-rootedness. We note that
the persistence of tensions in mining areas is higher
than in others. The exploitation of natural resources
and competition over those resources provoke violent
clashes between various groups for control of their
zones of influence, thereby leading to their engagement
in several activities falling under State sovereignty.
The current difficulties in finding a peaceful resolution
to the crisis in the Central African Republic adequately
illustrate the inextricable nature of armed conflict and
its being fuelled by the looting of natural resources by
armed groups.

The concept note (S/2019/97, annex) provided
to us covers relevant issues to which we are not able
to provide the requisite responses, given the time
allocated to us. We have witnessed the proliferation of
mercenarism in Africa for many years, but especially
in Central Africa in recent years. Given that mercenary
activity is driven by profit, it would be difficult not
to make the link between this growing trend and the
wealth possessed by States targeted by such acts of
violence and destabilization.

Furthermore, the actions carried out so far by the
States of the region, together with the Security Council
and the United Nations, abound in a positive way, as
the issue of mercenaries is now the subject ofa General

Assembly resolution that is dealt with annually by the
Third Committee. However, the resources deployed
and the measures taken so far appear to be insufficient
and require more extensive implementation. Existing
sanctions can undoubtedly be bolstered against
mercenaries in order to serve as an example and
a deterrent.

The proliferation of mercenaries and the circulation
of small arms and light weapons are a source of serious
concern. Those two scourges must be treated with
rigour. To that end, only sustained cooperation between
the countries of Central Africa can eradicate them, as
they undermine good-neighbourly relations and create
an atmosphere of suspicion among those countries.

