Mr. Gomez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for your invitation to
participate in this meeting.

We welcome the fact that Haiti is on the path
of institutional normalization with the holding of
elections, the inauguration of a new president and the
restoration of constitutional order. We recognize the
support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the international community
in that process. The arrival of the new Government in
Haiti provides us with the opportunity to work with new
partners, who are the principal persons responsible for
the destiny of their nation, and who, with the support
of the international community and the United Nations,
can focus their efforts on the development challenges
that Haiti faces.

I am particularly grateful to the Secretary-General
for his report on MINUSTAH (S/20l7/223), and we
take due note of his recommendations on the gradual
drawdown of that mission before November 2017 and the
establishment ofa successor mission. The new mission,
which is focused on strengthening Haitian institutions,
in particular the Haitian National Police, is particularly
welcome. However, the mission needs to have a mandate
and be given the capacity to assess the human rights
situation on the ground. The transition of the mission
must be carried out in a responsible, progressive and
prudent way so as to avoid a security vacuum. This
new stage is favourable for showing the capacity of the
United Nations and its Members to handle transitions,
assess progress and adjust peacekeeping operations to
political and security contexts.

We must ensure the foundations of sustainable and
lasting peace in Haiti. The drawdown of MINUSTAH
must not mean that the United Nations system is
failing to support that country. On the contrary, like all
other States, Haiti must meet the goals of sustainable
development. The United Nations, with the cooperation
of the international financial institutions, should
organize its efforts so as to reach concrete and long-
term solutions for achieving those goals.

To that end, it is fundamental that, first, there be
maximum coordination among all the components of
the United Nations system present on the ground. The
future Resident Coordinator will have to ensure that all
actions are consistent with the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Secondly,
the health situation in Haiti must be improved, with
particular attention to coordinating, under the leadership
of World Health Organization and the Pan American
Health Organization, the effective provision of health
services and efforts to address the ravages ofthe cholera
epidemic in the country, for which we must support the
new approach of the Secretary-General. Thirdly, efforts
must be undertaken to build infrastructure in the water,
sanitation, roads, transportation and education sectors.
Fourthly, Haiti must be supported as it seeks to take
steps to reintegrate returnees in a positive manner.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate
Mexico's commitment to sustainable peace in Haiti and
to the development of the country, as well as to the work
of the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, in which my country participates.

