Allow me to begin by personally congratulating you, Sir, and the Federal Republic of Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are confident that your leadership and expertise will guide the Council towards efficiency and success. I would like to express our appreciation for convening this session to discuss the hazardous situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the dangers it poses to the environment and maritime navigation in the Red Sea. The grave risks associated with this floating oil tanker threaten to cause harm to the southern part of the Red Sea and to the world at large, as it is situated in the proximity of Bab El-Mandab, through which vital international maritime navigation passes between Asia and Europe. This dangerous situation must not be left unaddressed and the Security Council bears primary responsibility for securing the safety and security of the area. The dangers emanating from the current situation include the possibility of an oil spill of millions of litres, which is far larger than the volume of the infamous Exxon Valdez disaster that took place in Alaska in 1989. In addition, the port of Al-Hudaydah could be closed for several months, leading to severe shortages in the supply of fuel and other essential needs to the people of Yemen. The fishing industry in the region would also be gravely harmed and would take years to recover. Moreover, marine life, the environment and the shores of my country would be seriously and adversely affected. Finally, toxic gases and black clouds emanating from the spill would cause damage to agricultural lands and farms in the vast area of both Yemen and Saudi Arabia - irreversibly damaging fruits, grains and vegetables and causing a massive internal displacement of people throughout the affected areas. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns the irresponsible actions of the Houthi militia, who have caused this situation in the first place. The Houthis continue to use this potential disaster to blackmail the world into fulfilling their political ambitions without regard to the well-being and safety of the Yemeni people and the region as a whole. The Security Council has already asserted the need to confront the risks associated with this situation and has warned against the catastrophic consequences that would result if it remains unresolved. The Council did so in resolution 2511 (2020) and in its press statement issued on 29 June (SC/14233). We took notice of the announcement made recently by the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General that the Houthi rebels have agreed to allow access to the tanker. We remain suspicious of their plans and intentions, and request that the Council remain vigilant and stand ready to enact strong and decisive measures to deal with this situation and mitigate its risks. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stands ready to take all steps that the Council may deem necessary to handle the situation. We wish to draw the Council's attention to the Houthis' record of procrastination and non-compliance with United Nations resolutions. The Council must not allow such reckless and irresponsible behaviour to stand. The Council must ensure that a political solution to the conflict in Yemen is found on the basis of resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference - all recognized by the international community as the elements of international legitimacy.
