Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate the Japanese presidency on taking the
initiative to convene today's briefing on these crucial
topic. I also wish to commend Under-Secretary-
General Nakamitsu for her insightful contribution to
our discussion.

I reiterate Italy's unwavering commitment to
participating in multilateral forums to fight the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. We attach
the utmost importance to the universalization of the
relevant multilateral instruments.

Illicit trafficking constitutes a very serious threat
to peace and security throughout the world. The
international community is well aware of the devastating
consequences resulting from the widespread illicit
availability of such weapons, which contributes to
instability, violence and insecurity and undermines the
effectiveness of States' development efforts.

As the Secretary-General points out in his latest
report (S/2017/1025), only peaceful societies will achieve
their desired level of sustainable development. That is
also why the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
sets target 16.4, which calls for a significant reduction in
illicit arms flows. The illegal flow of arms is constantly
evolving, and nowadays trafficking in weapons is not
only associated with transnational organized criminal
groups, but is increasingly fuelled by terrorist entities.
The use of the online market, including the dark web,
to sell and acquire weapons and their components poses
further challenges for law enforcement agencies and
national Governments. The anonymity enabled by that
platform makes preventing the illegal trade and linking
it to specific individuals increasingly difficult.

Furthermore, over recent years, non-State
actors have improved their capacity to design and
manufacture improvised explosive devices out of
commercially available dual-use components. In an
effort to mitigate the threat of weapons falling into
the hands of malicious actors, last August the Security
Council adopted resolution 2370 (2017), which not
only represented a remarkable step forward in the fight
against the scourge of terrorism, but also a substantial
commitment to prevent and detect the illicit supply of
arms. The resolution, the first of its kind, underscores
the urgent need to adopt comprehensive measures aimed
at, inter alia, enhancing Member States' strategies to
ensure the safe management of ammunition stockpiles,
the implementation marking and tracing processes for
weapons and the development of adequte judicial and
border control capabilities.

Addressing the disposal of small arms and excess
ammunition is critical in a post-conflict context. I
recall, in that regard, the ongoing efforts carried out
in the Western Balkans by national authorities in
partnership with the United Nations Development
Programme, the European Union and the Regional
Cooperation Council. Illegal arms trafficking is a
fundamental driver of Violence, and it contributes to
eroding institutional stability and the rule of law. The
Security Council has often addressed this scourge by
mandating that peacekeeping operations assist national
authorities in controlling the flow of small arms,
developing a proper legal framework and improving
policy capacity and practices.

There are many crucial actions that Member
States should take with the support and expertise of
the United Nations, and several tools that should be
effectively deployed to tackle the illegal flow of arms.
In that regard, I would like to draw attention of two
important initiatives.

First, I wish to recall the relevance of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, the third Review Conference of which will
be held in New York in June of next year. The Review
Conference will provide an opportunity to achieve
concrete progress in countering the illicit trade of small
arms and light weapons, including by increasing the
mobilization of all stakeholders in the security arms
control development sector and by exploiting all the
potential synergies among existing instruments.

Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the INTERPOL Illicit Arms Records and Tracing
Management System. That tool enables information
exchange and investigative cooperation among law
enforcement agencies in relation to the international
movement of illicit firearms, as well as legal firearms
that have been used to perpetrate crimes. In that
vein, let me underscore the crucial importance of the
implementation of international tracing instruments,
in keeping with the requirement of marking, record
keeping and ensuring international cooperation in
tracing illicit small arms and light weapons.

It is important to recall that illegal arms usually
start off as legally produced and traded weapons.
However, diversion and irresponsible exports can
produce damaging effects and facilitate the spread of
illegal flows. The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) is a crucial
instrument that has the potential to mitigate that risk by
regulating international trade in conventional weapons
and making it more responsible and transparent. In
addition, the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and
Components and Ammunition, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, is a very powerful tool for achieving
our common objective, since its States parties commit
to adopting and implementing serious crime-control
measures against the illicit manufacturing of, and
trafficking in, firearms, their parts and components
and ammunition.

Italy stands ready to actively contribute to the
efforts of the international community to curb the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and will continue to
offer its cooperation to interested States and partners.
In that regard, we welcome the review and update of
the European Union small arms and light weapons
strategy, with due regard to cross-cutting issues such
as an analysis of the regional dynamics of small arms
and light weapons, trafficking and new technological
developments to secure small arms and light weapons
and their ammunition and mitigate the risk of diversion.

Lastly, I would like to speak specifically about
Africa. The African continent is particularly affected
by armed violence fuelled by illicit small arms and light
weapons. In that regard, we support any initiative taken
and owned by the States of the region, like the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly. We encourage the signatories
to fully implement the Convention, which provides a
unique framework for addressing the specific issues of
the Central African region. We also fully support the
Group of Seven-African Union initiative on small arms
and light weapons control in the extended Sahel, as well
as the Africa-wide action plan aimed at implementing
the 2018-2020 road map for "Silencing the guns
by 2020".

