Mr. O'Brien: Where shall I start? It is with
raw grief, dismay, intense sadness, frustration and
an unquenchable anger at the excess of sheer and
unbridled horror - way beyond even the apex of
horror of a fortnight ago 4 that I report today to the
Security Council on the ultimate humanitarian shame
that is Syria today, and in east Aleppo in particular. The
people of Syria - and most immediately, the people
of east Aleppo - are being subjected to deprivation,
disease and death in increasing numbers and with
increasing ferocity. This is not an unforeseen result of
forces beyond our control. This is due to the action of
parties to the conflict and it is the direct result of the
inaction - be it through unwillingness or inability - of
the international community, including most notably
those members represented in this Chamber.

It is now a legitimate question to ask whether there
is any level of disaster and death that can be visited upon
the Syrian people that might prompt the parties to this
conflict, and by extension the international community,
to identify a red line that will not be crossed. This is

not a distant conflict in which we as a community
have only a passing stake; this is a critical test of the
capacity and willingness of those in this Chamber to
make a decision, take action to manifestly uphold the
words of the Charter of the United Nations, to which all
nations are bound, and to save the Syrian people from
the scourge of war.

The past seven days have seen an intensification
of attacks across the country. From air strikes in Deir
ez-Zor to airstrikes and ground attacks in Aleppo,
Hama, Homns, Idlib and rural Damascus and other
governorates, fighting has intensified despite a
one-week lull when the cessation of hostilities was
reinstated, albeit with violations on all sides.

Nowhere has the fighting been more intense
in recent days than in east Aleppo. Following the
announcement by the Syrian Ministry of Defence of
an offensive on 22 September, estimates are that some
320 civilians were killed and 765 injured in the first
days. Over 100 children have been killed. These are
not simply numbers to be added to a tally; these are
individual and family lives that we have collectively
failed to save. The alleged use of new bunker-busting
bombs has reportedly caused mass destruction in an
area that has already been decimated. I have received
reports that there are bodies of babies, children,
women and men stuck unrecovered in the rubble of the
basements, up to 20 metres underground, where they
had taken refuge and where they had been safe until
the use of these new and recently introduced weapons
claimed their lives. Air strikes are reported to have hit
three of the four civil defense centres in east Aleppo,
injuring staff and severely limiting their capacity to
respond.

On 22 September, attacks rendered the Bab
Al-Nayrab water-pumping station inoperable, stopping
water delivery to most of east Aleppo. On 24 September,
multiple air strikes struck the Jisr Al-Haj area in
eastern Aleppo city, reportedly damaging warehouses
belonging to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and killing
one of the few remaining doctors in east Aleppo, as
well as his wife - a senior midwife. Just yesterday, two
of the eight remaining hospitals - including two of the
four surgical units left in east Aleppo - were attacked
and rendered out of service. I echo the words of the
Secretary-General, who briefed the Council yesterday:

"[T]hose using ever-more destructive weapons

know exactly what they are doing. They know they

are committing war crimes." (S/PV. 7779, p. 2)
And let it be said that the evidence is being
collected and the eyewitnesses accounts recorded.Even
if not today, one day there will be no hiding place for
the individuals and institutions callously, cynically
perpetrating these war crimes. That is as much our
United Nations responsibility on behalf of all the
world's Member States, as it is the United Nations duty
to preserve that evidence to point the finger at any one
or more Member States and their leaders and officers
come the day. The only remaining deterrent it seems
is that there will be real accountability in the court of
world opinion and disgust. Goodness knows, nothing
else seems to be working to stop this deliberate,
gratuitous carnage of lives lost and smashed.

Let me be clear - east Aleppo this minute is not
at the edge of the precipice; it is well into its terrible
descent into the pitiless and merciless abyss of a
humanitarian catastrophe unlike any we have witnessed
in Syria, with no access by the United Nations since
7 July, and the health sector in east Aleppo is now
reportedly on the very verge of total collapse. Hundreds
of critical medical evacuations are urgently required. I
have received alarming reports of patients being turned
away or treated on the floors of the few remaining
health facilities. What little intensive care unit capacity
there was has now been completely overwhelmed. Four
people - three of them children - who did not have
access to ventilators died as a result. There are also
reports of severe shortages of surgical items, blood
bags, anaesthetics and other critical medical items. As a
result, the priority for assistance is as acute for medical
items as it is for food.

Because of the state of siege, food remains scarce,
with rations sufficient to feed only 40,000 for one month.
Despite the presence of limited food stocks, the impact
oflimited food access is already being felt. Deaths have
been reported from malnutrition, disease and poisoning
by those scavenging for food. Fresh water is also now
also in short supply, and waterborne illnesses and
preventable killer diseases are expected imminently
to rise dramatically - which is as unnecessary as it
is tragic.

There are more than 100,000 children trapped
in east Aleppo, and it is they who are among the
most vulnerable, who suffer first and who suffer the
greatest. The images of Alan Kurdi, Omran Daqneesh
and now Rawan Alowsh might have captured fleeting
global attention and be seared into our consciences,
but they are neither isolated nor exceptional cases, but
emblematic of the horrific murder and abuse of children
by the parties to this conflict. Rescue teams are finding
children every day under piles of rubble amid the
inferno and choking dust of east Aleppo. Meanwhile,
indiscriminate attacks are also being launched by
non-State armed groups into western Aleppo, so of
course this is not just one-sided, but the overwhelming
weight of forces is against the people pinned down in
east Aleppo. We must end this nightmare.

We have been ready and we remain ready to deliver
assistance to eastern Aleppo through cross-border
and cross-line support. Despite the distraction, as it
sadly turned out, in the attempt to get a full cessation
of hostilities - which crowded out negotiations for a
shorter humanitarian pause - since July I have been
calling for a minimum 48-hour weekly humanitarian
pause must be urgently implemented to allow
humanitarian aid to enter, to let medical evacuations
take those in critical condition out, and to provide
civilians respite from the barrage of bombs and attacks
causing untold suffering.

Now is not the time for political grandstanding or
protection ofone's political or, indeed, military position.
Now is the time to recognize the horror unfolding before
our eyes, agree upon our common humanity and restore
the cessation of hostilities to protect civilians and save
lives. That would be the best of humanitarian action;
if we cannot get a cessation of hostilities, we must at
the minimum have a weekly 48-hour pause. Anything
less would leave the Council today on the wrong side
of history and on the wrong side of avoidable deaths.
That is the responsibility of the parties to the conflict,
but it is the united will of each and every member of the
Council that will unlock the chance to make it happen.

As Council members have heard me say before,
there are few words left to describe the horrors for
people living under siege. Theirs is a daily struggle for
survival as they remain trapped and beyond our reach,
subjected to collective punishment. This revolting
situation in Aleppo must be the SOS, the mayday call,
to the international community. That the situation
now meets the criteria for besiegement - including
militarily encirclement, lack of humanitarian access
and lack of freedom of movement for civilians - is
clear. East Aleppo is now besieged.

Let me assure the Council that this is based not on
conjecture, but on the facts on the ground that I have
just reported. The area is militarily encircled by Syrian
forces. In addition, armed opposition groups continue
to conduct military operations from within the city,
placing those trapped there at greater and continued
danger. Despite all our collective efforts, which have
been discussed in great detail in the Council, there has
been virtually no humanitarian access through cross-
border or cross-line actors since early July. It should
be noted that this is a result of constraints by both the
Syrian authorities and non-State armed groups.

Furthermore, despite the assertion of there being
corridors available, civilians wishing to travel in and out
of eastern Aleppo are unable to do so in any significant
numbers. Members would do the same: one just does
not do it if they have nowhere to go voluntarily and if
the sniper is likely to take the shot anyway. As we have
long said, civilians cannot move when there are such
levels of insecurity. We have also assessed this lack
of movement based on the military presence at entry
and exit points and specific security concerns, not
just about sniper fire and detainment when travelling
through humanitarian corridors that were established
by the Russian Federation.

The status of another 275,000 people besieged
in Syria is truly unconscionable. We all must do
everything possible to bring this medieval practice to
an end for once and for all. That means that the number
of people besieged in Syria has increased from 586,200
to 861,200, after deducting those who were required to
leave Darayya as of late August. That is in addition to
the millions of Syrians in hard-to-reach locations today.

Besiegement is not a weapon of war, it is a flagrant,
unjustifiable breach of the law f law to which the
besieging parties have signed up to. As the Syrian
people struggle for survival and a political solution
remains out of reach, the best that communities under
attack can immediately hope for is that humanitarian
assistance can reach them. The role of humanitarians
is not to be part of a political solution, but to provide
food, shelter and the tools of survival to those in need,
while that solution is sought. Those efforts to protect
the vulnerable, to deliver to communities in need and
to step in to fill the gap where no alternative exists were
dealt a cruel blow last week.

After half a decade of conflict, it should not be
necessary to explain to any party that the laws of
war afford protection to humanitarian aid workers. In
2016, I should not have to brief the Security Council
on Violence committed against those who are aligned
with no side in the conflict and who are willing to enter
the most challenging environments imaginable to help
those suffering beyond imagination. Yet last week,
while leaders from around the world met to discuss the
humanitarian crisis in Syria, we suffered a devastating
attack on a humanitarian convoy.
In the early evening of 19 September, as 31 trucks
delivered lifesaving assistance just kilometers west of
Aleppo city in Oram Al-Kubra, humanitarians came
under attack in yet another shocking example of the
disregard parties have for civilian life and humanitarian
space. Over the course of two hours, the area around
a clearly marked United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent humanitarian convoy became a killing zone.
Eighteen humanitarians - 12 volunteers, five drivers
and Omar Barakat, head of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent in Oram Al-Kubra - were brutally killed.
Another 15 drivers were wounded, many civilians were
killed and injured and the warehouse where the supplies
were being unloaded and a nearby medical clinic were
both severely damaged. The local population has been
further traumatized by witnessing what happens to
those who try to help them. And of course, they did
not receive the desperately needed lifesaving help - a
double jeopardy defined.

I have expressed my deepest condolences to the
families, colleagues and loved ones of those who paid
the ultimate sacrifice, and I pledge to do my utmost
to ensure that their deaths were not in vain. I call on
all of us to take hold of this moment. I call on the
Council to urgently act to protect humanitarian actors,
be they United Nations staff or our non-governmental
organization partners, who face violent responses
almost daily. I also call on the Council to push
against all blockages and delays that are hindering
the deployment of assistance, and to ensure the rapid,
safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid to all
those in need. Most important, I call on the Council to
end the bloodshed.

The humanitarian convoy to Oram Al-Kubra
was a meticulously organized movement, as are all
deployments of humanitarian aid. When crossing a
conflict line to deliver assistance, the United Nations
and its partners first receive authorization by the Syrian
authorities. Advanced notification is given to all sides,
and ongoing updates of the convoy's location and status
are provided throughout its movement. United Nations
humanitarian aid convoys inform all actors on the
ground of the humanitarian delivery being undertaken.
Such de-confliction is done to ensure that the delivery
is safe from attack.

We do not yet have all the details. However, it is not
too early to make clear the consequences ofthis shameful
attack. If the attackers knew of the humanitarian
convoy and intentionally directed an attack against
it, they committed a war crime. Regardless of the
reason and regardless of the party responsible, those
people must know that they will be held to account.
Accountability is important for the sake ofjustice, but
it is also necessary to end the culture ofimpunity. That
is as much a matter of practicality as it is of principle.
If there are no guarantees that humanitarian convoys
will be safe, the ability of humanitarians to deliver
assistance will be jeopardized and those in need will
continue to suffer. As I have said before, those on the
front lines delivering aid are brave, but they are not
suicidal. Sufficient security guarantees for the delivery
of aid must be in place. Yes, that means engaging with
all parties impartially, even to the distaste of some.
Those are the humanitarian principles in which I and
others in the United Nations and beyond involved
in humanitarian action rely to give us our license to
operate. For us access is everything. Without it, as
we go far and wide across Syria, we cannot make the
difference that the world's citizens call on us to make.

The Secretary-General has called for a vigorous
investigation to ascertain the facts of the incident and
for accountability for those responsible. The Secretary-
General is currently reviewing options for the most
effective format of the investigation. I call on all
parties to stand up, demonstrate their desire to protect
humanitarian space and support the investigation
process, for full, transparent accountability and to
banish impunity.

While it is true that the United Nations and its
partners support millions of people with assistance
each month through regular programming and cross-
border activities, those who are in the most acute need
are often those who cannot be reached through either
modality. While we focus much of the attention on
ensuring humanitarian access via cross-line convoys,
this is not to take away from other modalities, which do
most of the actual aid delivery, but to ensure attention
is focused on the locations we cannot otherwise reach.

In both hard-to-reach and besieged locations, we
have continued to reach communities in need through
inter-agency cross-line convoys in September. On
19 September, we reached 84,000 people in Talbiseh; on
22 September, we reached 35,000 people in Moadamiya;
on 24 September, we reached 70,000 people in Al-Waer
in Horns; and the following day we reached some
60,000 people in the four towns - Madaya, Zabadani,
Fo'ah and Kefraya. And we continue to reach people
through the air - both by airdrops and air-bridges.
We have now completed 126 air drops since April to
Deir ez-Zour, dispatching food, nutrition, health, water
and sanitation and hygiene supplies to people in need.
That includes two full rounds of food distribution, each
reaching a total of 110,000 people in need. A third round
began on 12 August. We have now completed 90 airlifts
to Qamishly, providing a combination of food, health,
water, sanitation and hygiene supplies, nutrition,
education, shelter and non-food-item assistance,
including over 50,000 full food rations.

As for the people along the berm at the Syrian-
Jordanian border, which I visited earlier this month, we
have received positive indications from the Jordanian
authorities that humanitarian organizations might be
able to resume aid operations to reach those stranded
there by early next month. We look forward to all the
security and other arrangements being put into place so
that can happen, until longer-term solutions are found. I
am grateful to those who are working to hard to achieve
that.

While we welcome these deliveries, which provide
a lifeline to people largely trapped beyond our reach,
the last weeks have been especially frustrating to see
pass without access improving, particularly since the
reinstatement of the cessation of hostilities should have
provided an opportunity to extend our reach. Instead,
the delays in cross-line deployments are becoming
commonplace. The first inter-agency cross-line convoy
in September deployed on 19 September. The first cross-
line convoy last month only deployed on 23 August.
That means that no aid reached many of those most in
need through inter-agency cross-line convoys for the
first three weeks each of the last two months.

The delivery of assistance to the four towns, the
first after the five months since aid was last admitted
on 30 April, occurred only after numerous hurdles and
delays caused by the last minute removal of medical
items, which required an additional set of negotiations
of the parties to reach a final agreement. Beyond the
four towns, medical supplies have continued to be
removed from humanitarian convoys, with more than
200,000 items having been removed this year alone.
And linking humanitarian assistance of any kind to
the tit for tat provisions of the Four Towns Agreement
remains unconscionable.

As I have said many times, the United Nations
has been and continues to be ready to deploy. Our
requests are submitted and trucks are ready to move,
but they have been delayed by the same bureaucratic
tactics - late responses, lack of facilitation letters,
negotiations over the number of beneficiaries. While
such problems are being faced with alarming regularity,
this month also brought further delaying tactics to
deny aid to those in desperate need, such as the slow
clearance by Syrian security forces in the warehouses
and, in the case of Moadamiya, the damaging of items
by security forces. Trucks had to be reloaded in the
presence of Russian officers to ensure the cooperation
of Syrian security personnel. Just yesterday, a convoy
intended for Douma, despite having received all
necessary guarantees and approvals, was denied access
at the last Government checkpoint. After waiting over
eight hours at the last Syrian checkpoint, it was forced
to return to the warehouse.

Of course, insecurity has also continued to be a
significant factor in limiting deployment. Just two
days ago, on 27 September, a convoy to ar-Rastan was
cancelled by the United Nations, when the trucks were
at the last checkpoint of Syrian armed forces, due to air
strikes over the town that the United Nations and its
partners were attempting to reach. This is yet another
convoy where all sides were informed of the movement,
and all sides provided assurances of security, but failed
to deliver safe passage. Surely you can imagine the
hell for civilians, who woke up that morning hoping to
finally receive life-saving aid but finding themselves
instead under relentless attack.

We are now awaiting the response of the Government
to the October inter-agency convoy plan, submitted on
19 September. The United Nations has requested to
reach 962,800 people in 29 besieged, hard-to-reach
and priority cross-line areas. A response is expected
in the next day, and I call on the Syrian authorities to
respond positively and on time to the request and to see
the request response implemented in a timely manner.
We cannot allow another month to go by where we
wait three weeks before the first cross-line convoy. As
insecurity increases, civilian suffering does as well.

Sustained and safe access must be granted, based on
the United Nations assessment of need.
Syria is bleeding. Its citizens are dying. We all
hear their cry for help. As humanitarians, we are doing
all we can. Last week, world leaders came to New
York, sat around this table and met in ministerial level
meetings, all with no tangible results. Instead, while
the world leaders were meeting, violence actually
increased - more civilians and more humanitarians
were killed. It is time to place blame. It is time that the
Council stops tolerating the utter disregard for the most
basic provisions of international humanitarian law.

I call on the Council to act now, to do right by those
who have sacrificed their lives and to take whatever
steps are necessary to end the Violence. The alternative
simply does not bear considering. The depravity we see
will only get worse. If the parties to the conflict will
not, then the world's only hope is the collective, united
will and measures of the Security Council. It is up to
the Council to turn the tide, to create the conditions
for aid to reach all in need, to end the sieges, to restore
political dialogue and to bring an end to the war.

