Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this important meeting and to
congratulate you on Azerbaijan's successful conduct of
the presidency of the Security Council.

Ukraine considers the Council's effectiveness
and efficiency, coupled with its openness and
transparency, as the pillars of the overall activity of
this body. Therefore, we broadly share the priorities
for today's debate stemming from the concept paper
(8/2013/613, annex), namely, strengthening the
Council's transparency; enhancing its interaction with
non-Council members, other United Nations bodies and
regional and subregional organizations; and ensuring
increased informative and analytical annual reporting
to the General Assembly.

Ukraine welcomes the Council's continuous efforts
aimed at streamlining and improving its procedure as
showcased by the 2010 presidential note (S/2010/507),
which is under discussion today. Among such positive
steps during 2013, I would like to point out the increased
number of public meetings, the active revisiting of the
practice of wrap-up meetings and monthly informal
briefings at the end of presidencies and the increased
use of video-teleconferencing services.

There remains a number of significant issues to be
addressed, among which is the institution of the veto in
the Security Council. Ukraine supports the necessity
of creating conditions to gradually reduce the use of
the veto. In that regard, we took note, with interest, of
the relevant proposal of France. In our view, such an
initiative, along with other positive developments in the
domain of working methods, would demonstrate the
potential for ambitious change originating from within
the Council, in line with Article 30 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Fully cognizant that the Council is master
of its own procedures, Ukraine believes that this
body would benefit by taking on board, as it deems
necessary, innovative ideas of the wider United Nations
membership, as envisaged in Article 10 of the Charter.
The same relates to the accommodation of the legitimate
concerns of non-members of the Council.

Let me recall the long-standing position of Ukraine
on the necessity ofproviding a stronger voice in Council
decision-making processes to the United Nations States
Members that are directly involved in implementing
its decisions. First and foremost, such measures should
apply in cases involving troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs).

From our experience of active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Ukraine
sees a continuous need to adjust the Council's timing
of decisions on extending peacekeeping operation
mandates, so as to avoid placing the relevant TCCs
and PCCs in a difficult position. Taking such decisions
whenever feasible and well in advance of the target
date would provide TCCs and PCCs with more time to
align new or extended Council mandates with national
legislation. This especially concerns those countries
that, like Ukraine, by law require Parliament's approval
for the deployment of their peacekeeping contingents.

Ukraine welcomes the emphasis of the presidency
of Azerbaijan on strengthening the partnership synergy
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations, as evidenced by yesterday's high-level
briefing by the Secretary-General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (see S/PV.7050).

Commitment to a strong, effective, efficient and
transparent Security Council was a cornerstone of
Ukraine's only tenure in this body as an independent
State in 2000 and 2001. It is in keeping with and building
on this tradition that we intend to serve on the Council
if Ukraine is elected as a non-permanent member for
the term 2016-2017.

