Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal
welcomes the opportunity to be associated once again
with the Council's deliberations on Timor-Leste. I wish
to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.

As previous speakers have done, allow me to
extend warm greetings to Deputy Prime Minister
Jose Luis Guterres and to express our appreciation for
his valuable contribution to the present debate. Allow
me also to thank Mr. Atul Khare for his very useful
report.
Portugal of course concurs with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union, but as a representative of a
country that has had a long shared history with Timor-
Leste, I would like to underline some specific points.

This reporting period was marked by the tenth
anniversary of the popular consultation of 30 August
1999, in which the people of Timor-Leste expressed
their strong will for independence. Despite all the
difficulties, Timor-Leste has since then pursued the
path of consolidating peace, democratic stability and
economic development. Portugal commends the
Government of Timor-Leste for its achievements in
addressing long-standing security and economic
challenges, reinforcing political stability and
addressing the situation of internally displaced persons,
thus surmounting the grievances of the dramatic crisis
of May 2006.

In that context, I wish to underline the
resumption of operational responsibilities by the
National Police of Timor-Leste through a gradual
process agreed with the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which should be
fully achieved in the near future. We encourage the
Timorese authorities in that regard. Parliament and the
development of political dialogue have also had an
important role in reinforcing democratic governance
and the consolidation of the State. The elections
recently held at the local level were another milestone
in the democratic process. We encourage further steps
to consolidate the democratic institutions of Timor-
Leste.

UNMIT played a central role in that process,
actively contributing to the achievements in all four
areas of its mandate: the review and reform of the
security sector, the strengthening of the rule of law,
economic and social development, and the promotion
of a culture of democratic governance, including
enhancing political dialogue.

Portugal concurs with the Secretary-General's
view concerning the need for renewed dialogue across
the entire political spectrum and all segments of
society. We also share the view that long-term security
and stability will depend on the capacity of the security
institutions to function in an accountable and effective
manner and with due respect for the rule of law and
human rights.
The people of Timor-Leste have repeatedly
demonstrated their resolve to build a democratic,
peaceful and stable society. However, the consolidation
of those objectives requires continued support from the
international community. It is important that the people
of Timor-Leste know that they do not stand alone when
it comes to their endeavours.

For those reasons, we believe that UNMIT should
maintain its current strength for the time being,
including the police capability to assume interim
functions. At the same time, the process of handing
over responsibilities to the national police must
continue with a view to laying the groundwork for a
future transition and drawdown of UNMIT.

Another critical challenge in the near future will
be to build a sustainable economy that is nurtured by a
culture of accountable and transparent governance,
creates jobs and helps to fulfil the basic social
functions of a State. The elements introduced by
Mr. Guterres to our debate in that context are indeed
encouraging, in particular where economic growth is
concerned.

Portugal has and will contribute consistently to
those objectives as a leading donor within a large
spectrum of areas, including governance and public
administration, justice, education and security sector
reform. We are also strongly committed to UNMIT; we
have contributed 200 peacekeepers and fully support
all areas under the responsibility of the Mission.

The continued presence of UNMIT is essential in
order that the work in the consolidation of peace,
democracy and development in Timor-Leste may be
adequately sustained. May I also mention the most
valuable work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary General and, under his skilled direction, of
all UNMIT staff. During the past three years,
Mr. Atul Khare has done an outstanding job that will
remain inseparable from all the accomplishments
achieved by UNMIT. We wish to commend him for all
his efforts and dedication.

Finally, allow me to offer the Timorese people
and their democratic leaders our best wishes for
success in meeting these important challenges, and to
assure them of our constant solidarity.

