Mr. Klein (spoke in French): It is a great honour
for me to be before the members of the Security
Council once again to discuss, for the second time in
six years, the successful completion of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. The conclusion of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), in 19 days" time, represents, in the annals
of United Nations peacekeeping, the most important
police-sector reform and restructuring programme that
the United Nations has ever undertaken.

For myself and for the women and men who are
part of UNMIBH, this moment fills us with pride that
we have done our job well, but it also fills us with
humility, because we are aware of our inability to
prevent or to swiftly put an end to the conflict that took
place 1 decade ago, whose consequences were tragic
and devastating. Despite the difficult start of United
Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
conclude our Mission with our heads held high,
convinced that the United Nations has helped the
country to embark on the path of peace and stability.
As was emphasized by the Secretary-General during
his recent visit to Sarajevo, a historic chapter is
drawing to an end. We close that chapter with dignity.

(spoke in English)

The role given to the United Nations under Annex
11 of the Dayton Peace Accords has been fulfilled. We
leave behind a legacy of democratic law enforcement;
police forces fit for Europe. A platform now exists on
which the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
continued help from the international community, can
build a society based on respect for the rule of law and
functioning democratic institutions.

On 1 January 2003, the European Union Police
Mission (EUPM) will begin to build on UNMIBH's
achievements to ensure continued professional police
performance. The Brahimi report called for greater
cooperation between United Nations peace operations
and regional organizations. This first operation under
the European Union Common Security and Defence
Policy is the practical embodiment of that
recommendation.
Greater European involvement assures the
common citizen that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
integral part of Europe - that it cannot be left to
languish in a Balkan no-man's land, isolated from
mainstream European political and economic
development. The country must now move ahead with
progressive reforms focusing on the rule of law, on
economic development and on higher education
standards. With Vision and perseverance, Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leader - who honour us today with
their presence - can take the country to its rightful
place in the European family of nations.

But serious systemic challenges remain.
Politically, the fundamental bargain that institutionally
and organically links citizens together in a single State
without the need for external props has not yet been
struck. Strengthening State-level institutions by giving
them the necessary legislative, executive and financial
authority is essential for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
able to function as a modern State in its European
context. Economically, Bosnia and Herzegovina faces a
critical challenge. With 64 per cent of the gross
domestic product consumed by Government
bureaucracy, priority issues such as educational reform,
investment, job creation and the rule of law suffer. The
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina who are here today
have in their hands the ability to reform the State
apparatus in the interests of all of their citizens. I urge
them to bring their bloated bureaucracies under greater
fiscal discipline and to give Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as a State, the revenue that it needs to survive and
prosper.

As I have said before, justice and reconciliation
will not take root until the country is rid of the
malignant blight of war criminals. The continued
freedom of Karadzic and Mladic, among others, keeps
us all prisoners of the past and continues to
demonstrate the international community's impotence
in the face of evil. Bosnia and Herzegovina must fulfil
its commitments to cooperate in full with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Additionally, building up domestic
capacities to try ICTY-approved war crimes cases is an
essential and necessary step, and current efforts in that
direction deserve our collective support.

The new High Representative, Lord Ashdown,
has at last set the right priorities. His motto, "First
justice, then jobs, through reform", captures what the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina expect and what
political authorities must deliver. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has suffered too long from a political
culture in which elections were no more than a census
of ethnicity. Politicians should carefully read the
results of the most recent elections: programmes count;
politicians can lose office. Despite the clear progress
that has been made, the assistance and the involvement
of the international community continue to be essential.
But new Governments need to act quickly and
resolutely to ensure meaningful reform.

I now turn to the details of UNMIBH's
completion of its core mandate. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2002/ 1314) before the Council
updates our activities since June 2002 and puts them in
their historical context. As the Council is aware, the
mandate implementation plan has been the conceptual
guide of the Mission for the past two years. With the
Council's endorsement, it has virtually served as our
mandate. Based on established international standards
of competence and integrity, our intensive reform and
restructuring efforts have culminated in the
certification of individual officers and the accreditation
of police administrations. Local partnership and
ownership have been the key to the implementation and
the sustainability of our objectives.

Allow me to elaborate on our qualitative and
quantitative achievements. UNMIBH created
mechanisms to verify and certify that all current and
future police personnel are qualified professionals able
to serve the public with competence and integrity. To
determine individual integrity, each police officer has
been comprehensively vetted according to strict
criteria: wartime activities, housing status, academic
credentials, performance and adherence to human
rights standards. Senior police personnel were subject
to additional checks to ensure that managers were fit to
manage. To establish individual competency, all
serving police officers were intensively trained in basic
standards of democratic policing through the two
police academies that UNMIBH established. Training
has now been fully handed over to local ownership. As
a result, local police forces today comprise 15,786
certified law enforcement officers.

UNMIBH instituted structural reforms in law
enforcement institutions, on the one hand to address
organizational management and personnel policy
deficiencies carried over from the war, and on the other
to institutionalize the separation of politics from
policing. To ensure organizational competence, through
our systems analysis project, we opened up budgets to
external audits, instituted effective management and
human resource systems, and ensured internal and
external oversight mechanisms. The establishment of
local change management teams, with UNMIBH's
oversight, to implement our recommendations ensured
that that project would reflect a change in the
"corporate culture".

Three police administrations have thus far
received UNMIBH accreditation as meeting the basic
standards of democratic policing. With the support of
the High Representative, the legislative framework is
now in place to accredit the remaining administrations
by the end of the mandate. To ensure organizational
integrity, we established independent Police
Commissioners and Directors of Police in 12 police
administrations to insulate police work from unlawful
political interference.

Police forces should reflect the community that
they serve. Minority representation now averages 10
per cent in all police administrations. Recruited female
officers currently make up an average of 3 per cent of
the total personnel strength. That baseline will be
advanced through institutionalizing recruitment and
deployment mechanisms.

We have learned that the greatest threat to
international stability comes from the institutional
weaknesses of States themselves - from the inability
of new democracies to control borders, to fight
organized crime and to cooperate with neighbouring
States. The multi-ethnic State Border Service is now
fully deployed, a key UNMIBH achievement in
enhancing Bosnia and Herzegovina's statehood and
territorial integrity. With the establishment of the State
Information and Protection Agency (SIPA), Interpol
national coordination bureau and intra-State and
regional cooperative mechanisms, the country now has
an integrated law enforcement network to facilitate
national, regional and international cooperation.

To combat the reprehensible trade of human
trafficking, in July 2001 UNMIBH initiated the Special
Trafficking Operations Programme (STOP), the largest
and most extensive anti-trafficking programme in
South-East Europe, comprised of local police
monitored by International Police Task Force (IPTF)
officers.

UNMIBH's institution-building efforts also
encompassed assistance to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina play an active role as a United Nations
Member State. Civilian police and military observers
are now participating in three United Nations peace
operations, and troops are ready for deployment as part
of a composite unit. Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
longer only a beneficiary of, but also a net contributor
to, peace operations.

When UNMIBH leaves, our success will be
judged not only by what has been achieved but also by
what we are leaving behind. The impact of police
reform is measured by police performance and the level
of public trust and confidence.

The sea change in police professionalism has
created the essential security conditions for an
unprecedented number of minority returns. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
registered more than 80,000 returns in the first nine
months of this year - nearly the total year-end figure
for 2001.

As a result of improved police planning and
performance, public commemorations, re-inauguration
of religious sites and large-scale inter-ethnic sporting
and other events are, by and large, peaceful
occurrences. The recent incident-free elections further
attest to the high level of growing police
professionalism.

With the establishment and deployment of the
State Border Services (SBS), Bosnia and Herzegovina
is no longer a springboard for illegal migrants into
Europe. The dramatic reduction of illegal migration by
more than 95 per cent over the last two years through
the Sarajevo airport alone has benefited not only
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also the whole continent.

Intra-State and inter-State law enforcement
cooperation is now routine,institutiona1ized at the
ministerial level and operationalized through the Task
Forces. The State of Bosnia and Herzegovina now has
the functioning capacities and mechanisms to fight
terrorism, organized crime and human trafficking both
at home and in the region.

UNMIBH's Human Rights Office began
coordinating joint IPTF and local police raids on
establishments suspected of involvement in human
trafficking in March 1999. Recognizing the magnitude
of the problem, we established and monitored local
STOP teams in July 2001. Since then, over 830 raids
have been conducted on 240 identified establishments.
Of these, 152 have now been closed. Overall, several
thousand women have been interviewed and more than
550 victims have been assisted with repatriation to
their homelands. As a result of these operations, there
are 52 ongoing prosecutions and 19 pending court
cases, and 100 traffickers have been convicted.

In terms of police and public interface, we have
witnessed a remarkable trend of growing public
confidence and trust in the police. In sum, the
transition of law enforcement agencies from tools of
the State to professional servants of the public is firmly
on track.

Complementing our core mandate, progress has
been made and reinforced through two specialized
United Nations Trust Funds. Through the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Police Assistance
Programme, $16.5 million has been provided for basic
police equipment and facilities. Additionally, more
than 540 quick-impact projects have been implemented
from the United Nations Trust Fund for the Restoration
of Essential Public Services, costing $25 million.

Finally, a few words on one of our greatest
challenges - the legacy of Srebrenica. Our aims were
not only to assist in healing the wounds of the
survivors of the tragic massacre but also, in the scope
of peace-building, to lay the foundations for recovery.
We encouraged multi-ethnic representation in the
police forces to build confidence for returnees, and as
many as 3,500 Bosniacs have returned to the wider
Srebrenica region so far. From the United Nations
Trust Fund we disbursed over $1.6 million on
infrastructure, including funding and construction of a
model community police station. Additionally, in close
cooperation with United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), we initiated the Srebrenica
Regional Recovery Programme. The Secretary-
General's meeting, during his recent Visit to Sarajevo,
with representatives of one of the survivor groups, the
Mothers of Srebrenica, served as another reminder that
they are not forgotten.

Work has commenced on a project led by the
Office of the High Representative to construct the
Srebrenica-Potocari Memorial Cemetery. I take this
opportunity to urge all Member States to lend their full
support to fund-raising efforts to complete plans for the
site and enable the burial of the Victims to begin. At the
very least, we owe the victims burials with dignity.

Today, UNMIBH has reached the point where we
have confidence in passing the baton of police reform
to a smaller successor mission. The seamless transition
to the European Police Mission is well advanced. I
welcome their agreement to give priority to the SBS,
SIPA and the maintenance of effective counter-
trafficking measures. I am also glad that the EUPM
intends to continue a robust approach to organized
crime. We are confident that under this framework our
achievements will be sustained and UNMIBH's legacy
preserved. The EUPM. deserves the Council's full
political support.

Even with such a solid baseline, challenges
remain. Attention will be required to safeguard the
integrity of police forces from political influence. For
UNMIBH, this has been one of our overriding
priorities. Unless efforts continue along these lines,
sustainability of the achievements made so far in police
reform and restructuring will be seriously undermined.
Politics must be kept out from policing.

In the context of overall establishment of rule of
law, there is a vast disparity between the levels of
judicial reform and that of the police. UNMIBH's
Criminal Justice Advisory Unit partially filled the void.
However, definitive closure of this gap will depend on
an accelerated pace of judicial reform. The fullest
support is required for this already prioritized reform
item for the sake of eliminating parasitic criminality
and opening the doors to foreign investment.

Seven years of UNMIBH and a decade of United
Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
about to end. Many lessons have been learned. I hope
that one aspect of UNMIBH's legacy will be the
application of the Mission's lessons to other peace
operations. Two primary examples come to mind.

First, we have reached this closing phase only by
knowing where we wanted to go. UNMIBH's mandate
implementation plan encompassed our strategic and
operational vision and our exit strategy. It helped to
prioritize projects for international donor assistance
and represented a process of local capacity-building for
the eventual taking over of the tasks of police
professionalization. I am heartened that this approach
has found resonance for the work of the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
development of an Office of the High Representative
mission implementation plan.

Second, a holistic approach to rule of law must
happen early in a post-conflict situation and all the
necessary tools put in one hand. Police reform and
restructuring is only one aspect of the rule of law.
Without complementarity and simultaneous reform of
all areas, the rule of law will be a chain only as strong
as its weakest link. A pillar construct must be in place
to ensure the simultaneous professionalization of the
full sector - police, judiciary and prison systems.

UNMIBH is a success. A mandate has been
implemented, and there are visible signs that reforms
are at work. The quality of the women and men of
UNMIBH, representing 96 nations and 43 police-
contributing States, and the support of the Council and
of the Secretariat under the leadership of the Secretary-
General have made this Mission our collective success.

You, the members of the Security Council, have
provided the critical direction and means for UNMIBH
to implement its core mandate. It has been an
exemplary collaborative effort. Our colleagues in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have been
unwavering in their support and assistance, and their
confidence in us has been an inspiration. To the
Secretary-General, I would like to extend particular
thanks and appreciation for his leadership not only in
guiding the United Nations, but for his recent visit to
Sarajevo to mark the end of an important chapter in
United Nations peacekeeping in the Balkans. It also
represented the realization of the Mission that he
personally initiated in 1995.

(spoke in French)

We have witnessed in recent years the fulfilment
of a partnership between the authorities and people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations.
Together we are closing this peacekeeping chapter. The
United Nations system will, however, continue to work
in other ways to help the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a better future. The path has been
laid out: it leads towards a Europe-oriented future, on
the basis of a spirit of reform and responsible
leadership. I sincerely hope that the promise of a
European future will enable the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to attain the goals to which they
collectively aspire.

Before the work of UNMIBH is finalized, I
would like to give the Council a small gift as an
expression of our appreciation for its ongoing support
and encouragement, which has helped us to complete
our mandate and accomplish our mission successfully.

