Mr. Annadif: It is always an honour for me to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2020/952), especially at a time when the country is going through a critical moment in its history. The period from June to mid-September covered by the report was marked by significant sociopolitical developments. During my virtual meeting with the Council on 27 July, I noted the main causes of the current crisis being as follows: first, the weakening of central institutions, the loss of confidence in political actors and the rise of religious leaders; secondly, the delay in the implementation of the Agreement of Peace and Reconciliation and the worsening socioeconomic situation; and, thirdly, the deterioration of the security situation, in particular in the centre of the country, which has led to human rights violations that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) often documents, transmitting recommendations to the Government, but which unfortunately do not lead to concrete action. The situation led to a paralysis in Mali's institutions, notably the Constitutional Court and the National Assembly. It was in this context of deadlock that the mutiny of 18 August led to the resignation of President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. The coup de force was condemned by the entire international community, including the Secretary-General and the Security Council. In addition to condemning this unconstitutional change, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) decided to suspend Mali from all of its institutions and declared sanctions, including the closure of borders, an air embargo and the suspension of financial transactions until a civil transition were put in place. Since then, days of national consultations were organized from 10 to 12 September and led to the adoption of a transition charter, which complements the current Constitution. As provided for in the charter, a President of the Transition has been appointed in the person of Bah N'Daou, a retired Colonel Major and former Minister of Defence. The head of the junta, Colonel Assimi Goita, has was appointed Vice-President of the Transition in charge of defence and security. Both were sworn in on 25 August before the Supreme Court. A Prime Minister was appointed on 27 September by the President of the Transition in the person of Moctar Ouane, former Minister for Foreign Affairs, in accordance with the transition charter. (spoke in French) In his speech on the occasion of his swearing in, on 25 September, President Bah N'Daw listed a number of priorities that he hoped to would be achieved during the transition, which he hopes will be smooth. Those priorities include, first, strengthening the capacities of the Malian Defence and Security Forces in terms of equipment and training. The second priority is the fight against impunity, which he expressed with the now famous phrase: "I cannot guarantee that there will be zero corruption, but I commit to ensuring that there is zero impunity." The third priority is to organize free and transparent elections, which will be key to the return to constitutional order in the country. The fourth priority is the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which resulted from the Algiers process. The Government, which was formed on 5 October, is made up of 25 members, in accordance with the recommendations of the inclusive national dialogue, of which four are women - equivalent to 16 per cent of the Government, unfortunately far below the 30 per cent quota required by law - and 21 are men, including four members of the military. I am pleased to report to the Council that it is the first time since the signing of the Agreement, in June 2015, that the signatory movements have officially entered the Government in Mali. This progress is highly symbolic and significant. It is the result of the openness of the new authorities and signatory movements, who were encouraged by our good offices in order to build trust. Thanks to this trust, the Peace Agreement is included in the preamble to the charter, and its implementation is enshrined as one of the Government's tasks. Therefore, it is with genuine relief that the people of Mali and neighbouring countries, including ourselves, have welcomed the lifting of the ECOWAS sanctions following the statement of the interim President on 5 October. As members will have noted, the year 2020 in Mali has been marked by much tumult and political uncertainties. The country was without a Government for more than four months, and the challenges have multiplied, particularly with the coronavirus disease pandemic and its socioeconomic impact. This situation has also led toa considerable delay in the implementation of the Peace Agreement and has aggravated the humanitarian crisis, which was already latent. However, MINUSMA, as well as the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations, remained committed throughout this period and continued their activities, including support for the strategy for the stabilization of central Mali. Similarly, as part of its adaptation plan, MINUSMA has continued its patrols and the installation of its temporary bases in the interest of protecting civilians and supporting the Malian security and defence forces. This is how Operation Seka facilitated the return of Malian armed forces to Labbezanga, in the Gao region bordering the Republic of the Niger. With the formation of the new Government and the lifting of sanctions, we can now hope for the swift establishment of the national transitional council, which will serve as the legislative body throughout the 18-month transitional period. Indeed, the holding credible elections that can lead to a return to constitutional order depends on political, institutional, electoral and administrative reforms as set out in the transition charter. From this point of view, the transition constitutes an opportunity for Malian women and men to bring their country from this infernal cycle punctuated by a regular succession of coups d'etat. The United Nations must also seize this opportunity to continue supporting and assisting throughout this important phase for a way out of the crisis in Mal, in coordination with the entire international community, in particular the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States. The success of the transition is therefore within reach. The ball remains in the court of Malian women and men. They must mount a surge at the national level. For its part, MINUSMA is more engaged than ever by their side.
