Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I am
deeply honoured to speak before the Council today on
Africa, an area that I have pledged will be one of my
highest priorities as the United States Ambassador to the
United Nations. I thank Prime Minister Kok for his
leadership, and I appreciate all the hard work done by his
strong delegation to make this meeting possible. I
compliment the Secretary-General on his statement and
thank him for all of his efforts on these important issues.
His personal leadership - indeed, his personal advice to
me - his inspiration in these areas has been enduring,
and I look to him for so much in this area.

 

We also appreciate the statements of the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the representative of the Chair of the OAU. The
achievements of the OAU under Secretary-General Salim
Salim and the current Chairman in Algeria in promoting
peace and stability throughout the region are vital, and we
take note of these important efforts.

Because the list of speakers is long and the subject
vastly important, and much of what I will say has already
been said by previous speakers - and I am sure will be
repeated by others - and because the people in this room
need less than anyone else in the world to be reminded of
the importance of these issues, I would like to summarize
my remarks and submit the full remarks in written form in
order to enable more speakers to speak before lunch.

Throughout this decade, the United States, under the
personal leadership of President Clinton, has worked to
revitalize and energize American engagement in Africa. My
country is proud to have convened the first Security
Council ministerial meeting on Africa two years ago. Last
March, Secretary of State Albright hosted the first United
States-Africa ministerial meeting, bringing together leaders
of 50 African nations to discuss our common agenda. Next
month, she plans to make her third visit there as Secretary
of State. And, as many here know, because I have
discussed my plans in order to seek their advice, I plan to
make my first major trip in my present job to Africa in late
November or early December.

No longer the Victims of colonialism or great-Power
competition, the people of Africa have a historic
opportunity to see that in the coming century, their lives
can be freer, safer and more secure. It is imperative that the
United Nations support and foster their ambitions. Towards
this end, our efforts should address a four-part agenda: first,
we must enhance Africa's security by helping it resolve and
prevent armed conflict; secondly, we must help Africa
grapple with such transnational threats as AIDS and
terrorism; thirdly, we must support Africa's ongoing
political transformation towards open societies and markets;
and fourthly, we must assist Africa's economic development
and address its humanitarian concerns.

Allow me to discuss this agenda in more detail and,
once again, summarize much of what I would otherwise
have said at greater length.

In Africa we have to work much harder to solve the
conflicts that threaten the continent's future. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - a situation that has
involved at least eight countries and become the widest
inter-State war in African history - we support the
efforts now under way to implement the peace agreement
so painstakingly negotiated by President Chiluba of
Zambia. We will consider recommendations of United
Nations military liaison officers on how the United
Nations can further the peace process. We urge all
combatants to adhere to the signed ceasefire. And the
United Nations, in our View, needs a strong, experienced
special representative in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as soon as possible to galvanize peace
implementation.

Similarly, in Sierra Leone, the United States has
been working actively with the Government, the various
rebel groups, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations to implement
a peace agreement. We are anxious to begin disarmament
and demobilization in Sierra Leone while the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) still has a credible force
in the field. We need the United Nations to deploy the
full complement of authorized observers as soon as
possible and be ready to introduce a full peacekeeping
operation in December when the Nigerians plan to leave.

In Ethiopia and Eritrea, we must continue to work to
restore peace. Although both sides have committed
themselves to the OAU peace settlement, much work
remains to be done. What some consider two of the most
hopeful countries in Africa now illustrate the dramatic
impact of senseless war.

Our collective failure to prevent and contain such
conflicts is lamentable. The international community has
a responsibility - moral, humanitarian, strategic and
political - to do more. The United States for its part, has
started: through the President's African crisis response
initiative it is enhancing Africa's own peacekeeping
capacity. So far we have trained some 5,000 African
peacekeepers from six different countries through this
programme. As Secretary Albright explained last week,
the United States has developed procedures to halt United
States arms sales to regions of conflict not already
covered by United Nations arms embargoes. We
encourage other nations to establish and observe such
moratoriums.

We also believe that we must attack the economic
structures that fuel the illicit arms trade - the grey and
black markets in diamonds, precious metals and narcotics.
Next week, experts in the United States Government will
convene a conference to look specifically at the war

 

economies in Angola, the Congo and Sierra Leone. These
are just some of the things we must do, but our
responsibilities must not obscure a fundamental reality: the
people and leaders of Africa must provide a basis for peace.

Let me be clear: where meaningful peace agreements
are in place, the United Nations should work hard to
implement them. Where an international presence is
required, the United Nations has a vital role to play. But we
must also press the people and leaders of Africa itself to
solve the problems on their own and, above all, to prevent
them before they begin or escalate.

In addition to the threat of instability, the United
Nations needs to continue to help Africa grapple with those
problems that lie outside the traditional realm of
international politics. The scourge of diseases like
HIV/AIDS stands out. The statistics, as everybody knows,
are truly staggering, and again I compliment the Secretary-
General on his personal efforts to heighten awareness of
this issue over the last few years. President Clinton is
currently seeking from Congress an additional $100 million
to fight AIDS worldwide. Senator Frist of Tennessee, the
Chairman of the subcommittee on African Affairs of the
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, a Republican and
a surgeon, is personally seized of this issue and is working
hard and extensively to gain support for it and greater
awareness of it in the United States.

Terrorism continues to be a serious transnational threat
and one that we must all face together. The United States
has been providing anti-terrorism training to law
enforcement officers in eight African States.

Our third challenge is one we believe in strongly:
Africa must continue to develop open societies and open
markets. There can be no doubt that throughout this decade,
African democracy has made major - indeed in some
areas historic - strides. Today, more Africans live
democratically than ever before. Many Africans are tasting
freedom for the first time. This is illustrated in such places
as Mozambique and Namibia, and I think there was special
symbolism, and more than symbolism, in that only nine
years after United Nations peacekeepers helped Namibia to
independence, Ambassador Martin Adjaba so brilliantly led
the Security Council's recent delegation to East Timor and
effected a potentially historic breakthrough towards peace.

These are but two examples that should give us all
hope. It is for reasons such as these that the United States
will continue to be a strong supporter of democratic forces
across the continent. We will work extensively with non-
governmental organizations to achieve this.

We must continue to work together to address the
economic and humanitarian problems that still exist in too
many countries in Africa. Clearly, there is an enormous
amount of work ahead of us. According to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human
Development Report 1999, 42 African countries are in the
lowest third of the countries ranked; the 22 lowest-ranked
countries are all in sub-Saharan Africa. Urban
unemployment persists at rates of 20 to 30 per cent.
Landmines continue to cause deaths and casualties
throughout the continent. And Africa is also home to as
many as 3 million refugees and almost 8 million
displaced persons. As some representatives here may
know, I have spent my entire career working on refugee
issues. I intend to visit refugee camps on my forthcoming
trip. I know what needs to be done. I will work closely
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and with our able Assistant Secretary of
State for Population, Refugees and Migration, Julia Taft,
to enhance our efforts in this area.

President Clinton has committed himself to working
with Congress to restore United States official
development assistance to Africa to the high levels of the
past. The Africa Growth and Opportunity Bill, now before
the United States Senate, would open United States
markets more broadly to African products and give
incentives to countries to reform and modernize their
economies.

We have also given our support to demining
programmes both through the United Nations and
bilaterally.

These efforts assist our work to ease Africa's
transition into the global economy. Statism and
corruption - legacies of the colonial and immediate post-
colonial periods - are hard habits to break, but Africans
are working hard to break them. It is incumbent upon all
of us to play a role in this process.

We all have an indispensable role to play in helping
Africa progress towards peace, prosperity and greater
freedom. Strides have been made, but an enormous
amount remains to be done. Throughout my tenure as the
United States Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, I pledge that, along with the United States
Government, I will work tirelessly to further the agenda
I have just outlined.

 

