Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing on his latest visit to Myanmar.
We thank him for his considerable efforts to carry out
the good offices mission of the Secretary-General. We
view as hopeful the results of the Special Envoy's visit
during which the leadership of Myanmar demonstrated
its readiness to cooperate with the international
community. We believe the conclusions he has drawn
from that visit to be balanced and justified.

We take note of the steps taken by Nay Pyi Taw
to bring the situation back to normal, establish
dialogue with the opposition and prepare for
democratic change. Those too are positive
developments. In that regard, we appreciate in
particular the Government's decision to establish a
special commission to draw up a draft constitution. We
think it an especially significant development that
Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the opposition, has
been given an opportunity to address the international
community and to meet with members of the National
League for Democracy. We hope that Aung San Suu
Kyi's readiness for dialogue and cooperation with the
authorities will speed up the process of national
reconciliation.

While noting those positive changes, we
nevertheless expect the Myanmar leadership to take
further steps to implement the seven-point road map to
democratic changes leading to a civilian form of
Government.

In that respect, the international community,
through the United Nations and regional organizations,
must provide Myanmar with the necessary assistance in
implementing that process. We await with interest the
forthcoming Association of Southeast Asian Nations
summit and hope that the other States of the region will
pursue their efforts in support of establishing peace,
stability and democracy in Myanmar. We are convinced
that threats, pressure and sanctions exerted from
outside the country are counterproductive and will only
hinder the effort to solve the problems facing the
country today.

We wish Mr. Gambari every success as he
pursues his mission.

