Mr. Lovald (Norway): Being the last speaker, I
shall concentrate on the main points in my statement,
the full text of which will be distributed.

Norway is pleased that the Security Council will
for the first time pass a resolution on small arms and
light weapons. This underlines the serious security
dimension of the problem and heralds more decisive
and consistent action on the part of the Council. It is a
welcome signal in advance of the review conference on
the United Nations Programme of Action against the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

Norway believes that the Security Council has a
key role to play in eliminating the spread of illegal
small arms and light weapons. This must be a core
element in the Council's peace efforts. Effective arms
embargoes now constitute an integral part of the
Council's resolutions on most conflict areas, and
special monitoring mechanisms are increasingly being
put in place to assist the peace missions in this regard.
This is a welcome development. We are also pleased to
note that an increasing number of arms embargoes
explicitly include ammunition. Norway is of the view
that ammunition should be subject to the same
regulations as the weapons for which they are intended.

The United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
remains the key global instrument for dealing with this
issue. We welcome the significant progress in its
implementation over the past year, with the adoption
by the General Assembly of an international instrument
on tracing and marking small arms and light weapons.
We also welcome the General Assembly's request that
the Secretary-General establish a group of
governmental experts to consider further steps to
enhance international cooperation to combat illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons. Norway is
convinced that in order to deal effectively with the
destabilizing effect of illicit small arms and light
weapons, we must curb illicit brokering. We hope that
the expert group will recommend the negotiation of an
international instrument against illicit brokering.

Norway is also in favour of the negotiation under
United Nations auspices of an arms trade treaty that
would regulate all transfers of conventional weapons.
We believe that such a treaty would greatly enhance
control over the export and transit of small arms and
light weapons.

We still have a way to go in developing effective
international cooperation to deal with these challenges.
Norway believes that it is necessary to focus more
closely on the factors that create demand for illicit
small arms and on ways to minimize the detrimental
effects of illicit small arms on development efforts.

Together with Norwegian non-governmental
organizations, we have arranged an experts' seminar on
small arms and development in Oslo on 22 and 23
March. The seminar will bring together more than 50
experts from around the world and will, we hope,
provide useful input on how to integrate development
into the United Nations Programme of Action process.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) efforts are relevant to the fight against illicit
small arms. DDR is also a vital element in any peace
operation. We welcome the more consistent inclusion
of clear provisions regarding DDR in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Nevertheless, the role of
peacekeeping missions in DDR should be more clearly
defined in the mandates for such missions. We endorse
the Secretary-General's recommendation to that effect.

Finally, Norway concurs with the Secretary-
General that closer interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly would contribute to
a coherent and comprehensive United Nations policy
on small arms and light weapons. We also share his
view regarding the particular importance of that
interaction in the light of the forthcoming review
conference on the Programme of Action. We believe it
would be useful to look more closely at the issues
raised in the Secretary-General's report in connection
with the review conference. The Council could also
consider whether any of those issues would benefit
from a more focused debate in the Council at a later
stage.

