Mr. Kurtyka (Poland): Let me first sincerely thank
the Dominican Republic for inviting me here today
to share Poland's perspective on the issue of climate
change and security. Let me also take this opportunity,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. Before starting,
I would also like to thank the briefers for their
contribution to our discussion, namely, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Mr. Achim Steiner, Mr. Pavel Kabat and
Ms. Lindsay Getschel.

Today's discussion focusing on the existential threat
posed by natural disasters for small island developing
States encourages us in the Council to look at that
threat from the preventive and security perspective in
order to address them in an effective and innovative
way. I am speaking to the Council not only as Secretary
of State in the Ministry of Environment of Poland.
This year, I also have the privilege to preside over the
twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP24) in Katowice. I would like to thank our briefers
who mentioned Katowice as an important milestone on
our way forward.

I will address three points. First, let me share with
the Council why we think the issue of climate change
and security is pertinent; secondly, what tools could be
used in order to address the corresponding nexus in an
adequate manner; and, thirdly, some information on
the newly adopted global tool to address global climate
change, known as the Katowice rulebook.

First, concerning the issue of"why", climate change
is happening all over the world. I am sure that I do not
have to convince anyone here about the urgency and
seriousness of the problem. It is an existential threat.
Usually, climate-related events are very local in nature,
but such local events have a butterfly effect. They impact
people's livelihoods, security and ability to provide,
produce and function, and, through all that, they create
an inflammatory ground on which a potential conflict
can ignite. We do not have to look far to find examples of
climate-induced conflicts destabilizing - sometimes
quite unexpectedly - entire regions, for instance, as
has been repeatedly mentioned, the Lake Chad basin
and the Sahel region. Therefore, addressing that issue is
not just our responsibility, but also in our own interest.

Let me turn to the tools. One might ask: What
can the Security Council do about it? Let me turn the
Council's attention to two aspects.

First, creating a safe and secure world for all is
not just about reaction. It is also about anticipation
and prevention. As my colleagues from Belgium and
Germany mentioned earlier, all countries potentially
affected by such threats should be equipped with an
accurate early-warning information-gathering system
that would alert us to potential climate-induced
flare-ups and conflict. That goal can be successfully
reached by implementing activities under the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development aimed at
enhancing the resilience of risk-exposed States. All
States and organizations should use the full potential
of their field offices and missions in order to gather and
share such information.

Secondly, the issue of climate change and security
should gain prominence in the Security Council through
regular discussions and debates as a preventive tool,
focusing on solutions and monitoring. The Security
Council should be regularly briefed on the threats and
the progress in addressing and mitigating the global
security implications of climate change.
Thirdly, let me turn to the global response and direct
the attention of representatives to the achievements of
the United Nations climate summit that took place in
Katowice in December. I again thank the representative
of Kuwait and many other speakers who have mentioned
that important event. I had the privilege to preside over
that global climate conference, known as COP24.

The tangible impacts of climate change may be
local, but the solution that must be found is clearly a
global one. That is why the only way to address the
problem at its source must be implemented through a
concerted global effort. After long negotiations, we
adopted a document called the Katowice rulebook,
which makes the Paris Agreement operational. It is
important for the following reasons. First, it provides
clarity on how, when and according to which formula
all countries of the world must act. Secondly, it shifts
the world onto a path towards a concrete and single
transparency system. Thirdly, it creates a very specific
framework around the provision of climate finance and
other support to those countries that need it.

Holding the presidency of the global climate process
for the fourth time, Poland contributed to strengthening
the global response to climate change. We have a great
deal of experience and understanding of the issues
with which countries are grappling and the scale of the
problem before us. The climate-related threats oblige us
to be responsive and responsible.

Today, as President of the UnitedNations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and a member of the
Security Council, Poland would like to once again
underscore that climate change is a destabilizing force
in our world and deserves attention and action on the
part of the Security Council in order to achieve durable
and sustainable peace on our planet Earth.

