Mr. Diabre (spoke in French): The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) welcomes
this opportunity to address the Security Council on the
important topic of cross-border issues in West Africa.
These issues are numerous and varied and include
human and armament flows, infrastructure and
environmental damage, disruption of economic activity
and the spread of diseases such as HIV/AIDS in the
region - all leading to increased tensions and conflicts
in the subregion and strong impediments to poverty
reduction and sustainable development.

The report of the Secretary-General on ways to
combat subregional and cross-border problems in West
Africa clearly identifies the many different root causes
of the conflicts in the subregion. UNDP warmly
welcomes and endorses the recommendations
contained in that report. UNDP is actively engaged in
the 12 priority areas identified in the report through its
country-level activities and its regional programmes.
With its partners in government, civil society and the
private sector, UNDP is undertaking programmes and
activities targeting policy dialogue, capacity-building
and institutional strengthening, all of which contribute
to the implementation of the recommendations of the
report.

Acknowledging the strong link between peace,
security and development, UNDP addresses the
development dimension of crisis and conflict up front
by mainstreaming prevention and peace-building in its
development work.

To address the many challenges of peace and
security in the subregion, UNDP has developed a
regional strategy for West Africa that is based on an
integrated regional development approach. The key
elements of that strategy include establishing greater
coherence between the overall objectives of the United
Nations and UNDP's conflict-prevention and peace-
building activities in the subregion, with targeted
support to the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA), including the secondment of a senior
UNDP staff member; mainstreaming conflict-
prevention and peace-building throughout UNDP's
development work in West Africa; strengthening the
capacities of ECOWAS in order to enable it to play a
more important role in conflict prevention and in
peace-building; and carrying out complementary
regional activities in the area of human security, such
as small-arms-control initiatives in Ghana, Mali, Niger
and Sierra Leone.

UNDP, together with the European Union and
UNOWA, conducted a mission to assess the capacity of
ECOWAS in conflict prevention and peacekeeping.
Preliminary findings indicate a real need to reorient
ECOWAS' approach to those two areas. ECOWAS
should have a stronger development focus, reinforce
policy dialogue among Member States and strengthen
donor coordination. UNDP is ready to assist ECOWAS
in implementing these important and relevant
recommendations.

In addition to the West Africa strategy, UNDP is
also carrying out a number of initiatives to address
specific problems related to cross-border issues. These
include, first, support for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. For example, in Sierra
Leone, the recently completed DDR programme led to
the reintegration of 51,000 ex-combatants. Our
programmes in Liberia and in Cote d'Ivoire are aimed
at the reintegration of 38,000 and 50,000 ex-
combatants, respectively. We have a specialized team
in our Nigeria Office whose goal is to support and
assist the ECOWAS secretariat in terms of strategic
planning in the area of conflict prevention.

Another initiative involves small-arms
programmes in Sierra Leone, the Mano River Union,
Ghana and Niger, and support for the establishment of
national small arms commissions in several countries
of the subregion. Also important is support for the
proposed Greater Guinea Forestiere Project, a
subregional initiative involving Guinea, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Cote d'Ivoire, which can make an additional
contribution to addressing some of the causes of
conflict such as uncontrolled mineral resources and the
presence of displaced populations.

In addition, UNDP also is providing specific
country-level support to Guinea-Bissau with the
establishment of the Emergency Economic
Management Fund; to Liberia, with the establishment
of the Liberian Emergency Governance Fund; and to
Sierra Leone, with the so-called 4Rs process -
repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

Re-establishing peace and security in West
Africa, and, consequently, fostering economic
development and poverty reduction, requires the
support of all development partners. It is essential to
provide concrete support to regional institutions so that
they can achieve durable results. Adopting a holistic
approach that closely links peace-building and
development is of fundamental importance: our success
in resolving the cross-border issues in West Africa
depends on such an approach. New and innovative
regional approaches to development, such as a
subregional poverty reduction strategy, could help us to
attain our common objectives.
UNDP is resolved to work in close collaboration
with other United Nations agencies and with other
development partners to implement the
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General.

