Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Peter Piot
for the important and informative briefings they have
given us on the dangers of HIV/AIDS, in particular as
they relate to peacekeeping missions, and on the
measures that should be taken to eliminate them.

The HIV/AIDS pandemic emerged in the early
1980s. Today it has not only become a public health
problem: it is also a major challenge to development,
which is essential to stability and international peace
and security. Africa - which is the continent most
affected by conflict, underdevelopment and
HIV/AIDS - must be the object of further attention,
especially if one considers that most of the world's
conflicts today are taking place in Africa, where there
are several rather large peacekeeping operations.

HIV/AIDS weighs heavily upon the most
productive and active sectors of Africa's population,
particularly adults in their prime, scarce qualified
personnel and women and children. The horrific waste
in human and financial resources that is the result of
AIDS makes AIDS a fundamental issue for Africa's
security and development. According to official
statistics, HIV is spreading in Guinea at a disturbing
rate, with an average infection rate of 2.8 per cent.
With respective infection rates of 7 per cent and 6 per
cent, the mining and military sectors are the most
affected. By geographical breakdown, HIV-infection
rates are higher than the national average in the
forested region of Guinea, where the gold and diamond
mines and camps of Ivorian and Liberian refugees are
located. The infection rate in the refugee camps is
approximately 3.5 per cent. Those statistics, however
incomplete, reveal the impact of war and social
problems on the spread of the AIDS pandemic.

The campaign against AIDS requires the common
efforts of Member States; that in turn requires more
genuine and effective partnerships at the national,
regional and global levels.

HIV/AIDS has become an unprecedented
challenge for the United Nations and requires
coordinated action and the adaptation of the work of
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council. In that context, my
delegation welcomes the creation by the Secretary-
General of the Commission on HIV/AIDS and
Governance in Africa, under the chairmanship of the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for
Africa.

Moreover, it should be underlined that resources
and access to medicines are basic issues that have to be
dealt with. My delegation once again welcomes the
creation of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria and the World Trade
Organization's agreement on generic drugs. The
mechanisms to distribute funds and medicines to those
who need them should reflect the urgent need for swift

action dictated by this health emergency and threat to
peace.

The convening of this meeting reflects the
Council's concern to ensure follow-up of resolution
1308 (2000). My delegation believes that the battle
against HIV/AIDS can be won only through decisive
international cooperation on the part of the various
actors of the international community. The Security
Council acknowledged that when it adopted resolution
1308 (2000), which recognized the gravity of the
devastating effects of HIV/AIDS and reaffirmed the
need for coordinated international action to combat the
virus. The resolution also recalled the Council's
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and underlined the
Council's concern over the scourge's potential negative
impact on the health of the personnel of international
peacekeeping operations, including support personnel.

In the context of international solidarity, it should
be noted that the Millennium Declaration, the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS of the
special session of the General Assembly in June 2001
and the outcome of the high-level debate of
22 September 2003 to follow up implementation of the
Declaration of Commitment - these are all sources of
inspiration that, fortunately, have led to new alliances
and partnerships to combat HIV/AIDS.

For its part, the Security Council must provide
peacekeeping operations with the tools necessary to
find solutions for the deep structural impact of
HIV/AIDS on their ability to promote peace and
security.

Positive actions that should be supported are the
incorporation of HIV/AIDS inquiry and work groups
into peace missions and host populations, the
appointment of HIV/AIDS advisers and focal points in
the major peacekeeping missions, the appointment of
advisers in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), the development of prevention and advising
strategies, support for national initiatives to assist
uniformed personnel, the recruitment of gender
advisers and initiatives in countries with high infection
rates, as mentioned in the report submitted to the
Security Council.

My delegation welcomes the arrangements made
for better cooperation between DPKO and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
as mentioned in the briefings. We should now draw
lessons from past experience, assess the progress made
and plan for the future with perseverance. To that end,
we believe that the two bodies should share their
experiences and strengthen their cooperation with other
partners, including Member States, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and other bodies of the
United Nations system. Such synergy will undoubtedly
enable us to better assess the nature and extent of the
problems posed by HIV/AIDS, to identify the obstacles
to overcome, to create specific action plans and to
make recommendations for more effective global
action in combating this scourge in the context of
peacekeeping missions.

My delegation believes that the issue of HIV/
AIDS should be incorporated into the initial planning
of peacekeeping missions and that troop-contributing
countries should include an HIV/AIDS component in
their personnel training. The United Nations should
contribute assistance in that regard.

In brief, the campaign against HIV/AIDS must be
incorporated into the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in order to strengthen
security and stability in regions of crisis and in post-
conflict situations.

In peacekeeping operations, as a complementary
measure, it is essential to create better systems for
keeping statistics in order to follow up and assess
progress made and to strengthen local and regional
technical capacities.

My country, one of the leading troop contributors,
continues to draw lessons from its participation in
peacekeeping operations. Thus, through its national
policy on HIV/AIDS, the Government of Guinea has,
in its education component, emphasized prevention and
counselling among military troops and police units.
The personal involvement of national authorities, in
particular the First Lady of the Republic, in the
military communities and police camps, especially with
the wives and children of soldiers and police officers,
is an initiative worthy of mention.

My delegation believes that the involvement of
ministries for defence and security in national
mechanisms to combat AIDS will contribute to the
better coordination of national initiatives to fight
HIV/AIDS. Moreover, host countries, particularly
countries with high rates of infection, should organize
programmes to fight this scourge.

Winning the battle against AIDS in not only a
moral imperative - a service to the millions of people
infected or affected in one way or another by its
devastating impact - it is also an issue of political and
humanitarian urgency if we wish to fulfil our
aspirations for peace, security and development in
solidarity. That is why my delegation attaches the
greatest importance to the Council's debate, which
reflects the Council's firm commitment to meeting the
challenges posed by HIV/AIDS, a great and
unprecedented threat to life and the security of
humankind.

