I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the subject of global governance as it relates to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. A microscopic virus is now the number one threat in our world. The COVID-19 pandemic is a full-blown crisis in itself, unfolding against a backdrop of high geopolitical tensions and other global threats in unpredictable and dangerous ways. The pandemic is a clear test of international cooperation - a test that we have failed. It has killed nearly 1 million people around the world, infected more than 30 million and is out of control. That was the result of a lack of global preparedness, cooperation, unity and solidarity. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations reminds us of the achievements of our founders and calls on us to live up to their ambitions. We urgently need innovative thinking on global governance and multilateralism so that they are fit for the twenty-first century. First and foremost, we need a networked multilateralism based on strong links and cooperation between global and regional organizations, international financial institutions and other global alliances and institutions. Since I became Secretary-General, I have prioritized our strategic partnership with the African Union. Our relations are characterized by shared values, mutual respect and common interests. The partnership between the African Union (AU) and the United Nations is a model that we should emulate in our relationships with other regional organizations. We now have a strong AU-United Nations framework on peace and security on the continent. I urge the Security Council to deepen our engagement by creating strong, formalized links and regular communications with the AU Peace and Security Council. That would enable the most effective division of labour, allowing for AU peace enforcement and counter-terrorism operations, backed by Security Council mandates, with predictable funding guaranteed by assessed contributions. That is the only way in which we will build the coalition that we need to beat terrorism on the African continent and fulfil the African Union's flagship initiative to silence the guns. We at the United Nations also have a responsibility to improve the effectiveness of global governance. Our focus on prevention, our efforts to enhance the peace and security architecture, the Action for Peacekeeping initiative in partnership with Member States and our drive to end sexual exploitation and abuse across the United Nations system are all aimed at meeting that challenge. I welcome resolution 2532 (2020), adopted in July, in support of my appeal for an immediate global ceasefire. We now need a united effort, led by the Council, to silence the guns around the world by the end of this year. The primary responsibility for making global governance work lies with Member States, including those on the Council. Reform of global governance cannot be a substitute for collective action by Member States to confront common challenges. Conflict, human rights abuses, humanitarian crisis and stalled progress on development reinforce each other and are interlinked. But our global response is more and more fragmented. We are not keeping pace with the world as it is. The institutions of global governance should work together in coordination to contain, mitigate and reduce risks of all kinds. Networked multilateralism must extend beyond peace and security, encompassing the Bretton Woods institutions, development banks, trade alliances and more. The pandemic is heightening risks across the board. Humanitarian needs are growing, decades of progress on sustainable development are at stake and social unrest is increasing. Many of the countries in the global South have been left hanging, without financial and practical resources. Some middle-income countries face a crushing debt burden as they try to respond. From the start, I have advocated for a comprehensive global response package and for coordinated action on debt through the mobilization of all partners. We need the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to support member countries through enhanced access to facilities and tools, and we need greater resources for the IMF and enhanced support for the World Bank Group and other financial institutions and bilateral mechanisms. In May, together with the Prime Ministers of Canada and Jamaica, I brought Heads of State and Government, leaders of international organizations, representatives from the private sector and civil society together to launch an initiative on financing for development. That initiative focuses on areas that are critical to survival and to building a strong recovery, including global liquidity, financial stability and debt vulnerability, and I look forward to its conclusions next week. But we cannot continue with such ad hoc solutions to systemic, foreseeable global risks. The pandemic is a wake-up call for even more catastrophic challenges that may arise, starting with the climate crisis. If we meet those challenges with the same disunity and disarray that we have seen this year, I fear the worst. We need global governance that is resolute, coordinated, flexible and ready to react to the full range of challenges that we face. In a world of interconnected threats, solidarity is self-interest. Many of the cross-border challenges that we face today, from the climate crisis to rising inequality and cybercrime, involve interest groups, businesses, organizations and entire sectors that are outside traditional concepts of global governance. Such challenges cannot be addressed effectively by States alone. We need to broaden our idea of global governance to take in businesses, civil society, cities and regions, academia and young people. International conventions are not the only way to reach binding agreements for the common good. We need flexible mechanisms in which different stakeholders come together, adopt protocols and codes of conduct, define red lines and create conditions for successful cooperation. Global governance must also recognize our responsibilities to our planet and to future generations. Civil society movements, particularly those led by young people, are global leaders on these issues. Let us face it: global governance mechanisms until now have been exclusive, and the largest group left out in the cold is women - half of humankind. Women watching this week's general debate have a perfect right to feel that they are not represented and that their voices are not valued. The COVID-19 pandemic has proved what is obvious - women's leadership is highly effective. We cannot hope to turn the climate crisis around, reduce social divisions or make sustained peace without the full contributions of all of society. Reformed global governance is about approaches and institutions, which must be reformed and strengthened. We need more, and better, multilateralism that works effectively and delivers for the people we serve. We need more, and better, global governance, based on national sovereignty and expressed through our shared ideals, eloquently expressed in the Charter of the United Nations. The pandemic has illustrated beyond dispute the gaps in our multilateral system. As countries go in different directions, the virus goes in every direction. A rational and equitable approach to vaccination would reduce preventable deaths by prioritizing front-line workers and the most vulnerable. But we have struggled to mobilize the resources needed to ensure that a vaccine is a global public good, available and affordable to all. We urgently need multilateral institutions that can act decisively, based on global consent, for the global good. We need multilateral institutions that are fair, with better representation of the developing world, so that all have a proportional voice at the global table. The General Assembly Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy- fifth Anniversary of the United Nations has created space for a process of reflection on the future of multilateral cooperation and the post-COVID-19 world. I will report back with analysis and recommendations, guided by a common thread of solidarity within and between societies at the national and international levels and with future generations. Our world is no longer bipolar or unipolar; it is moving towards multipolarity. We experienced polarization and fragmentation without effective mechanisms of multilateral governance 100 years ago. The result was the First World War. COVID-19 is casting a dark shadow across the world, but it is also a warning that must spur us to action. We have no choice. Either we come together in global institutions that are fit for purpose, or we will be crushed by divisiveness and chaos.
