Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all, Sir, to congratulate your country on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this very important debate on the
thorny scourge of terrorism, which has become public

enemy number one of the international community at
the dawn of the twenty-first century.
Many countries have suffered nefarious terrorist
acts in recent months, joining a long list of countries
that have been victims of terrorism. The Kingdom of
Morocco expresses its solidarity with the countries
affected by such acts and offers its condolences to the
victims' families. The Kingdom of Morocco takes this
opportunity to reiterate its resolute condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and stresses that nothing can
everjustify a terrorist act. It would also like to reaffirm
that terrorism can not be associated with any religion,
civilization, nationality or ethnic group.

The adoption ofresolution 2178 (2014) in September
2014, following the Security Council summit, reflects
the will of the international community to put an end to
this scourge. It is an appropriate response in light of the
unprecedented spread of terrorism, both in the Middle
East where Da'esh controls large territories in Iraq and
Syria, as well as in the Sahelo-Saharan and Maghreb
regions where Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb are particularly active and where Da'esh has
seized some territory in Libya as a launching pad for a
push into the region.

The arrival of Da'esh in Libya and its rivalry
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb to expand its
influence in the Sahelo-Maghreb area constitutes a
threat to the stability and territorial integrity of the
countries ofthe region. The terrorist attacks against our
brother nation of Tunisia speak to this being Daesh's
avowed goal; hence Morocco's appeal for vigilance
and for the strengthening of regional and international
cooperation so as to curb the spread of terrorist and
organized-crime networks in the region.

Morocco's commitment to helping its Libyan
brothers to overcome their differences and difficulties
by hosting, under the auspices of the United Nations,
the inter-Libyan talks, culminating in the signing in
Morocco on 17 December last of the Libyan political
agreement of Skhirat also stands as one of the many
efforts by which the Kingdom is seeking to prevent
Libya from sliding into the clutches of Da'esh and thus
prevent the destabilization of the entire North African
and Sahel region.

The report of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (S/2016/49)
spelled out in black and white that the deterioration of
the situation in Libya had attracted terrorists seeking
refuge and promoted the trafficking in weapons
destined for terrorist groups located both in the region
and elsewhere.

Terrorist groups, in particular Da'esh, finance
their terrorist activities through the illegal trade in oil
and cultural relics and human trafficking. Resolutions
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) are an appropriate
response that seeks to cut off sources of financing for
terrorism and terrorist organizations. The funds they
acquire, together with a sophisticated communications
strategy that harnesses the most advanced information
and communications technologies, including the
Internet and social networks, have allowed terrorist
organizations to recruit foreign terrorist fighters from
the four corners of the world. that is why we now
have 30,000 such foreign terrorist fighters for more
than 95 countries. It is therefore important to keep an
eagle eye on the implementation of the aforementioned
resolutions and also to ensure that laws are being
drafted that are capable of regulating and halting the
abuse of the Internet, with, of course, full respect for
freedom of expression and human rights.

The report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate on the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2014) sounded the alarm about the
return of foreign terrorist fighters to their countries
of origin and the threat that this poses to countries
and third countries, hence the importance of properly
understanding the repercussions of that threat. In
addition, the report of the Secretary-General drawn
up pursuant to resolution 2195 (2014) acknowledged
that certain terrorist groups are directly linked to
organized-crime networks.

The Kingdom of Morocco attaches particular
importance to international cooperation, the
strengthening of border security, the exchange and
sharing ofintelligence, the use ofINTERPOL's databases
and the roll-out of deradicalization and reintegration
programmes, as we believe that such actions are the
best way to foil terrorists" plans. Morocco played host
to conferences in 2013 and 2015 on border security. In
July 2015, it participated in the Madrid meeting that
culminated in the adoption of a declaration calling
upon us all to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
We also took part in the Washington Nuclear Security
Summit, whose final communique calls for greater
efforts to prevent the obtaining by non-State members
of nuclear or radioactive material for pernicious

purposes. We also took part in the Geneva conference
on violent extremism.
The fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be a perfect opportunity
for us to assess the effectiveness of the Strategy and
to take stock of the Plan of Action on Preventing
Violent Extremism. In addition to such activities, the
Kingdom of Morocco co-chairs with the Kingdom of
the Netherlands the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum
(GCTF). In this respect, we commend the Netherlands,
as all of this is the result of deep-rooted work on the
part of, and cooperation between, our two countries,
and we will seek to build on the work already done by
the United States of America and Turkey along these
lines.

The ministerial meeting of the GCTF adopted in
September 2014 The Hague-Marrakech memorandum
on good practices for a more effective response to the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, in addition
to which Morocco and the Netherlands also chair the
Foreign Terrorist Fighters Working Group within
the GCTF.

At the national level, the Kingdom of Morocco
has developed a comprehensive and coherent approach
based on prevention and action that is fully consistent
with the provisions of the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolutions 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015),
which my country co-sponsored. This approach was
shared on 30 September 2014 when we met with the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Our approach is based on the following.

First, it is based on optimizing security governance,
enhancing and making fit for purpose a legal framework
for counter-terrorism activities, the adoption of relevant
new legislation and vigilance in terms of security.

The second factor is the rollout in 2005 of a
national initiative for human development that is
focused on the individual as a way of fighting against
social ills, exclusion and precarity, and focusing on
the empowerment of women. Women have seen their
status in society enhanced thanks to their engagement
in counter-terrorism efforts and efforts to tackle
violent extremism.

Thirdly, we have focused on reform of religious
practices, notably through the establishment of a
learned council responsible for interpreting the text
of the Koran and the hadith; the training of young
preachers, both men and women, in the precepts of Islam
based on the values of dialogue, tolerance, moderation,
coexistence and respect for others, as espoused by
the Islamic religion; the launch of a deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration programme for foreign
terrorist fighters. Morocco's experience in the field of
training preachers has been shared with several friendly
countries in Africa, in the Arab world and in Europe
through bilateral agreements.

