Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
would like to commend the Mexican presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important
discussion to evaluate the report of the Secretary-
General on enhancing mediation and its support
activities (S/2009/l89). We thank Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his
incisive and comprehensive statement.

Mediation is a strategy widely accepted and
extensively utilized by Member States, including
Nigeria, for the pacific settlement of all forms of
dispute. Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter has
long recognized negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement or other
peaceful means as valuable conflict-resolution
techniques.

The efficiency of mediation was amply
demonstrated in the peaceful resolution of the conflict
over the Bakassi peninsula between Nigeria and its
neighbour, Cameroon. Through intense mediation, the
exercise of political will and commitment to the
international judicial process, the nearly inflamed
situation over the Bakassi region was resolved
amicably.

In several other conflict situations in Africa, Asia
and elsewhere, mediation has proven to be a useful,
inexpensive and less risky peacemaking activity.
Indeed, it remains a tool that needs to be actively
utilized in all existing conflict situations, whether
intra-State or inter-State.

Given the importance of international mediation,
demonstrated by the frequency with which it has been
used to settle all types of conflicts in different parts of
the world, it is regrettable that it has not been given the
requisite attention and support within the United
Nations system. It is in this context that my delegation
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/189), which aims at bringing mediation to the
centre of the peacemaking activities of the United
Nations. My delegation believes that the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, has a
crucial role to play in strengthening the Organization's
mediation capacity. It is the expectation of my
delegation that today's discussion will engender the
outcome necessary to reinforce the mediation efforts of
the United Nations.

International mediation should be viewed as a
specialist endeavour, requiring skills and techniques
such as persuasion and the ability to bargain and to
exercise leverage. The United Nations must therefore
guard against the appointment of international
mediators solely on the basis of their political stature
rather than on the basis of their competence as
mediators. It is necessary that mediators be proficient,
resilient, impartial, experienced and equipped to
manage the complexities of deep-rooted conflicts. They
must be familiar with a wide range of mediation
strategies and tactics in order to effectively deal with
the disputants.

The Mediation Support Unit should possess the
capacity to function in pre-conflict, conflict and post-
conflict situations. It is imperative that the Unit
coordinate its activities with the United Nations early
warning mechanism, and that it function in support of
United Nations post-conflict recovery efforts,
including those of the Peacebuilding Commission.
United Nations mediators should seek to work closely
with their counterparts in regional and subregional
organizations.

Some of those organizations have developed
advanced mediation and dispute settlement
mechanisms that could support the efforts of the United
Nations. The African Union Panel of the Wise, a key
component of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, and the Council of Elders of the
Economic Community of West African States, have
substantial experience in high-profile mediation.
Similarly, the Southern African Development
Community has also demonstrated an enviable capacity
to mediate conflicts in Southern Africa. The United
Nations mediation mechanism could also benefit from
the capacities, goodwill and specialization of some
regional peacemaking non-governmental organizations,
including women's organizations.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate that the success
rate of the United Nations mediatory role will depend
upon how sensitive the Organization is to the
socio-cultural milieu of every conflict. The United
Nations must therefore take concrete measures to
assure the parties to all conflicts of its neutrality and its
receptiveness to local values.

