Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Uganda's assumption of the
stewardship of the Security Council for this month. We
appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
discussion of the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).

We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
which contains an objective analysis of the challenges
and opportunities of post-conflict peacebuilding. While
the challenges addressed in the report may not be new,
the value-added of this report is the fresh perspective
and impetus it could provide on the ways and means of
addressing these challenges in a more timely and
effective manner. Drawing on past experiences, a
closer review of ground realities and expectations and
an extensive process of consultations, the report
outlines an agenda that can guide and better inform our
collective action in forging more coherent, efficient
and predictable responses to the peacebuilding needs of
countries emerging from conflict.

While the report's focus is on the initial two-year
post-conflict period, it is good to note that it addresses
a wide range of policy issues and practical tools in a
manner that retains the broader and long-term
perspective of peacebuilding. But since there is a
proven risk of relapse into conflict within the first five
years, it is important for the international community
to devote particular attention to doing things right in
the immediate aftermath of conflict.

It is true that the challenges are immense in that
period, but so are the hopes and aspirations of the
people affected by conflict, who are determined to
seize the opportunity of peace and to turn a new page
for a better and more secure and prosperous future.
That is what must happen. It is those people who have
the greatest interest and highest stakes in
peacebuilding. It is therefore only logical that they
have full leadership and ownership over the process.

However, since countries emerging from conflict
face complex and fragile situations, and most often
lack the capacities and resources to overcome the
challenges on their own, it is incumbent upon the
international community to help them to lay
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
That partnership is at the heart of successful
peacebuilding. It comes as no surprise that the report of
the Secretary-General is structured around those
central pillars of national ownership, with the good
governance and honest and sincere purpose that are
essential. That must also include international
partnership, with sufficient resources and the will to
understand, not dominate.

Today, peacebuilding is an established component
of the comprehensive approach to conflict prevention
and resolution. It is a direct manifestation of the
interlinkage between peace and development. The
general principles of effective peacebuilding are well
recognized. As the Secretary-General has observed, it
entails a common strategic vision based on clearly
defined and agreed national priorities, and coherent
and concerted action backed by the required capacity
and resources aligned with that strategy.

We believe that, in order to succeed, that
endeavour must be people-centric, responsible to the
specific needs and circumstances and designed to
reinforce their confidence in and support for the peace
process. The central objectives of establishing security,
promoting inclusive political processes and
reconciliation, delivering early tangible peace
dividends and building national capacities for
governance, economic recovery and development
should all be sensitive to that human dimension of
peacebuilding.

While there is a fair degree of convergence on the
principles and objectives of peacebuilding, the main
challenge is to translate it fully into practice. The true
test of the Secretary-General's report will be in the
implementation of his recommendations. That requires,
above all, the political will and commitment, not only
of national actors but also of international partners, to
stand behind and implement a common strategy, not
one that is divergent. While the latter need to
demonstrate more understanding and flexibility to
align their support with national priorities and to
eliminate conditionalities, the former, on their part,
also need to inculcate the required responsibility and
values of governance that correspond to ownership and
infuse confidence among all partners.

The Secretary-General is right in saying - and
this is very important - that investment in national
capacity-building should be part of the entry, rather
than - in that well-known and oft-used phrase - the
exit strategy. Priority should be on identifying, tapping
and harnessing the civilian capacities available
nationally before resorting to regional or international
expertise, as required. I would now like to remind my
colleagues of what Mr. Brahimi said in this very
Council on 20 May 2008.

"We should have as many international staff as
we need to get the job done, but not one single
staff member more than that. Our goal in the
mission, individually and collectively, should be
from the outset to work ourselves out of a job."
(S/PV.5895, p. 10)

The most ominous gap, however, is in funding
and resources. The various recommendations contained
in the report aimed at generating rapid, flexible and
predictable funding would require cooperation and
support from Member States, in particular from donors,
as well as enhanced collaboration with the international
financial institutions, which have not been so
forthcoming to this institution in the past and which
would need to show more operational flexibility in the
assistance programmes for countries emerging from
conflict, considering their plight and special
circumstances.

From the point of view of enhancing national
ownership and capacity, it should also be very
important that most of the funding also be provided
through governmental channels. But it would make a
lot of sense to devote attention, from the very outset, to
mobilizing international resources, especially through
better management and the exploitation of natural
resources, for the benefit of a country and its people.

Peacebuilding is a complex undertaking
involving parallel and coordinated efforts on the
security, political, humanitarian and development
fronts. The United Nations, with its wide-ranging
mechanisms, capacity and expertise, is well-placed to
coordinate and lead international action in this field -
of course, with the support of other partners,
particularly the World Bank.

We welcome the commitment of the Secretary-
General to improve the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations. The Peacebuilding Commission, with
its unique composition and specific mandate, has a
pivotal role in those efforts. Strengthening the
Commission and utilizing its full potential is therefore
essential in advancing the peacebuilding objectives of
the United Nations. For effective responses in the
immediate aftermath of conflict, it would make more
sense if the Peacebuilding Commission were engaged
from the very outset of the involvement of the United
Nations, particularly where integrated peacekeeping
missions are deployed. The Commission also has a
critical role to play in the follow-up to the Secretary-
General's report. Full implementation of the report
would also entail the engagement and contribution of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the success
of peacebuilding efforts will be gauged eventually by
the tangible benefits and results on the ground, not
merely by the organizational skill that we have to show
here. We hope that this debate, which to us is part of
the process that began in the Peacebuilding
Commission last week, will contribute to that same
objective, which is at the very heart of the Secretary-
General's excellent report.
