Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): The Republic of
the Marshall Islands aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Federated States
of Micronesia on behalf of the Pacific small island
developing States.

I wish to thank the delegation of Sweden for
convening this debate and to congratulate it warmly
on assuming the Security Council presidency for this
month. I also wish to extend congratulations on behalf
of my Government to the new members of the Security
Council. I wish them every success during their tenure.
Moreover, through you, Mr. President, I would also
like to convey my personal gratitude to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallstrom.
It is wonderful to have met her in person and to have
witnessed her exemplary leadership. Furthermore, I
would also like to congratulate the Secretary-General
and to thank him for taking on such a tremendous
challenge at this time.

As we begin this new calendar year, it is of
paramount importance that the Security Council be
better able to demonstrate credible and responsive
leadership. If indeed the world is at a moment where
a large question mark hangs over multilateralism, then
confidence must be strengthened.

The Marshall Islands is a small nation but it is
very much a full and equal Member of the United
Nations - one whose deeper history is also marked
by the imprint of global conflict and threat. Our firm
view is that more proactive approaches are needed to
address to conflict prevention, and stronger political
will is necessary to drive it forward. That will further
build global confidence and avoid or minimize security
disasters before they occur.

We fully support the Council's increased attention
and appropriate engagement on the role of women and
young women in conflict prevention and resolution. The
Marshall Islands affirms the Pacific Islands Forum's
Regional Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
adopted in 2012, and we call for renewed efforts to
take it forward. I do not see the treatment of gender
and security as something rooted in an ideological high
ground or any particular political agenda. Rather, I
urge the Council to look at it through a very practical
lens, and consider the impacts upon, and the active role
of, half of the world's population in addressing peace
and security.

I would call the Council's attention to the July
2015 open debate on peace and security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS), which
was convened by the presidency of New Zealand (see S/PV.7499). The debate revealed new dimensions of
security analysis across SIDS regions and it should
not be an isolated event. It is imperative that the
Council establish a regular agenda item or regularized
treatment of this topic. Small islands States make up
nearly 20 per cent of the membership of the United
Nations. Our populations are small, our water is vast,
and our location often sits between the edges of major
and often conflicting global Powers. Yet based on
the Council's agenda, one would think that we barely
exist. However, basic math reveals that the Council is
overlooking concerning emerging trends across our
region. Long-term risks of instability are growing
and are coupled with growing youth populations and
overwhelming unemployment.

The treatment of our security cannot be considered
apart from that of much larger geostrategic interaction.
For many, including those in the Pacific, our baseline
is State fragility and we are uniquely vulnerable to
external shocks. Others might see our sovereignty and
marine resources asjust a string ofpearls to be collected
in a contest between the growing rivalries of major
world Powers that is fought across the Pacific Ocean.

Our Pacific regional statement made a compelling
case for increased attention to the relationship between
climate change and security, where there are important
linkages within and across all regions. As a low-lying
nation, it is important that we understand such linkages
in the wider security and political context. We recall the
Council's 2011 presidential statement on climate and
security (S/PRST/2011/15), which states that there are
security implications on the loss of territory for low-
lying nations and the risk of aggravating certain threats
to international peace and security. Those are not words
to be ignored. They must be understood in regions like
ours where fragility is a worsening baseline.

I urge the Council in its future work not only
to strengthen engagement on conflict prevention
resolution, but also to assure that there is an agenda
item and regularized treatment of small island States.
It is unlikely that we will be at the immediate front
of conflicts, but the longer-term trend points in very
dangerous directions. If the Council is serious about
conflict prevention, then it should take to heart our
voice and that of other small island nations.

