Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I would like to warmly welcome you to New York,
Mr. President. It is a pleasure to see you again only a
few days after our meeting in Nigeria. I would also like
to welcome His Excellency the former President Pierre
Buyoya and thank him for his comments on behalf ofthe
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission.
The Secretary-General is of course always welcome in
our midst, and it was a pleasure to hear his perspective
on the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. I would like to thank the delegation
of Chad for organizing this important debate and for
the excellent concept note (S/2014/879, annex) it has
provided to guide our deliberations.

We have listened carefully to our briefers and
drawn some lessons from their comments. In November
2013, the Secretary-General and the President of the
World Bank Group made a tour of the Sahel region and
visited some countries, including Chad, where they met
with President Idriss Deby Itno. The nexus between
peace and security and development was extensively
discussed. Central to that was an appreciation of
the critical significance of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Today's debate is therefore a continuation
ofthat discussion held in N'Djamena, and we believe it
is crucial for us to deliberate on it today.

The concept note highlights four important
challenges to the efforts of both the African Union
and the United Nations to deliver effectively on their
cooperative peacekeeping tasks. They are, first,
improving institutional collaboration between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union; secondly,
planning for and managing mission transitions; thirdly,
enhancing the prospects for rapid deployment and
fourthly, financing AU peace operations.

Concerning the challenge of improving institutional
collaboration between the United Nations and the
AU, we believe that moving from context-specific to
more practicable mechanisms for peacekeeping will
enhance their cooperation. The inherent difficulty in
this is the perennial problem of how to operationalize
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, designed in a different era of global regional

security collaboration. The ongoing conflicts in the
African region make the case for a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, in line with
the principles of Chapter VIII of the Charter. Indeed
the challenge of achieving more balanced institutional
collaboration and a more effective United Nations-AU
strategic peackeeping partnership occurs not only at
the organizational level between both institutions but
also, more essentially, at the political level.

Interms of operational challenges in the management
of mission transitions and rapid deployment, we believe
that more could be done to enhance United Nations-
AU capacity-building programmes, joint assessment
missions and planning exercises to aid the effective
performance of the AU peacekeeping capabilities.
In that regard, it would be appropriate for the High-
level Panel to Review Peacekeeping Operations to
consult closely with the African Union and to provide
recommendations to further strengthen United Nations-
AU cooperation in addressing operational challenges in
AU peacekeeping efforts.

It is essential that coordinated efforts be
undertaken with the African Union Commission to
develop its military, police, civilian, technical, logistic
and administrative capabilities. A cursory overview
of United Nations peacekeeping operations since 1948
indicates that 32 of the 69 peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the United Nations have been in Africa.
This situation has led the AU to undertake major steps
to enhance its peacekeeping efforts on the continent,
including the establishment of an African Stand-by
Force. A major challenge in those efforts has been
financial resources. That is highlighted in resolution
1809 (2008), which calls for enhanced predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
United Nations mandates.

The Prodi and Obasanjo Panels both examined
alternative financial sources for the AU's peace
operations in keeping with resolution 1809 (2008), which
accents the responsibility of regional organizations to
secure financial resources, including through soliciting
contributions from donors to fund their operations. So
far, neither of the recommendations of the two Panels
has produced major results. In its efforts to meet its
financial challenges in the context of peacekeeping
missions, the AU has sought authorization for the use
of United Nations-assessed contributions for AU peace
operations. That is in line with the Prodi report (see S/2008/813), which also recommends the establishment
of a multi-donor trust fund for the purpose of
supporting African Union peacekeeping capacity.
Effecting those recommendations, including enhancing
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
the financial resources of the African Union when it
undertakes peacekeeping activities under Security
Council mandates, will, we believe, avail the AU of
predictable funding to meet its peacekeeping efforts.

In terms of collaboration and coordination, Nigeria
supports the current level of deepened interrelation
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council through the
holding of annual joint consultations between Addis
Ababa and New York. We also see merit in the close
collaboration between the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat, as well as the institutional
mechanisms put in place, such as the Joint Task Force
and the desk-to-desk collaboration. Those mechanisms
help to bring together the senior leadership and focal
points in both organizations to discuss issues of
mutual interest. More attention should also be paid to
information management in order to improve synergy
in the implementation of mandates. Evidence of the
ongoing cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU can be seen in several peacekeeping operations
across Africa, notably the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
operations in South Sudan, Mali, Guinea-Bissau and,
most recently, in the Central African Republic.

Finally, as the United Nations-AU peacekeeping
partnership continues to evolve, we see a need for
the current collaboration between the two institutions
to be intensified in order to consolidate the gains
already achieved. Constructive interaction among
members of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council on substantive
issues in peacekeeping remains relevant to creating
a cost-effective and mutually beneficial United
Nations-AU peacekeeping partnership. A strategic
framework embodying a common vision for such
cooperation - a lot of which you, Mr. President,
outlined in your statement - and your road map for
its implementation can suitably guide that interaction.

