Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a great
honour for me to address the Council also on behalf of
the Permanent Representative of Jordan, His Excellency
Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein, and His Excellency
Bruno Stagno Ugarte of Costa Rica. As the three
former Presidents of the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), we have closely followed the relationship
between the Council and the Court in the past 10 years.
A generic debate on that relationship is very timely, and
we are grateful to you, Mr. President, for initiating it.
Like others, we would suggest that the Council discuss
the issue at regular intervals.

In the early days of the Court, the debates in the
Council revolved largely around the use of article
16 of the Rome Statute, which gives the Council the
competence to defer investigations and prosecutions
for a period of 12 months. Those debates led to some
of the most controversial and questionable resolutions
to come out of the Council, namely, resolutions 1422
(2002) and 1487 (2003), which we consider contrary to
both the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome
Statute. Today, thankfully, that topic belongs to the
past, although it would serve the Council's interest to
be better prepared for possible deferral requests in the
future.

At the heart of today's political debate is the other
competence that the Rome Statute gives to the Council,
namely, its authority to refer situations to the Court.
The Council has used that competence only twice in 10
years - in 2005, on the situation in Darfur and, in 2011,
on Libya. However, that is still more frequently than
most of us expected when the Statute entered into force.
Supporters of the Court have generally welcomed such
referrals as breakthroughs for international criminal
justice. The 2005 decision on Darfur (see resolution 1593 (2005)) was made in an overall climate that was
difficult for the Court. The Libya referral (see resolution 1970 (2011)) seemed to illustrate the preparedness of
the Council to act swiftly to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes and was even by a unanimous
vote.

Nevertheless, we believe that today, our assessment
must be more calibrated. The referral decisions of the
Council have proven to be a mixed blessing for the
Court and for international criminal justice as they
were driven by political convenience as much as by
the desire to establish justice. The referral decisions
were significant in the history of international criminal
justice but they came at a high cost for the Court. The
Court was accused of politicization, of bias against a
particular region and of manipulation by powerful
countries that chose to stay outside the Rome Statute,
and it found itself with very limited support from
its constituency. It is therefore paying the price for
the decisions of the Council, and sometimes the lack
thereof.

Obviously, that is not in the interest of the Court, and
more broadly justice, or in the interest of the Security
Council. The Council should therefore take several steps
to move towards a more symbiotic relationship with the
ICC as an independent judicial institution. In order to
genuinely advance accountability, several aspects of
the Council's practice would have to be addressed in
future referrals. Most important, the Council must back
up its referral decisions with measures that enforce
cooperation. A referred State's obligation to cooperate
with the Court is based solely on the Council's powers
under Chapter VII. A lack of cooperation by that State
is therefore a violation of its obligation under Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Nevertheless, the Council has been notoriously
silent, or even tacitly acquiescent, in most instances
where the Court required its backing. The Council does
not even have a mechanism to deal with notifications of
non-cooperation by the Court - a serious shortcoming
that should be urgently addressed. Our colleague from
Togo and other speakers mentioned that earlier in
today's debate. An important challenge in that respect
may face the Council once the Court has decided on
the admissibility challenge put forward by the Libyan
Government.

Closely linked to that is the question of the
financing of judicial Court activity triggered by a
referral decision. In referring situations to the ICC, the
Council effectively uses the Court as an alternative to
the establishment of an ad hoc tribunal, which is a very
cost-efficient alternative, as a comparison with other
tribunals illustrates. Both the Relationship Agreement
between the Court and the United Nations and the
Rome Statute clearly indicate that the costs arising from
such referrals should therefore be borne by the United
Nations budget, subject to a decision by the General
Assembly. We do not think that the independence of ad
hoc tribunals has been undermined by the fact that they
were financed by the United Nations membership.

Finally, the Council should delete the language
exempting certain individuals from the Court's
jurisdiction in future referral decisions. Such
formulations corroborate the suspicion of selectivity
in creating accountability and reflect an ideology that
we hope the Council has overcome. Also, they may not
withstand the judicial scrutiny of the Court, should the
occasion arise.

In addition to subjecting the language that it has
used in the past to a fundamental review, the Council
should also do what is necessary to address some ofthe
problems that have arisen in connection with referrals.
In particular, the rules concerning complementarity
should be clearly reflected in such decisions, in
accordance with article 19 of the Rome Statute. The
Statute always gives primacy to the jurisdiction
exercised by the national authorities but it also provides
for very clear rules governing such jurisdiction. Finally,
referral resolutions should stipulate that the obligation
of the referred State to cooperate is of course based on
the Rome Statute in its entirety.

In that way, the Council could prevent discussions
suggesting that referred States would have to respect
only parts of the Rome Statute. Indeed, it is the integrity
of the Statute that makes the Court deliver justice in
an independent and credible manner, and thereby
contributes a fundamental building block to sustainable
peace.

The Council has made important advances in the
area of accountability. It should now make full use of
the potential offered through the Rome Statute system.
A genuine commitment to accountability also entails
immunity agreements contrary to international law not
being endorsed by the Council.

Ultimately, the political challenge for the Security
Council will often be to square the principles of peace
and justice. That is often not an easy task, and we clearly
need more and more inclusive discussions on that
challenge. However, we find it difficult to understand
why the Council is unable to make a simple and
straightforward statement on accountability concerning
the situation in Syria. There is ample evidence that
crimes against humanity and other international crimes
are being committed by the parties to the conflict. The
Council should therefore call for accountability in that
situation and ultimately, if there is genuine political
will, refer the situation to the Court.

The activation of the Court's jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression, hopefully in 2017, will create an
additional connection between the Council and the
International Criminal Court. The Kampala consensus
preserves the competence of the Council under Article
39 of the Charter. At the same time, the Court's
exercise of jurisdiction is not ultimately contingent
upon the Council's decisions. Therefore, both legally
and politically, the Kampala consensus strikes a careful
balance.

