Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation has taken note of the fact
that the Government of Haiti is continuing its efforts to
consolidate democracy in the country and to resolve the
various economic, social and institutional problems which
impede its development. Nevertheless, the efforts made in
the transition to democracy in Haiti continue to be
threatened, as the security climate in the country remains

 

only relative because of the increase in crime and the
presence of groups or persons with links to the previous de
facto regime who could undertake destabilizing actions
against the legitimately elected Government.

As indicated by the President of Haiti, Rene Preval, in
his communication addressed to the Secretary-General of
last 13 November (S/1996/956), progress has been made
towards solving Haiti's security problems thanks to the
assistance given by the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH) to the Haitian National Police (HNP).
However, he indicated that assistance from the international
community continues to be necessary in order to guarantee
a stable and secure environment in the country.

Honduras fully shares the wish expressed by the
Government of Haiti that the mandate of UNSMIH be
extended. We believe that the necessary climate of security
must exist in Haiti to enable its Government to devote its
full attention to solving the major economic and social
problems it faces and to promoting reconciliation among the
Haitian people.

If violence in Haiti has diminished in recent months,
this has been due to the training received so far by the
Haitian National Police from the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti. However, the police has not yet attained
the level of experience and confidence necessary to control
the problems of crime, drug trafficking and the presence of
armed groups opposed to the Government.

The extension of the UNSMIH mandate is necessary
to complete the professionalization of the Haitian police and
to continue motivating its performance in Port-au-Prince
and the rest of the country, and thus to be able to create the
secure and stable environment needed by the people and
Government of Haiti in order to promote national
reconciliation, strengthen the administration of justice,
consolidate the democratic system and stimulate the
country's economic and social development.

For those reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution.

