The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

On behalf of the Government of Argentina, I wish
to welcome the appointment of Ambassador Sandra
Honore, while also highlighting the fact that she is the
first woman to be appointed Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I again reaffirm the commitment and the firm
will of Argentina to support the people of Haiti. The
cooperation of our country has always adapted to the
needs stated by the Government of Haiti and the real
challenges on the ground in that country. The presence
ofArgentina is characterized by strong emphasis on the
consolidation of Haitian institutions, respect for human
rights and the people's full enjoyment of democracy.
That commitment is based on several pillars, but
essentially on a vision of South-South cooperation
through a considerable effort in human and financial
terms in more than 200 projects, which are not based
on assistance and which have as a central focus the
development of capacity among Haitians themselves. It
is only in that way that we can ensure true sustainability
to support the development of our brother country.

In that context, we mention as an example the
market garden programme Pro Huerta, which has meant
investment in technical assessment and agricultural
supplies, both of which essentially make it possible
for Haitians to generate their own productive capacity.
That does not mean that we are neglecting essential
emergency needs. We have demonstrated that in actions
such as support for the national programme for school
canteens, in response to the specific needs of Haitian
authorities for food donations, while at the same time
cooperating with the project itself.

Argentina's commitment is also reflected in the
broader context of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States, which has resolved to continue
making efforts to cooperate with the Government of
Haiti. I wish to highlight the activities of the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR), which committed
funds to rehabilitate the public hospital in Corail, in
the southernmost area of Haiti. That hospital bears the
name of President Nestor Kirchner, the first Secretary-
General of UNASUR. Measuring more than 1,200
square metres, it was inaugurated in June 2013. Together
with coordination efforts for health care between
the Governments of Cuba, Venezuela and Haiti, this
initiative resulted in the repair and expansion of the
community hospital. We believe that it is essential to
respond to the social and economic development needs
of the Haitian people and to strengthen institutions in
that country.

We note with satisfaction, therefore, new signs
of progress in Haiti, thanks to the efforts of its
Government, international assistance and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in particular
the establishment of the transitional Electoral Council.
The decision taken yesterday by the President of Haiti
to send to the legislature an electoral time line was
auspicious. We are convinced that, with functioning
institutions that can ensure democracy, Haiti's problems
would be resolved faster. There should be no reduction
in the number of democratic institutions for the Haitian
people.

A reduction in the number of displaced people
living in camps, after the relocation of more than
34,000 people, has brought about an 82 per cent decline
in internally displaced persons between 2010 and
2013. However, we are concerned about the decline in
international assistance and lapses in basic services,
especially drinking water, which is crucial in order to
overcome the spread of cholera.

On efforts by the Haitian Government to promote
development and institutional stability, especially the
"five Es" programme, we would like to point to the
establishment of institutions linked to the rule of law,
especially programmes to strengthen justice, municipal
administration and civic participation. I would like
also to highlight positive developments in the judiciary
with reference to several long-standing cases of severe
violations of human rights.

There has been progress in the strategic
development plan in accordance with the priorities for
economic and social development established by the
Government of the Republic of Haiti. Haiti has also
played a remarkable role as the temporary chair of the
Caribbean Community and Common Market.

We appeal for the continued efforts of Haitian
political actors to reach consensus, which could lead to
the long-postponed elections, thereby overcoming the
political impasse.

During this period, the security situation has
shown relative stability, with some clear indications of
a drop in crime rates. From that point of View, we can
highlight that MINUSTAH has reached its objective of
creating a secure and stable environment, but it remains
to be seen if that will be sustainable.

The Haitian National Police has shown significant
progress, both in the number and training of cadets. We
applaud the fact that, by November, the Haitian police
force will be over 11,200 strong. However, we stress
the need to be cautious when subcontracting civilian
personnel to fulfil security roles. In such cases, the
responsibility of ensuring competence always lies
with the State. As a result, the efforts of countries
that are members of the Mission should from now on
be focused on specific actions aimed at developing a
training programme for Haitian security forces, thereby
strengthening the Haitian National Police, which is key
when it comes to the process of genuinely reducing
the number of personnel in MINUSTAH. A gradual
and orderly transfer of the responsibility for ensuring
security to the Haitian authorities must be achieved.

Continuing with the current trend of progress in
security and gradually strengthening the capacity of
the Haitian National Police are complex variables on
which compliance with the guidelines established
by the Mission consolidation plan depend to a great
degree. If the conditions of those two variables are not
met, we run the risk of a vicious cycle, which could
extend the presence of MINUSTAH, with a further risk
of the situation deteriorating.

Argentina supports the continued presence of
MINUSTAH, as long as it is required by local authorities
and is justified by the prevailing security situation and
the requirements for reconstruction. For that reason, we
wish to highlight that our country supports the Mission
consolidation plan for 2013-2016, and we share the
objectives to reduce MINUSTAH forces in accordance
with the proposal in the plan, based on improvements
in capacity-building among the police, the development
of electoral capacity, the rule of law, human rights
and good governance. In that sense, we understand
that all missions need to have time tables and dates,
but a day on a calendar does not always represent the
whole day. A day on a calendar is just a number on the
calendar. Bearing in mind that it might be cloudy, or
there are chances of storms or rain, let such days serve
as a warning, The forecast for the day might be rain,
showers or even storms, but that forecast might also be
sunny, with clear skies. We believe and are convinced
that MINUSTAH should not only set a date but also a
forecast and that forecast should be one when the sun
starts coming out for the entire people of Haiti, a sun
that represents hope, ensures sustainable development,
harmonious development with respect for institutions,
economic development and the full and legitimate
enjoyment of democracy.

Beyond our bilateral commitment towards Haiti
and the efforts Argentina is promoting through regional
organizations such as UNASUR, I wish to remind
everyone that our commitment is also demonstrated
by the presence of more than 572 personnel, 38 of
whom are women. Since 2004, when MINUSTAH was
established, Argentina, through its armed forces, has
mobilized more than 12,000 personnel who have been
present in various contingents within Haiti. In that
military component, we wish to highlight the existence
of the field hospital, which is a resource for health care
and hospital assistance for the entire United Nations
contingent, and highly valued by the entire mission.

Lastly, I wish to conclude by highlighting
Argentina's interest in continuing to participate in the
efforts of the international community in the interest of
peace and security. In that context, I wish to highlight a
particular commitment we naturally have in our region
of Latin America and the Caribbean. For us, Haiti is
part of our region. My presence here today is intended to
demonstrate the special interest we, as Argentina, have
in the region, with all of our mechanisms of integration.
I hope that Haiti will find its path as an autonomous
nation, one in which it can deploy its full potential. We
are doubly committed to the United Nations through
the Security Council because of what the Stabilization
Mission means, and we are also committed as Latin
American brethren.

To conclude, I wish to briefly refer to something
I believe is important when it comes to the spirit that
should guide us through this mission in Haiti.

Fifty years ago today, not far from here, in
Washington, DC, on 28 August 1963, Martin Luther
King, Jr., gave that memorable speech where he spoke
about his dream. "I have a dream" are the words he
used. To conclude, I would like to read a very short part
of that speech.

"I have a dream that one day every valley shall
be exalted, every hill and mountain shall be made
low, the rough places will be made plain, and the
crooked places will be made straight, and the glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
it together."

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

