Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda joins the other
members of the Security Council in expressing
condolences and sympathies to the Government and
people of China following the deaths, injuries and
destruction after the earthquake that occurred there
today.

I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.

The peace process in the Middle East is at a
critical and delicate phase, and the situation remains
tense. Uganda commends the international and regional
efforts that have been undertaken to restart
negotiations, including the recent United States efforts
to start indirect talks between Israel and Palestine. We
also commend the willingness of both Israel and the
Palestinian leadership to hold indirect peace talks.

However, despite the efforts that have been made
to restart negotiations, we are concerned that no
progress has been made. We remain convinced that a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle East
problem will be achieved only through negotiations.
We call for the immediate resumption of negotiations
with a View to achieving a comprehensive peace based
on the vision of two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

We commend the continued efforts of the
Palestinians towards fulfilling their obligations under
the Road Map, particularly in the security sector, where
they have continued to maintain law and order, and in
the areas of economic development and State-building.
We are concerned about Israel's continued construction
of settlements in the occupied territory, which is not

consistent with its obligations under the Road Map. We
consider Israel's decision to build 1,600 new homes in
East Jerusalem and other units near Bethlehem, as well
as the inclusion of the two mosques on the list of
Israeli national heritage, to be moves that threaten and
undermine the trust that is so sorely needed. We call
for a complete freeze on all settlement activity,
including natural growth.

The deterioration of the security situation is a
matter of concern. We deplore the continued rocket
attacks on Israel and Israel's continued air strikes on
Gaza, which have intensified during the reporting
period. These attacks do not help bring the parties to
the negotiating table; they only alienate them further.
We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint,
avoid further escalation and fully implement resolution
1860 (2009).

We reiterate our concern over the grave
humanitarian situation caused by the continued
blockade imposed on Gaza. While welcoming the
limited opening-up by Israel that has helped a limited
number of United Nations projects to start, we feel this
does not go far enough. We call for an end to the
blockade of Gaza, as called for in resolution 1860
(2009).

We are also concerned that the Palestinian groups
have yet to overcome their differences. These divisions
are detrimental to overall negotiations on the Middle
East question and to efforts for the reconstruction and
development of Gaza. We therefore call on all
Palestinians to resolve their differences and achieve
unity within the framework of the intra-Palestinian
dialogue.

On Lebanon, we welcome the national dialogue
that took place recently. We see it as a positive step
towards resolving the outstanding issues in Lebanon.

