Mr. Strommen (Norway): At the outset I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, President-elect
Xanana Gusmao, Mr. Annabi and Mr. Alkatiri for their
statements to the Council this morning. Allow me also
to congratulate Mr. Gusmao on his election as the first
President of an independent East Timor, as well as the
East Timorese people and the United Nations for the
excellent manner in which the presidential elections
were carried out earlier this month. This is indeed a
promising sign for the future of a democratic and stable
East Timor.

Norway commends the Secretary-General for his
report of 17 April 2002. It contains recommendations
as to a clear and achievable mandate for the successor
mission to United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), and it provides an exit
strategy with benchmarks for the gradual downsizing
of the mission. In our view, this is an outstanding
example of mission planning. Moreover, the
consultative planning process and the Integrated
Mission Task Force have clearly contributed to the
comprehensive nature of the recommendations,
including the call for coordination to ensure a smooth
transition towards a framework for medium- and long-
term development assistance.
Norway supports the mandate, structure and
overall timetable for the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) as set out in the
Secretary General's report. We fully concur with the
view that a peacekeeping presence is necessary until
the national police and armed forces gain the capacity
required to enforce the law and ensure internal and
external security. At the same time, we are pleased with
the report's indication that UNTAET's presence will be
reduced from the current level and that the report offers
a sensible schedule for reducing the international
presence while transferring responsibilities to the East
Timorese. Sustainable transition will require the
effective Timorization of all public institutions.

Under the current circumstances the
establishment of a well functioning public
administration continues to be the greatest challenge
for the United Nations in East Timor. This is also a key
prerequisite for the new State's long-term stability. The
proposed downscaling should therefore be undertaken
on the basis of an in-depth assessment of the
challenges faced by, and of the corresponding capacity
within, the national administration. Needless to say,
revisions should be made in close cooperation with the
East Timorese authorities. Finally, the need to
prioritize training of personnel to fill the large gaps in
the staff of the administration is urgent and cannot be
overemphasised.

Peaceful and constructive relations between East
Timor and Indonesia are crucial for the stability and
prosperity of the region. We are therefore pleased that
bilateral relations between the two nations continue to
improve. The bilateral meeting in February was a
positive step in that regard. Notwithstanding this, there
are still pending bilateral issues. We would here like to
underscore the importance of the ongoing negotiations
on judicial cooperation to permit the prosecution of
alleged perpetrators of serious crimes committed in
1999. Another urgent matter is the completion of
border demarcation and normalization in the border
areas. We therefore welcome the recent launch of the
border demarcation survey.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that,
in addition to the support provided by the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and the United Nations development agencies, bilateral
development assistance will be crucial for the
establishment of sustainable Government structures
and institutions. My Government hosted the donors
meeting for East Timor in December 2001. We now
stand ready to fulfil our assurances of continued
assistance, and we urge other countries to do the same.
To facilitate future development cooperation, the
Norwegian Minister for International Development,
Ms. Hilde Johnson, intends to sign a memorandum of
understanding during the donors conference to be held
in Dili in May.

Justice, reconciliation and effective
accountability are essential elements of East Timor's
long-term stability. Norway attaches great importance
to the work undertaken by the Serious Crimes Unit and
the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation. Accordingly, my Government provides
both human and financial resources to those
institutions, and we support the Secretary-General's
proposal to accord efforts within the justice sector high
priority, including after independence. Nevertheless,
the lack of qualified personnel continues to be a matter
of concern. In that regard, we welcome the short-term
measures undertaken by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to reduce the current backlog in
the appeal court. In the longer run, however, the
international community will need to work to support
much-needed capacity-building in the justice sector.

I should like to conclude by congratulating
Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello and by
expressing Norway's appreciation for the outstanding
way in which he has led the Mission since 1999. We
would also like to welcome the newly appointed
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, and to wish him every success in
his assignment. Finally, I should like to applaud the
leadership and people of East Timor for the impressive
progress achieved thus far and to assure them that my
Government will continue to support their efforts to
consolidate the foundations of a stable and fully
functioning democratic State.

