Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to thank you, Sir, for having
chosen as the theme for this debate, in the context of
your presidency this month, the African dimension in
the work of the Security Council. It is to your credit,
and to the credit of your country, that you have done
so. But that is no surprise, because we are conscious of
the commitment of Brazil - a country that is so close
to the culture and civilization of Africa - to the cause
of the continent, which suffered the scourge of
colonization and slavery, and which was divided up
among Powers with disregard for the ethnic, historical
or cultural unity of the peoples affected.

As a consequence of that painful history, which
ended only in the 1960s - thanks, in particular, to the
action of the United Nations - Africa has been
dragged into many fratricidal conflicts and has been
rendered vulnerable to new predators, such as those
who traffic in arms, as well as in vital natural resources
and precious stones - the infamous blood diamonds.

In an Africa that has been torn apart and ruined
by inter-State conflict and civil war, devastating
pandemics have spread to a greater extent than
anywhere else in the world. I am referring not only to
HIV/AIDS, but also, lest we forget, to malaria, a
disease that still kills millions of Africans every year,
with the result that life expectancy on the continent is
the lowest in the world, with entire professions,
including teachers, being decimated by the disease.

Thus, the fact that most of the Council's work
concerns Africa and that Africa receives the bulk of the
resources allocated for peacekeeping clearly reflects
the seriousness and the scope of the problem the
continent faces and demonstrates the extent of the
international community's mobilization and unity in
tackling the problem.

The Council has strengthened its peacekeeping
missions in the affected regions, regularly honing their
mandates so that they can act effectively, putting out
the fires raging in entire countries, such as in Sierra
Leone and Liberia, and putting an end to the dangerous
course of civil war in order to prevent the repetition of
crimes against humanity and genocide, separating the
parties until the attainment of a lasting, peaceful
solution enabling all of a country's sons and daughters
to take part in its development, with equal rights. That
is the case, for example, in Cote d'Ivoire, and we hope
that the mediation process under way there will soon
produce irreversible positive results.

As the representative of Denmark has just stated,
the Council is aware of the linkages between the
conflicts of a single subregion, such as West Africa.
There, the Council established a regional Office in
Dakar to coordinate the work on the ground of the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General. That
subregional approach has been employed with a certain
degree of success, but the road to be travelled remains
long and arduous in the Great Lakes subregion, as the
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - a
country as large as Europe, with immense resources -
is linked to most of that country's neighbours. The
Council is taking action by reinforcing its resources in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time, it is not neglecting the subregional dimension or
the resolution of the problems in neighbouring
countries - essential for finding a rapid solution to the
Congolese crisis, for which we all fervently hope. In
that context, we appreciate the Council's successive
missions to observe on the ground the results of its
efforts in recent years.

Also at the subregional level, to assist the
brotherly countries of the Mano River subregion -
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone - His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, in cooperation with the Secretary-
General, has undertaken mediation efforts in the spirit
of the February 2002 Rabat summit, so that those
countries can engage in dialogue and cooperation in
order to prevent, as has been mentioned, cross-border
incursions from various directions and to tackle the
problem of mercenaries.

The Kingdom of Morocco has made significant
efforts to contribute to peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a country that is very dear to
us, as we were, at the time of the first crisis - in 1960,
at the height of the cold war, when we ourselves had
just achieved independence - among the first
countries to contribute troops to the peacekeeping force
in Congo. Today, we continue to extend our support in
the very troubled eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, so that the country can recover
its stability and play its essential role in that part of
Africa.
We were also present at the time when the United
Nations, in very difficult circumstances, was faced
with the Somali crisis. As well, we recently responded
to the appeal of the Security Council when it acted to
stabilize the situation in Cote d'Ivoire and to assist in
the process of restoring peace in a country that had
been the guiding light in the West African subregion, a
country with which we have had brotherly ties for a
very long time, even before the creation of the present-
day States or the European colonization.

We can all be very proud of the efforts for peace
that the Council has carried out in the Sudan, another
brotherly country ravaged by so many decades of
fratricidal conflict. Last year, the Council met in Kenya
and secured the parties' commitment to peace and to
the rebuilding of a society in which the parties could
achieve their full development and direct their own
affairs, while contributing to the security and the
prosperity of the nation as a whole. Since then, the
Council has seen that goal achieved, and the two
parties have been received in the Council Chamber.
Once the Peace Agreement was concluded, the Council
took the decision to build on that peace by sending a
robust peacekeeping force and by ensuring significant
financial support.

We hope that, after witnessing the massacre of
thousands of innocent people, the Darfur region will
find peace and that the perpetrators - at least, I would
say as a lawyer, those against whom there are solid
accusations - will be brought to justice.

However, the Council has not only put out fires
and helped many to take the road to peace. As in
Mozambique and Angola, it has also taken action to
reintegrate yesterday's combatants into civil and
political society, to re-establish the rule of law and to
facilitate the transition towards genuine peace.

In that context, one can say without being
accused of being overly optimistic that the continent is
seeing certain positive developments and that real
progress has been made in Africa towards good
governance, through transparent and fair elections, and
through the establishment of the rule of law with the
strengthening of human rights and judicial
independence.

The good news continues. Political power
changes hands; new elites, in turn, take power: these
are signs that African societies are regaining their
health.

The international community must lend its
support to those efforts, helping Africa to recover lost
ground so that it can achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015. We are convinced that
real progress will be achieved at next September's
summit. We take this opportunity to welcome all the
pledges made by the developed countries - which I
will not cite here and make them feel uncomfortable,
as some of them are present here in the Council - so
that, at the September summit, Africa will benefit from
a boost that will help rescue it.

Mr. President, your country too, in cooperation
with others, has contributed an important stone to that
building, working to eliminate hunger - the "zero
hunger" proposal of your country's President - and to
find ongoing financial resources for development.
Those efforts continue today.

I would like to conclude on that optimistic note at
a time when the winds of reform are sweeping this
glass tower. We hope that the reform will be well
directed in order not to weaken its foundations.

