Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Ambassador
Kairat Umarov for his briefing on the activities of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, which
we found extremely useful and very well balanced.
We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his assumption of the chairmanship of the
Committee and assure him of our full support in the
effective discharge of his responsibilities. He has, in
fact, already made a difference in bringing seriousness
to the work and in being non-ideological. We highly
appreciate his commitment to working in an open,
transparent and objective manner with all the members
of the Committee.

The 751 and 1907 sanctions regime has great
significance for regional peace and security in the
Horn ofAfrica, and we attach importance to its full and
effective implementation. In that regard, we appreciate
the fact that the Committee held a briefing session with
representatives of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development on transnational terrorist threats in
the region. We believe that such briefings have a lot
of relevance to the work of the Committee, and we
encourage the Chair to continue this good practice,
in line with the mandate of the Committee, in order
to create a better understanding of the challenges and
threats facing the region.

No doubt, Al-Shabaab remains a potent force
capable of launching asymmetrical attacks, although
its conventional capabilities have been significantly
weakened. Its possible links with the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) will have enormous
implications for peace and stability in the region.
Therefore, this is certainly something that needs to be
followed up very closely and very seriously.

We welcome the appointment of the new members
of the Monitoring Group, whose work is critical to
ensuring the implementation of the sanctions regime.
We have been cooperating with the Group outside the
Council, and we are now ready to do so in our capacity
as a member of the Council and with a great sense
of responsibility. We understand that the work of the
Group is dependent on the relevance and quality of
information gathered, and the cooperation of countries
in the region and others remains very important in that
regard. We hope and expect that in the three months
since they started their work, members of the Group
have undertaken the necessary examination of existing
and new information gathered in the course of their new
mandate. In the light of reports of possible violations of
the arms embargo in particular, we will wait for the
Monitoring Group to inform us of the outcome of its
investigation in its midterm report. Of course, forging
the necessary horizontal cooperation with other
panels of experts is important during the process of
investigating those reports, and we trust that this has
already been done in the course of the investigation.

The cooperation of Somalia, Eritrea and countries
of the region is absolutely necessary to facilitating
the work of the Monitoring Group and the Sanctions
Committee. In that regard, we appreciate the willingness
of the Federal and regional Governments in Somalia to
cooperate with the Monitoring Group. We also note the
submission by the Federal Government of Somalia of
its report, in line with paragraph 7 of resolution 2317
(2016), on the structure, composition, strength and
disposition of its security forces, including the status of
regional and militia forces.

In the same vein, it is incumbent on the Ethiopian
Government to render the necessary cooperation to the
Monitoring Group and the Sanctions Committee based
on its obligations, in line with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. As the Monitoring Group has
stated, for instance, it is important that Eritrea clarify
the situation of the remaining soldiers identified by
Djibouti as still missing in action as a result of the
conflict of June 2008, in line with its treaty obligations
and as directed by the Council.

We note the intention of the Chair to undertake
a visit to the region, which is long overdue. It will
certainly help in developing a better appreciation of
regional dynamics. We hope that the visit will take
place in accordance with existing practice. We want to
make it clear that putting preconditions on the visit to
enlist concessions from the Council should by no means
be entertained, as it would set a dangerous precedent.
We are confident that the Chair will handle this matter
very carefully.

But the visit is important because, among other
things, it would allow the Chair to appreciate the existing
hubris and arrogance that have been such a problem in
our region, masked behind a veneer of victimhood that
may deceive many. That is the context within which the
issue of the boundary demarcation should be looked at
since, seen alongside other matters, it pales enormously

by comparison. Delimitation having been completed,
what remains is demarcation, regarding which Ethiopia
cannot be expected to applaud with one hand.

Given the geopolitical situation in our region,
this matter and the issue of sanctions can easily be
politicized. That is why the Chair must be wise and
perceptive, which we have no doubt he is. That is why
we trust that he cannot determine that the link between
Eritrea and Al-Shabaab has conclusively proven to be
non-existent. The Monitoring Group has never made
such a claim. Given the mortal danger that Al-Shabaab
represents, this is not ajoke. It is a serious matter.

Lastly, Ethiopia unquestionably considers this
issue extremely important, and we are committed to
engaging actively and constructively to support the
Committee's work.

