Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this meeting on the vital topic of the importance of
mine action for peacekeeping operations. We hope that
our deliberations will again draw attention to the
humanitarian aspects of the problem. We also thank
Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Dahinden for their useful
briefings on this subject.

Demining activities have two dimensions,
humanitarian and disarmament, both of which, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, are
mandates of the General Assembly. The General
Assembly has addressed these two dimensions in the
past and adopted a number of resolutions on them. I
reaffirm that mine action in peacekeeping operations in
no way entails a transfer of responsibilities from the
Assembly to the Security Council.

The significance of this subject lies in its link to
the humanitarian dimension and to the number of
casualties among civilian workers in peacekeeping
forces. It is worth noting that demining is a long-term
and dangerous undertaking; it may often take decades
and require vast financial resources to complete, given
the difficulties of action in this field, particularly the
lack of minefield maps or the unwillingness of certain
parties to provide them to the relevant demining
agencies, as well as the special geographical
characteristics of certain conflict zones.

The link between peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian programmes is extremely important,
since both are undertaken in the context of
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building. Here, I
should like to commend the role played by the United
Nations through its mine-action centres, which have
done excellent work in the past two decades in many
countries facing this problem.

Proceeding from its belief in this humanitarian
role, my country - with the cooperation of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and other Arab
donors - has assisted brotherly Lebanon in removing
mines from the liberated Lebanese territories that were
planted by the Israeli occupation forces. Field
assistance, expertise and training are being offered in
order to help eliminate the mines and their catastrophic
effects on civilians and the inhabitants of the affected
areas.

This noble work must always be undertaken with
sincere and tireless effort if it is to achieve its desired
objectives. We hope for such a collective effort in order
to achieve the best possible results, minimize the
damage caused by this problem and avoid further
humanitarian losses due to mines.

