Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and to express our
appreciation for his comprehensive and candid
statement. We would like also to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Atul
Khare, for his briefing and to commend him for his
work in the context of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Peru would like to express its strong support for
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste in their
quest to ensure that their State is peaceful and
sustainable in the long term. We would like also to
highlight the measures that have been adopted with a
view to striking up a national dialogue and achieving
political reconciliation, as well as the activities being
carried out in the context of a community-level
dialogue designed to bring about the reintegration of
internally displaced persons and to tackle the issue of
social fragmentation.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Timor-Leste for the period August
2006 to January 2007. We support his
recommendations aimed at supporting the country in
the areas of reconciliation and long-term development.
In that context, we support the extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a 12-month period. We agree with the
Secretary-General that such a decision will send an
important signal of the Security Council's commitment
to Timor-Leste, which is vital in the light of the
upcoming electoral process.

We would like to highlight the establishment of a
compact between Timor-Leste and the international
community aimed at the promotion of economic
development in the country. We believe that, in the
long term, Timor-Leste's success will depend to a
considerable extent on its success in terms of economic
and social development. We are pleased to hear that the
Government has already taken measures to identify the
most urgent priorities, which include national
reconciliation, elections, security, justice, employment
for young people, as well as the provision of basic
services to the most needy.
We also believe that UNMIT must continue to
attach priority to providing assistance to the security
and justice sectors. We welcome the start of
substantive follow-up to the recommendations of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry, which, we
believe, will help to strengthen the rule of law and
combat impunity.

Along those same lines, we are pleased to see that
the friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia continue to strengthen, which will make it
possible for the work of the Commission for Truth and
Friendship between the two countries to continue.

The issue of security in Timor-Leste, in terms of
the police and the army, must be tackled on two fronts:
on the one hand, by addressing the issue of a shortfall
in units, and, on the other, by seeking to bring about
reconciliation between the two institutions. The
security situation in Dili and in other principal cities
could lead to difficulties in the holding of the general
elections.

In that context, we would like to support Timor-
Leste's request, made in its letter dated 7 December,
that UNMIT be strengthened through the addition of a
supplementary integrated police unit, so as to be able
to handle any security issues that might arise during
and after the elections. We also believe that any
decision on the gradual drawdown of UNMIT police
units following the elections should be considered very
carefully, bearing in mind developments in the security
situation in the field and in view of the fragility of the
national police itself.

In conclusion, I should like to call on the
international donor community and United Nations
entities to support the consolidated appeal of
17 January focusing on the most pressing humanitarian
requirements and on the protection of internally
displaced persons.

