Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his detailed briefing on developments in the military and political situation in Libya. We are also grateful for the representative of Germany's briefing on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. From to today's briefing by the Special Representative, it is clear that the situation in Libya remains fraught with tension. Despite the announced truce, the hostilities have continued and even escalated. We are troubled by the reports of violations of the arms embargo and stress the need to stop the fuelling of the conflict by competing external actors. The illicit proliferation of weapons in Libya is destabilizing the security situation both within the country itself and in the Sahel-Saharan region. The representative of the United Kingdom stated that Libya is standing on the brink of disaster. It is indeed standing on the brink of disaster, but that did not begin in April 2019, but in 2011, when Libyan statehood was destroyed. Today's events are rooted in those of 2011. From the very beginning, we have called for international and regional efforts to focus on unifying Libya. The aim of the Berlin conference was to achieve stabilization by bringing together external stakeholders. From the very beginning, the Russian Federation participated in preparations for the Berlin conference. We were guided by the need to support any initiative to help to facilitate the end of the crisis. Let us recall that we had previously participated in the meetings held in Paris and Palermo. We also focused additional efforts aimed not only at overall de-escalation in Libya, but also at setting the stage for the summit in Berlin. Together with Turkey, we organized the meeting of Libyan parties in Moscow on 13 January. Our initiative was aimed at establishing a truce in Libya in order to enable the parties to revive efforts on the political track and was our contribution to the Berlin conference. In working on the documents of the Berlin conference, we proceeded from the key premise of the principles enshrined in the relevant Security Council resolutions, namely, that the Libyan people themselvesneed to resolve the conflict and determine the fate of their country. Russia had and has no hidden agenda on Libya. We support and cherish our ties with all stakeholders; we do not favour any of them. We conveyed to them our support for a political settlement. We consistently advise them of the need to renounce seeking power through military means and _ the importance of unifying the efforts of all conscientious Libyan actors to promptly restore statehood and rebuild national institutions. We view the outcome communique of the Berlin conference as a source of support for the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative to set the stage for the Libyan parties to return to the negotiating table with the aim of initiating lasting, inclusive nationwide dialogue. We reiterate what we stated in Berlin, which has also been agreed to by all those present in this Chamber, namely, that dialogue is to be undertaken among the Libyan people themselves. It must be a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned dialogue. The Berlin Conference was intended to create the necessary atmosphere and frame with a view to sending a direct message to the Libyan parties. What is now needed is clarity on the positions of the Libyan parties with regard to each of the provisions of the conference's outcome documents. We have listened attentively to Mr. Salame and we intend to continue our discussion with him in order to clarify the details of his plan. We fully support the efforts of the Special Representative in this difficult endeavour. We trust that the meetings in the near future of the Joint Military Commission - the 5+5 talks - will help to clarify those issues. We believe that the Council should support measures that help to facilitate the resumption of the political track and to adopt draft resolutions that will lead to the settlement of disputes among the Libyan parties. In his briefing, Mr. Salame used the word "credibility". We believe that any future draft resolution to be adopted by the Security Council needs to be credible. Indeed, a political settlement in Libya should not be or become an arena for international competition. We believe it is important to take into account the views and the interests of Libya's immediate neighbours, as they are dealing with the immediate consequences of the protracted crisis. The views of regional organizations should also be considered. Libya's neighbours are in a position to play a constructive and valuable role in making progress on a peaceful settlement.
