Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I wish to thank the Prosecutor
for her briefing and to congratulate the presidency for
convening this important meeting. It is indeed useful for
the Security Council to hear a briefing by the Prosecutor
just a few days after the General Assembly debated the
reports of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Tribunal for Rwanda.

Brazil joins other delegations in expressing its
satisfaction at having Ms. Del Ponte in the Security
Council for the first time. We hope to have dialogues like
this in the future as well.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
her work and our conviction that Ms. Del Ponte will be
able to build upon the good foundations laid by her
predecessor, Mrs. Arbour.

I will address very briefly some aspects of the
Prosecutor's work in the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

 

Brazil agrees that the degree of success of the
Prosecutor's work depends to a large extent on the
cooperation she receives from Member States, in particular
the States and entities of the region. We consider that any
kind of obstruction or non-compliance is not to be tolerated.
The work of the Tribunal should be free of political
considerations, and the difficulties in her work that she has
just mentioned are reason for grave concern, especially the
resistance of States to accepting the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal and the provision of de facto sanctuaries for
indicted criminals. In this regard, the presence of Ms. Del
Ponte here today is extremely useful for showing the
international community that the Security Council supports
the office of the Prosecutor effectively.

The challenges facing Ms. Del Ponte, as well as the
attention devoted to her work by the international
community, were considerably increased by the events in
Kosovo. The preliminary findings in Kosovo are showing
how imperative the creation of the Tribunal was, not only
as an instrument for justice to be done, but also as a
foundation for the reconciliation of the people of Kosovo.

I would like also to mention very briefly the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. I welcome the
fact that the Rwanda Tribunal was able to deliver, in the
period covered by the report, its first four judgements,
including the historical, ground-breaking conviction of
Akayesu for genocide and crimes against humanity.

The task of the Prosecutor is a difficult and noble one.
In her work the best ideals of an international order
founded on law and justice find clear expression. That is
why the Security Council, and, indeed, the entire
international community, has an ethical and legal obligation
to support the work of the Prosecutor.

I wish you, Ms. Del Ponte, all success in your work
from now on.

