Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the ninth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
the threat (S/20l9/612). I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov for providing an overview
of the report, as well as the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Analytical and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for their collaboration with my team
in preparing the report.

The ninth report demonstrates that, while welcome
progress has been made, most significantly in the
military defeat of ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the challenges involved in responding to the aftermath
of that defeat and the threat posed by its affiliates
around the world remain substantial. In particular, as
we heard from Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Member States and the international community
should pay urgent attention to the fate of the thousands
of individuals, including large numbers of women
and children, who are currently detained owing to
their suspected association with ISIL. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
will continue to support United Nations efforts to assist
Member States to address this issue in full respect for
international law and human rights.

In parallel with possible repatriation efforts, States,
with the support of the United Nations system, should
also prepare to deal with the post-repatriation phase,
issues of accountability and the challenges involved
in rehabilitation and reintegration. In that regard,
Member States have reiterated to CTED their concerns
at the potential risks posed by the imminent release of
imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters - men and women
alike - in the absence of appropriate rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes. In the light of the short
sentences given to many returnees, owing to evidentiary
and jurisdictional challenges, there might be limited
opportunities to engage them in rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes prior to their release. In
turn, extended periods of pretrial detention without
guarantees of due process can undermine the
effectiveness of rehabilitation measures and increase
the potential risk that such individuals might radicalize
others within prison systems to violence.

It is therefore essential that post-repatriation
strategies include short-, medium- and long-term
components relating to prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration. It is also essential that such strategies be
human rights-compliant and gender sensitive and take
into consideration the special needs of children. That
is not easy and, of course, there is no one-size-fits-all
policy. Programmes should instead be tailored to local
conditions and allow for a case-by-case approach, while
still meeting applicable international law and upholding
human rights.

CTED remains fully engaged, together with its
partners, in assisting States address these challenges.
One example of that is our work in the Lake Chad
basin, where we have been working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations entities to help States develop regional
approaches to screening, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration as part of the Regional Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Islamic State West Africa Province.

Our dialogue with Member States has revealed that
many other gaps and challenges remain in our efforts
to understand, address and counter-terrorism and
violent extremism. Addressing the gender dimensions
of terrorism and violent extremism is a particular
challenge. In February, CTED published a trends
report entitled Gender Dimensions of the Response
to Returning Foreign Terrorist Fighters. Significant
knowledge gaps remain regarding the number and
profiles of women who travelled to and returned from
ISIL-held territory. It also noted that women tended to
receive more limited rehabilitation and reintegration
support, potentially putting them at greater risk of
marginalization and recidivism.

Furthermore, as terrorists continue to exploit the
Internet, social media and messaging apps, practitioners
need improved skills and updated tools to access
critical evidence and help prosecute and secure the
conviction of terrorist suspects in judicial proceedings.
To help Member States address those challenges,
CTED, UNODC and the International Association
of Prosecutors have developed the Practical Guide
for Requesting Electronic Evidence Across Borders,
which helps practitioners at the national level to
gather, preserve and share electronic evidence, with
the overall aim of ensuring efficiency in mutual legal
assistance matters.

Terrorists also continue to demonstrate their interest
in carrying out attacks targeting critical infrastructure
and civilian or soft targets, including places of worship.
CTED has identified the need for States to develop or
expand existing national strategies and action plans to
take into account the risk and threat to such targets.
Government and private-sector partnerships are
particularly essential to the protection of soft targets
against terrorist attacks. This has been a topic of
concern for the Security Council. In June, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee held an open briefing on this
topic with Member States, civil society and the private
sector. Participants discussed ways to work together to
prevent, protect, mitigate, respond to and recover from
terrorist attacks against soft targets and their victims.
It was noted that the development of responses, from
prevention to recovery, should also involve close
engagement with local leaders and communities. The
Secretary-General, also concerned by this trend, has
tasked the Alliance of Civilizations to develop an
action plan that supports Member States in their efforts
to protect religious sites.

Another critical issue is victims of terrorism. As
we have heard, last week, the United Nations held its
second annual International Day of Remembrance of
and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism. For too long,
victims of terrorism have struggled to have their voices
heard and their rights upheld. It is imperative that
we recognize and honour the victims and survivors
of terrorism. That requires that we ensure that the
perpetrators of terrorist attacks be held to account.

As the report makes clear, the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL (UNITAD) has
already made considerable progress in that regard
in less than one year, including the first excavations
of mass grave sites and the exhumation of victims'
remains in Sinjar, in north-western Iraq.

In April 2019, the Council adopted resolution 2467
(2019), on sexual violence in armed conflict, which
recognizes the victims of sexual violence perpetrated
by terrorist groups as victims of terrorism. It is
essential to address the needs of survivors of conflict-
related sexual Violence. In the immediate term, that
includes upholding victims' rights and addressing
their humanitarian needs. But it also requires the
development and implementation of prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies that
strengthen victim-centred approaches across a range of
issues and recognize communities as key partners in
the process of reintegration.

As noted by the Secretary-General in his ninth
report (S/20l9/6l2), ISIL maintains significant residual
wealth, estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of
dollars. Preventing ISIL and its supporters from raising,
using and moving funds to support terrorist acts around
the world remains a key component of international
efforts to counter the group's threat. Therefore, over
the past six months, the Security Council, supported
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, undertook numerous activities aimed at
countering the financing of terrorism. Following the
January 2019 Arria Formula meeting on preventing
and countering the financing of terrorism, the Council
adopted resolution 2462 (2019), which is the first
resolution focused solely on preventing and suppressing
terrorism financing. Furthermore, the United Nations
system, including CTED, has also sought to better
understand the linkages among international terrorism,
organized crime and terrorism financing. In February,
CTED published a study entitled Identifying and
Exploring the Nexus between Human Traflicking,
Terrorism and Terrorism Financing. And, of course,
just last month, the Council adopted resolution 2482
(2019), which requires Member States to address
those linkages.

Despite their military defeat, ISIL and its affiliates
remain a significant threat. We must therefore
remain vigilant, innovative, adaptive and proactive
in our response. CTED will continue to work with its
implementing partners, including Member States, other
United Nations entities, international and regional
organizations, civil society, academia and the private
sector, to ensure a holistic and effective approach to
this complex threat to international peace and security.

