Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, to
the Security Council to preside over today's meeting. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for his briefing and for his efforts.

Recently, the conflict in the Gaza Strip has
escalated. The situation in Jerusalem remains grim.
Settlement construction has continued. Inflammatory
rhetoric is frequent. The Middle East peace process has
stalled. At the same time, the situation in the Middle
East has become increasingly tense. Local conflicts
continue to emerge. China is very concerned about
the situation. I would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize the following points.

First, the Palestinian question is at the core of
the Middle East issue and at the root of the region's
issues. Safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests
of the Palestinian people is a shared responsibility
of the international community. Foreign occupation
and historical grievances are at the source of the
complexity and insolubility of the Palestinian
question. The international community should uphold
multilateralism, promote dialogue and negotiations
and find a peaceful resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli
issue through political consultations. Violence or threat
of force will not help solve the problem. All the relevant
parties should move towards each other, actively
promote internal reconciliation in Palestine, put an
immediate end to inflammatory words, actions and
mutual accusations and avoid unilateral measures that
undermine trust, so as to create favourable conditions
for resuming dialogue.

Secondly, efforts should be made to promote
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian issue, based on existing international
consensus. The two-State solution is the only right
way to solve the Palestinian-Israeli issue. The relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative constitute the
fundamental parameters to be followed in that regard.
The international community should proceed on that
basis to promote an early resumption of peace talks
between the two sides, with a view to establishing a fully
sovereign Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new initiative
should be in line with those international parameters.

Thirdly, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. Settlement-building continues, and the
prospect of the two-State solution has been severely
undermined. The parties concerned should immediately
stop all settlement activities in the occupied territories,
stop demolishing Palestinian houses and destroying
the property of the Palestinian people and should take
measures to prevent violence against civilians. All legal
and unilateral actions aimed at legitimizing settlement-
building should be stopped immediately, and practical
measures should be taken to redress their impact.
China hopes that the Secretary-General will submit to
the Council another report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).

Fourthly, we should pay close attention to, as
well as improve, the economic and humanitarian
conditions in Palestine. The party concerned should
fully lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip as soon as
possible, effectively fulfil its obligations under relevant
international treaties, such as the Paris Protocol on
Economic Relations, and fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) has made vigorous efforts
to improve humanitarian conditions for Palestinian
refugees, including by safeguarding their rights, easing
the pressure on host countries, actively promoting
regional peace and stability and preventing the spread
of terrorism and extremist ideology in refugee camps.
China appreciates those efforts. The international
community should continue to lend firm support to
UNRWA and contribute to improving humanitarian
conditions for Palestinian refugees.

China has always been committed to promoting
the Middle East peace process and will continue to
follow the four-point proposal put forward by Chinese
President Xi J inping to promote a political settlement of
the Palestinian issue. China will continue to strengthen
communication and cooperation with the major parties
and countries of the region and will play a positive and
constructive role in achieving peace in the Middle East.

China is also assisting Palestine to the best of its
ability in the area of development. On 30 July, China and
Palestine signed a document on the implementation of a
Ramallah schools project, which will provide hundreds
of secondary school students in Ramallah with access to
nearby schools. China has also actively promoted local
exchanges in cooperation with Palestine, supported
local social development and provided support to
UNRWA. We will continue to provide humanitarian
assistance to Palestine through bilateral channels.

