Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, I would like to thank
Mr. Tom Koenigs for his very informative briefing.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has been making an indispensable
contribution to consolidating peace and promoting
reconstruction and development in that country. We
also commend the UNAMA staff for their dedication,
and we expect that, under Mr. Koenigs' leadership,
UNAMA will continue its good work.

The Bonn process was completed successfully.
The London Conference at the end of January, with the
launching of the Afghanistan Compact, was a
significant event in the laying out of a post-Bonn
framework for continued international commitment and
assistance for the country.

The fact is, however, that many challenges
continue to face Afghanistan's future, including in the
areas of security, governance, economic and social
development, and - especially worrying - that of
illicit narcotics. To meet those challenges, determined
efforts are needed on the part of the Afghan
Government, supported by continuous assistance from
the international community. Japan appreciates the
commitment shown by the Government of Afghanistan
in vigorously pursuing its national objectives in these
critical areas, such as through the Interim Afghanistan
National Development Strategy (I-ANDS). For the next
phase of national reconstruction and reconciliation to
be a success, it is considered essential that single-
minded efforts be made towards the implementation of
I-ANDS and of the Compact, with full ownership of
the process by Afghans themselves, assisted by well-
coordinated international support from the United
Nations and the donor community.

The Secretary-General has reported that the
National Assembly is now engaging in active
deliberations and debates on issues ranging from
administration of the country to threats to its stability.
We are encouraged by this positive development. We
also look forward to the early confirmation of Cabinet
ministers by the National Assembly. Through this
process, we hope that Afghanistan will overcome the
difficulties so often experienced in the early stages of
establishing a democratic political system.

Among the problems that continue to plague the
country and its people are those posed by the insecurity
and lawlessness that prevail in many provinces, as the
Secretary-General's report has highlighted. To improve
security, the size of the Afghan National Army and
National Police must be expanded, their capabilities
improved and judicial reform achieved without delay.
At the same time, it is important to call on all Afghan
parties and groups to exercise restraint and avoid
resorting to violence, and all should engage in the
conduct of political affairs in a peaceful manner and
strive for national reconciliation.

Considerable progress has, in fact, been made by
the Afghan Government and the international
community in achieving reform throughout the security
sector. Japan has been a major contributor to the
promotion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). We appreciate the efforts of the
Afghan Government to bring disarmament and
demobilization to a conclusion. With disarmament and
demobilization having been completed, it now remains
to work on completing reintegration, and we hope that
this will be done at the earliest possible date.

With DDR almost achieved, Japan attaches
special importance to the disbandment of illegal armed
groups programme as an urgent item on our current
agenda. This is an Afghan-led programme and, as such,
it must be carried out by all the Government authorities
concerned, acting together. We strongly hope that the
Government will show the necessary resolve and
commitment to make the programme yet another
success. This, of course, requires international support
for weapons collection and the collection of
information. In that connection, I am pleased to
announce that Japan is planning to hold an
international conference in Tokyo later this year on
DDR and the disbandment of illegal armed groups. We
call on the donor community to lend its valuable
support to this vital project, which is directly related to
improving security on a sustainable basis.

As for the question of the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA, Japan supports the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report, taking into consideration the launch of the
Compact. Nevertheless, the "light footprint" approach
should be maintained, in View of the need to encourage
ownership on the part of the Afghan Government.
Also, a scrap-and-build approach should be considered,
where necessary, in deciding on the optimal allocation
of personnel and funding resources.

We believe that, as Afghanistan moves into a new
phase of its post-Bonn reconstruction and
peacebuilding efforts, a Security Council mission
should make a visit to Afghanistan to appraise the
situation and demonstrate the continued commitment
of the international community to providing assistance
during this phase. In our view, such a mission could be
organized soon after the UNAMA mandate is extended.
It should be small and mobile, considering the
prevailing security situation.

In conclusion, Japan is now working on a draft
resolution on the extension of the UNAMA mandate.
We hope to be able to present such a draft resolution
for adoption by 23 March, taking into consideration the
views expressed in this meeting by both members and
non-members of the Security Council.

