Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I will start where
the representative of Lithuania ended, by thanking
Ambassador Oh Joon and the Republic of Korea for
their strong leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two
years. Their engagement and drive has been essential
to the work of this important Committee.

The year 2014 marks the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004). It is an important milestone.
The instability currently seen around the world only
strengthens the need for robust controls on all chemical,
biological and nuclear materials. We have to prevent
any proliferation to non-State actors. With even better
national reporting, an increased focus on effective
implementation and the promotion of best practices in
tackling proliferation risks, the 1540 Committee can go
on to make an even greater contribution.

States continue to demonstrate their firm
commitment to implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
The submission in 2014 of the first-ever national reports
from Malawi, Lesotho, Liberia and South Sudan has
reduced the number of non-reporting States to 20.
Further submissions of new updates to national reports
and voluntary national implementation action plans are
also welcome. Resolution 1540 (2004) retains one of
the highest rates of reporting compliance, but we have
not yet achieved universality of reporting. The final
yards can sometimes be the hardest, but also the most
important. I urge those States that have yet to submit
such reports to do so without delay.

Under the Republic of Korea's able leadership
the Committee has rightly focused on effective
implementation practices. The information the Group
of Experts intend to provide on country matrices will
be an invaluable resource to the Committee in fulfilling
its vital function of matching offers and requests for
assistance.

The United Kingdom continues to play its part in
supporting and promoting best practices. We hosted the
delegation of Committee members and experts earlier
this month on its first visit to the United Kingdom.
We look forward to the report of the Group of Experts
on the visit and encourage more States to engage the
1540 Committee in its outreach functions. As part of
the wider visit to the United Kingdom, my Government
additionally teamed up with Chatham House and
King's College, London, to host a conference on the
challenges and opportunities presented by the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). This attracted
participation from 70 non-proliferation practitioners
from Government, academia and civil society, and
was opened by Virginia Gamba, Director and Deputy
High Representative of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs.

The continuing relevance of resolution 1540
(2004) to evolving proliferation risks, such as so-called
intangible transfers of technology and information that
could be used to build and deliver weapons of mass
destruction, emerged as a key theme from that event's
discussions. As we approach the comprehensive review
of the resolution in 2016, I encourage the Committee to
continue to be bold in its ambitions in response to the
proliferation threats we must face together.

