Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to express
Namibia's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open briefing on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also wish to
thank you for your presence in our meeting this morning.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet for the briefing,
and we also wish to thank Ambassador Holbrooke for the
information he provided to us following his recent trip to
Africa. We sincerely hope that his visit to the region will
bear fruitful results for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We welcome the appointment of the former
President of Botswana, Sir Ketumile Joni Masira, as
mediator for the national dialogue, as provided for under
the Ceasefire Agreement on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We commend the tireless efforts of the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
which culminated in the appointment of a Facilitator
acceptable to all Congolese parties. It is our hope that the
necessary arrangements will now be made for the
dialogue to take place without further delay.

We have all learned and have come to realize that
UNITA could not have waged war against the Angolan
people for such a long time without support from outside
the country. The same experience will be repeated in the
Congo, if we are not careful. Media reports indicate that
investors from several countries are doing business with
the rebel movement, especially in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These actions clearly
 

violate the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and should be halted. The plundering and
looting of Congolese natural resources, including the
granting of diamond rights, cannot be allowed to go on
unabated.

We have all acknowledged that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo peace process is difficult and
complicated. Ambassador Holbrooke reiterated that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not less complicated
than Kosovo. We Africans are not deluding ourselves. We
are saying that, just as this Council has felt the urgent need
to intervene in other, no less complicated, situations, it
should also do so in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Nobody is saying that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is easy. Nobody has said that. What
we are saying is that the Council should assume its
responsibilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and here time is of the essence.

I agree with my colleague from Gambia, who made
this point so eloquently. In fact, only last week, when
Under-Secretary-General Prendergast briefed the Council on
his trip to Burundi, he emphasized that the situation in
Burundi and in the Great Lakes region in general is
impacting the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. So, as the Council addresses this question of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we should not lose
sight of what is happening around that country. As
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, all parties,
in particular the rebel groups and their supporters, Namibia
believes should carry out their commitment. Hence, I again
reiterate here Namibia's commitment to the full
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement.

Let me make one point clear. We shall passively
maintain our position in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as we have done since the signing of the Ceasefire
Agreement. However, we shall not offer ourselves as
helpless targets when fired at by the rebels and those who
support them.

On 12 December 1999, at the invitation of my
President, President Sam Nujoma, a summit of heads of
State of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) allied countries in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was held in Windhoek. We have made available to
you, Mr. President, for Council members' information, a
press release issued at the end of that summit. I will
therefore only highlight a few points emanating from the
summit.

The summit welcomed the appointment of the
United Nations Secretary-General's Special Representative
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It reviewed
the current status of the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
noted that significant progress had been made since its
signing: the inauguration of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) and the deployment of the JMC
observers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to verify ceasefire implementation.

Furthermore, the summit reiterated the commitment
of the SADC allied countries

"to scrupulously observe the Ceasefire Agreement
and speed up the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo." (S/1999/125Z, annex)

It also noted the ceasefire violations, particularly in
the area of Ikela and Basankusu, by the Congolese Rally
for Democracy (Goma) and the Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo rebel groups.

It would be ideal if all parties to the conflict ceased
hostilities. We will continue to reiterate our call for
putting a halt to the fighting.

The question we should ask ourselves is whether the
Congolese people should continue to be held hostage by
those whose interests are materialistically based and who
are at the core of plundering Congolese resources.

We welcome the deployment of regional joint
military commissions inside the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to assist in the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement. We also welcome the deployment of
Organization of African Unity (OAU) observers to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the hope that the
Security Council will soon take a decision to authorize
the deployment of military observers to that country.

In this respect, we hope that such deployment will
take place rapidly given the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1279 (1999). We cannot emphasize
this point enough. From our experience, it is unrealistic to
expect a perfect peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or in any conflict situation before the Security
Council takes action. The English say "The perfect is the
enemy of the good". If we wait for perfection in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will lose
everything that has been achieved in the Lusaka peace
process.

 

My South African colleague could not have been
clearer yesterday. In fact, some of us have wondered
whether it is because the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is in Africa. Otherwise, why does the goal post always
seem to be shifting? SADC, as a subregional organization,
continues vigorously to work towards a peaceful resolution
of the conflict.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank those
Governments and organizations that have provided support
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo peace process,
and, in particular, those that have contributed to the
requirements and funding of the Joint Military Commission.
We encourage them to continue their support. Likewise, we
call on others to give positive consideration to contributing
to the United Nations and OAU trust funds.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has an external dimension to it. Even if this were not the
case, the Security Council still has a responsibility towards
that situation, and we look forward to the Secretary-
General's report in January.

