Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I thank your for organizing the present
meeting to allow Member States to discuss, for the
second time in this Chamber, the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). This
demonstrates the Council's determination to fight
terrorism effectively within a concerted and
coordinated framework.

My delegation would also like to thank Sir
Jeremy Greenstock for the encouraging information he
has just communicated to the Council on the work
carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Through him, we also extend our gratitude to
the other members of the CTC and to its support staff
for the volume and quality of the work completed.
Sixty-two of the 143 national reports submitted have
already been considered - in record time. This says
much about the work already accomplished by the
Committee.

We welcome the Council's renewed expression of
confidence in the Committee's Chairman and Vice-
Chairmen in carrying out their duties. We assure them
of our cooperation and support.

My delegation welcomes the regularity with
which Member States are informed of the Committee's
work through the Chairman's briefings. This without
doubt attests to the Committee's transparency in
conducting its work. My delegation supports the CTC
programme underway and encourages Member States
to cooperate further with it.

We agree with the CTC and its Chairman that a
consideration of constraints related to translation
services is necessary in order to advance at the desired
pace.

The study of the first reports allows us to affirm
that the question of assistance remains central to our
concerns. We believe that such assistance is required at
the financial and technical levels. The Committee
should identify sources of assistance and refer
countries to them according to their needs.

Since the heinous terrorist attacks of 11
September 2001, nearly all countries have expressed a
real desire to fight effectively against the scourge of
terrorism. It would be very useful to support that
determination of States with the appropriate assistance
in order to help them create or improve their counter-
terrorism mechanisms.

As for the group of experts, it would be desirable
to ensure the effective representation of all regions.
That would enable the concerns and experiences of all
to be considered, with the advantages of a comparative
approach. As well, greater coordination is needed
between the various organs of the United Nations and
those of other organizations, particularly regional
organizations. In this respect, my delegation welcomes
the contacts that have been established between the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and certain subregional,
regional and international institutions, and we
encourage such contacts to continue.

The examination of the second set of reports to be
submitted by Member States to the Committee will
provide a good indication of the additional measures
that the international community will have to adopt in
the fight against terrorism. The Committee will have to
consider this issue in depth, and my delegation will
make its own modest contribution in that regard.

Furthermore, we hope that the work of the Ad
Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210 to elaborate a draft convention
against international terrorism will reach a successful
conclusion during its next session. We also welcome
the entry into force, on 10 April, of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, which constitutes an important step on the
part of the international community in the fight against
terrorism in general.

Finally, my country, aware of the urgent need to
fight terrorism, will spare no effort to strengthen its
domestic measures to that end. It will rely on
international cooperation for achieving its objectives in
that respect.
