Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving C6te
d'Ivoire the opportunity to take part in this important
meeting of the Security Council, which is once again
addressing the situation in Sierra Leone in the light of
the report of the Panel of Experts created pursuant to
resolution 1306 (2000). This report is presented by
Ambassador Chowdhury in document 8/2000/1195,
dated 20 December 2000. I commend the Ambassador
for the quality of the work that has been done.

Before continuing my remarks on this subject,
allow me to convey to you, Mr. President, my
delegation's warmest greetings and congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January - this being the first
presidency of the year 2001 and of the new
millennium. If it they are not too late, please accept as
well my best wishes for the new year. The decisive role
that your dynamic country, the Republic of Singapore,
plays to promote development and peace around the
world leads me to believe most assuredly that you will
carry out your task with success, to the benefit of our
Organization and of all its Members.

The report that is the subject of our meeting today
provides the Council information about possible
violations of measures taken by the Council to end the
existing links between the diamond trade and the
supply and circulation of arms and related materiel, by
various ways and means, in the West African subregion
and elsewhere.

In this regional context, my country is named at
various points in the report as being among those
having special relationships with the countries or the
parties in conflict in Sierra Leone. More to the point,
my country is named as a venue for commercial
transactions in diamonds and for aerial navigation, to
the benefit ofthe actors in the war in Sierra Leone.

Before attempting to respond to the parts of the
report that implicitly suggest that Cote d'Ivoire plays
an important role in the various types of trade fuelling
the war efforts of the conflicting parties in Sierra
Leone, I would like to tell the Council that my country
approves of its initiative to entrust a panel of experts
with the mission of shedding light on the issue of
involvement by States ofthe subregion.

I would also like to highlight one fact, namely,
that Cote d'Ivoire was unable to provide the Panel of
Experts with statistics about Cote d'Ivoire's import and
export of diamonds in good time, that is, before the
preparation of the Panel's report. It has since done so,
in a letter dated 4 January 2001 addressed to the
secretariat ofthe Security Council Committee on Sierra
Leone established by resolution 1132 (1997). That
delay was justified by the unstable political situation
that has prevailed in Cote d'Ivoire since 24 December
1999. Since that time, there have been four
Governments. The delay in providing information has
been due to administrative changes, and not because of
any indifference or lack of consideration by my country
for the United Nations. I would once again like to
reaffirm to the Council the commitment of the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire to resolutely undertake
measures to ensure compliance with Security Council
sanctions within the context ofits overall policies.

The second part of the report deals with weapons.
Its chapter III, which is entitled "The role of other
countries", deals in particular with the weapons of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). Paragraph 194
states that private brokers and arms merchants are the
main suppliers of the RUF and that most large arms
and ammunition supplies reach the RUF only indirectly
and through countries with Governments sympathetic
to it. Paragraph 195 names Cote d'Ivoire and says that

"Cote d'Ivoire, under previous administrations,
was sympathetic to the Liberian government and,
indirectly, to the RUF in Sierra Leone. The
Ivorian relationship dates back to the training of
RUF and Liberian rebels in C6te d'Ivoire in the
early 19905."
In that connection, I wish to make the point that the
word "training" is imprecise, as training involves
various aspects. What aspect are we talking about here?
Let us avoid any blurring of distinctions.

Having said that, I would like to point out that
cote d'Ivoire has constantly striven to maintain
excellent relations with all its immediate neighbours.
With regard to Liberia in particular, it should be noted
that Liberia is like other countries bordering on C6te
d'Ivoire in that they are made up of the same peoples,
who were artificially separated by the borders inherited
from colonialization. It must be kept in mind that the
Krahns and the Gios of Liberia are the Gueres and
Yacuba of Cote d'Ivoire. Moreover, it is precisely
because of this ethnic affinity that there has been a
harmonious integration of Liberian refugees into C6te
d'Ivoire.

It should also be noted that late President
Houphouet-Boigny - the country's first President -
and the Government and people of Cote d'Ivoire have
spared no sacrifice to help to restore peace to Liberia.
The thousands of Liberian refugees fraternally
welcomed by the people of Cote d'Ivoire at the height
ofthe civil war in Liberia attest to that fact.

In addition, the role played by C6te d'Ivoire to
try to restore peace to Liberia and Sierra Leone should
also be recalled. Sierra Leone's recent history includes
the Abidjan agreements signed by the Freetown
Government and the RUF, which at the time was
headed by Mr. Foday Sankoh. I would also like to
remind the Council that it was due to the efforts of
diplomats from Cote d'Ivoire that Mr. Sankoh was
induced to quit his retreat in the forests of Sierra Leone
to come to the negotiating table. It does not seem fair
to us that the relations we had, and which we continue
to have, with the two fraternal countries of Liberia and
Sierra Leone 4 and even with the RUF - should be
interpreted as a sign of being sympathetic to the
appalling activities being condemned by the
international community. It would have been desirable
for the report to be precise at this point, especially as
the events mentioned go back to the early 1990s.

Similar precision should have been applied to
paragraph 209, which refers to the flight of an
Ukrainian BAC-lll aircraft that allegedly flew to
Abidjan without declaring the date and time of its
arrival, information necessary for a national
investigation.

With regard to paragraph 216, which refers to the
private activities of an Israeli businessman resident in
Abidjan who is allegedly very close to President
Charles Taylor, I believe the Council will agree with
me that the activities and movements of that individual
cannot be imputed to the Government of C6te d'Ivoire,
in particular as that person holds a Liberian diplomatic
passport.

With regard to the report's technical points
relating to air traffic monitoring systems in West Africa
and to a certification regime for diamonds originating
in Sierra Leone, my country would be happy to support
any initiative to make United Nations sanctions more
effective that would not jeopardize its national interests
or, above all, involve additional expenses to the
countries ofthe subregion.

Similarly, Cote d'Ivoire is prepared to sign - if
it has not already done so - the 1989 International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. I take this opportunity to
assure countries neighbouring Cote d'Ivoire, and the
international community at large, that the Government
of my country has never permitted, and will never
permit, anyone to use its territory to undermine the
territorial or political integrity of any country in Africa
or anywhere else in the world.

Animated by that commitment, the Cote d'Ivoire
of the Second Republic, under the leadership of
President Laurent Gbagbo, reaffirms its full readiness
to continue to work in close cooperation with the
United Nations, the Security Council and the sanctions
Committees.

The new authorities of my country, who came to
power only three months ago, call on the international
community to give them the time to settle in and to
become acquainted with these issues, and to extend
understanding to them so that they may restore to full
vigour the position and image of Cote d'Ivoire on the
international scene, in accordance with the principles
and ideals ofthe United Nations.

