Mr. Maina (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on a matter
that we consider to be crucial to peace and security in
Africa. Kenya welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(S/2010/514). The report addresses important issues
related to peacekeeping operations and a number of
recommendations that warrant our collective
consideration.

Regional organizations play a pivotal role in
matters of peace and security, and indeed serve to
further the Council's mandate of ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
African Union in particular has played and continues to
play this role in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa. However,
there are many challenges that face the African Union
in the deployment and management of peacekeeping
operations. The question of capacity-building is vital if
the institutional development of the African Union is to
be strengthened. Capacity-building is important to
enable the African Union to address not only
immediate peacekeeping operations, but also conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.

Partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is crucial in addressing the question of
peace and security in Africa. In that regard we note that
the Secretary-General's report underscores the
necessity of a close strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union and gives
direction on mechanisms and processes to be put in
place so as to enhance this critical partnership.
We are encouraged by the increased momentum
of a bid to strengthen and solidify the relationship
between the two organizations. We welcome the
establishment in July of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, headed by Ambassador Muburi
Muita. The fusion of the various United Nations offices
in Addis Ababa into a single compact office will
certainly greatly assist in streamlining the channels of
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union. Indeed, by reducing duplication and pooling
resources in a more cost-efficient manner, the United
Nations Office to the African Union will be a prime
example of the evolution of qualitative engagement
between the African Union and the United Nations.

The issue of funding in support of African Union
peacekeeping operations has been on the table for quite
a while. The Prodi panel report (S/2008/813) and
subsequent reports, assessments and initiatives have all
sought ways for the United Nations to assist the
African Union to improve effectiveness in deploying
and managing peacekeeping operations mandated by
the United Nations. The United Nations has indeed
recognized the importance of enhancing the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for the African Union's peace and security capability. It
is our hope that the strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union will lead to a
better understanding of the dynamics involved and a
way forward in this matter.

In the specific case of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), Kenya strongly supports the
call made yesterday to this Council by the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Ambassador Lamamra (see S/PV.6407) to endorse the
newly authorized strength of AMISOM. and authorize
an enhanced support package for it, as well as all of the
other four action points raised by the Commissioner,
including rehatting AMISOM.

In conclusion, I wish to recall the Secretary-
General's observation in the current report that:

"Africa's needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made to
keeping the peace in their region and beyond."
(S/2010/514, para. 65)

Therefore, it is only right and just that the United
Nations and international partners walk the path with
Africa as it seeks solutions to the conflicts that have
sadly ravaged the African continent for so long.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report that intends to define the Secretariat's strategic
vision for United Nations and African Union
cooperation in peace and security.

