Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I wish
to thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I
would like to welcome Prime Minister Daeic' and Prime
Minister Thaci back to the Council and to thank them
for their comments. I commend the Prime Ministers for
their continued dedication to the dialogue process over
these past few months.

The United States congratulates Kosovo on the
successful second-round elections held on 1 December
as well as the repeat votes in Partes/Partesh, Zvecan/
Zveean and northern Mitrovica municipalities. Their
organization and relatively high voter turnout reflect
Kosovo's commitment to free and fair democratic
elections and desire among the people to make their
voices heard. We commend the coordination between
the Kosovo police, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to
ensure that citizens throughout Kosovo could vote in a
secure environment.

The memorandum of understanding between police
and prosecutors to address reports of intimidation and
fraud on election day also contributed to the success
of the elections. We congratulate all of the mayors and
municipal assembly members officially inaugurated
in December and January, including Kosovo's first
female mayor, and commend their readiness to serve
their communities in accordance with Kosovo law
and Kosovo's institutional framework. We call upon
local leaders throughout Kosovo to support dialogue,
cooperation and integration within their communities.

The United States fully supports the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
landmark April 2013 Agreement to normalize relations.
The Prime Ministers and EU High Representative
Ashton deserve our praise and continued support for
their efforts and leadership.

Sustaining the dialogue's successes remains crucial
for long-term stability, reconciliation and development
in the region and is in the interests of all citizens.
Normalization between Serbia and Kosovo will bring
opportunities for communities in both countries,
including jobs and economic growth. The ongoing
integration of the police, the resumption of customs
controls at the northern gates and the establishment
of the development fund for the north are just a few
aspects of the hope, order and normalcy achieveable
through the dialogue.

We welcome the acknowledgement by both Prime
Ministers that there remains much more to be done to
implement all that has been agreed. With that in mind,
we believe we should reduce the number of reports to,
and meetings of, the Council and allow Kosovo and
Serbia time to concentrate on the full implementation
of the dialogue, to include integrating the judiciary
in the north and staff from the civil protection corps
into the Kosovo framework and removing remaining
impediments to the free and lawful movement of goods
and people.

The United States appreciates the Government of
Kosovo's outreach to Kosovo's Serbs, especially efforts
to work with newly elected munical authorities to ease
integration, ensure functional decentralized institutions
and promote inclusiveness in the spirit of the April
Agreement. We encourage Kosovo authorities to
continue expanding those outreach efforts, particularly
in northern Kosovo, so that ordinary citizens hear and
see positive examples of the Government of Kosovo's
commitment to all of its citizens, regardless of ethnicity.

Prime Minister Thaci's Christmas visit to Serbian
returnee families in Klina and Vidanje illustrates
a dedication to welcoming displaced families back
to Kosovo. The Government needs to sustain that
whole-of-society effort. Attacks, burgluries and
harassment of Kosovo Serb returnees must be
addressed in the strongest terms and the perpetrators
must face justice. Preserving and protecting religious
and cultural heritage sites is part of the effort, and we
welcome the progress that has led to the adjustment of
KFOR's presence at the Pec' Patriarchate, the eighth of
nine internationally protected sites to be transferred to
Kosovo police protection. We continue to encourage the
full implementation of the Law on Cultural Heritage
and the establishment and enforcement of the special
protected zone through the Law on the Village of
Velika Hoca.

Finally, we congratulate both Kosovo and Serbia
on the achievement of their recent milestones on the
path towards membership in the European Union, with
Kosovo beginning negotiations on a stabilization and
association agreement and Serbia beginning accession
talks with the European Union.

I must again underscore the appreciation of the
United States for the growing number of countries
that have recognized Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State. Those recognitions are a reflection
of the progress Kosovo has made on internal reforms,
as well as the new dynamic in Serbia and Kosovo
relations. It is that progress that bolsters stability in
the Western Balkans. We encourage the countries that
have not recognized Kosovo to reinforce those efforts
by joining the more than 100 United Nations Members
in acknowledging the reality of an independent Kosovo.

