Mr. Kolby (Norway): Recent experiences in
various regions of the world clearly demonstrate the
decisive role played by peacekeeping and crisis
management operations in settling violent conflicts and
in securing peace and stability. The United Nations
must therefore be able to continue to play its crucial
role in safeguarding international peace and stability.

The situation we now face entails serious
consequences for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
could place the reform and reconstruction process in
jeopardy. The inability to act could encourage
extremist and criminal forces to continue their
intransigence. This situation is harmful also in the
message that it sends the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and indeed of the western Balkan region.
The international community must therefore continue
to contribute to the stabilization and peaceful
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must
reaffirm our common commitment to a people that only
recently was ravaged by a brutal war, with hundreds of
thousands of casualties and millions of refugees.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is already in the process of
winding down its operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina prior to the planned closure of the mission
on 31 December 2002. That process must be allowed to
proceed in an orderly manner. UNMIBH's planned
withdrawal from Bosnia and Herzegovina does not,
however, imply that all the tasks at hand have been
dealt with. While important progress has been made,
not the least due to the work of UNMIBH, much more
remains to be done. A smooth transfer of
responsibilities to other organizations is therefore of
the essence. This requires that the handover of tasks be
conducted in a prepared and structured manner, and
that the necessary time be allowed for this to take
place. This point has also been raised by Bosnian
authorities and by the High Representative. We should
take note of their concern.

It is especially important that the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) be allowed to
continue operations during the critical months leading
up to the general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina
on 5 October 2002. These will be the first elections
organized by Bosnian authorities since the signing of
the Dayton Peace Agreement, and they mark a
significant milestone in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
post-war development.

Extremists on all sides continue to have the
potential, as well as the motivation, to create instability
and chaos in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Maintenance of
public order and security during the forthcoming
election campaign is a prerequisite for a successful
election process that can provide political stability for
the country. While public security remains the primary
responsibility of the Bosnian authorities, it remains a
fact that the presence of both the International Police
Task Force and the Stabilization Force (SFOR) is
essential. It is also important with regard to providing
security for minority refugee returnees, many of whom
have shown considerable personal courage in returning
to towns and villages from which they were ethnically
cleansed.

The European Union has for some time been
preparing for the implementation of the European
Union Police Mission as a follow-on to the
International Police Task Force as of 1 January 2003,
but has more recently signalled willingness to prepare
an interim arrangement in the event that the IPTF
should be withdrawn prematurely. While Norway
highly commends and supports the European Union's
response in this critical matter, it remains a second-best
option. The preferred option would be for the
UNMIBH mandate to be completed as originally
planned, thereby allowing for stability in the upcoming
election period, and for an orderly transition from the
International Police Task Force to the European force.

We all have a responsibility in ensuring that the
current situation is solved. A positive outcome is vital
in order to maintain the primary responsibility of the
United Nations in peacekeeping. Hence, the issue for
discussion today has repercussions extending beyond
Bosnia and Herzegovina. If we do not reach a solution,
the whole system of United Nations peacekeeping
operations may be put at risk, with serious effects for
those millions of people around the world already
threatened by armed conflict or who are in post-
conflict areas.

Like many other speakers today, Norway wishes
to take this opportunity to reaffirm our full
commitment to the new reality of international criminal
justice. The establishment of the International Criminal
Court on 1 July was indeed a historic step forward in
the efforts to build peace through the rule of law. The
steady international tide of opinion against impunity
for the worst international crimes has made an
important breakthrough with the establishment of the
Court. Justice and legal order are increasingly being
perceived as prerequisites for lasting peace and
stability. In that context, we believe that a permanent
court may actually be more conducive to peacemaking
than ad hoc tribunals set up in the context of a
particular conflict.

We are convinced that the Rome Statute of the
ICC contains solid safeguards against unwarranted or
arbitrary prosecutions. It is important to recall that it
can be activated only when impunity has been
demonstrated through lack of genuine national
prosecution of mass atrocities. The ICC system is
solidly founded on primary jurisdiction for national
courts.

We recognize that particular concerns have been
expressed against the exposure of United Nations
peacekeepers to unwarranted prosecutions. The Statute
contains, as already mentioned, a system of safeguards
against any unwarranted action. Moreover, it is worth
recalling the statement by the Secretary-General that in
the history of the United Nations no peacekeeper or
any other mission personnel have been anywhere near
the kind of crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
ICC.

On the whole, it is our View that the Rome Statute
itself provides for an appropriate relationship with the
United Nations. The ICC can therefore make important
contributions not only in terms of international law, but
also when it comes to promoting international peace
and security.

