Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Persistent signs of instability
in the Central African Republic led a group of African
nations to bring the situation in that country to the
attention of the Security Council. A multinational force
had been put together by these countries, with the
participation of France, to prevent the internal turbulence
from further threatening peace and security in a region
already vulnerable to conflict. While the force deployed
as of January 1997 appears to have effectively contributed
to curbing unrest, an international peacekeeping presence
in the country seems to be required so that progress
achieved so far is not jeopardized.

We are now extending for a final period the
authorization for the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) to
remain in place up to 15 April. We would like to take
this opportunity to commend the valuable work performed
by MISAB, which placed the Council in a position to take
a decision that we are about to formalize. I would also
like to praise the role played by President Bongo of
Gabon in ensuring the coordinated efforts of the countries

 

of the region in the context of the International Mediation
Committee.

Indeed, there have been positive signs. The political
forces recently signed a National Reconciliation Pact, which
can be considered an encouraging step towards the
stabilization of the country. However, the situation remains
fragile. In order to consolidate an environment required for
the holding of free and fair elections, a special security and
political mechanism has been set up. It will be crucial to
ensure that, during the period leading up to the elections,
conditions are not allowed to deteriorate. The Security
Council should follow events closely in the coming weeks
and months.

The draft resolution that we are considering proposes
the establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the Central
African Republic, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA). Assurances given by
President Patasse to the effect that he will facilitate national
reconciliation were an important element in allowing for the
establishment of this Mission, and the international
community will be justified in expecting him to fully
honour his commitment.
MINURCA is the first full-fledged peacekeeping
operation authorized by the Security Council in more than
two years. This is something to be reflected upon,
especially as this lull did not coincide with a period of
fewer conflicts, particularly in Africa. A forthcoming report
by the Secretary-General should permit the Council to come
forward with a clearer and more constructive agenda for
Africa on the basis of a balanced assessment of recent
experiences.

The draft before us represents a satisfactory outcome
from the point of view of my delegation. We are glad that
participants in the negotiations leading to it were capable of
ironing out differences, allowing for the operation to be
launched in an effective way. MINURCA will operate
under the explicit consent of the parties, which places it in
the corresponding legal framework under the Charter.
Paragraph 13 of the draft resolution (S/1998/268) affirms
that

"MINURCA may be required to take action to ensure
security and freedom of movement of its personnel in
the discharge of its mandate".

In our understanding, this rule should apply generally to
peacekeeping operations under Chapter VI.

Apart from its security component, MINURCA has
been entrusted with other tasks linked to the mandate
attributed to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who will assist in the promotion of the reforms
necessary to achieve national reconciliation and stability
and provide good offices and mediation between the
Government and political parties.

The initial mandate of MINURCA also includes
provisions for advice and technical support to the national
electoral bodies regarding the electoral code and plans for
the conduct of the legislative elections scheduled for
August/September 1998.

The Council's decision to establish a peacekeeping
operation for the Central African Republic is a
meaningful contribution by the international community
and cannot be taken lightly, given the prevailing
budgetary restraints under which the Organization has
been operating. We urge President Patasse and the parties
involved to make the best of this opportunity to ensure
lasting peace in the Central African Republic, thereby
contributing to greater harmony in the entire region.

