Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Adviser for his report (S/2019/878) and
his work in Iraq, which he continues to carry out so
skilfully. We would also like to express our gratitude
to Mr. Kachi for his briefing and his work and tireless
engagement in documenting the unlawful activities of
Da'esh, which represents a significant contribution to
bringing all those responsible to justice. We welcome
the contributions of the Special Adviser and the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) to accountability efforts by
collecting, preserving and storing evidence of acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide committed in Iraq by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. We are particularly encouraged
by the advances being made in operationalizing
the Investigative Team's mandate, including the
development of its investigative strategy, and the
activities being undertaken by UNITAD in line with its
priorities, which include the collection of testimonial
evidence and the protection of witnesses.

The establishment of trust and the safeguarding
of cooperation between the Government of Iraq and
the authorities of a number of other States, as well as
Iraqi regional and local authorities and representatives
from various sectors of society, including survivors, are
equally commendable. We look forward to seeing the
Investigative Team develop that cooperation, further
increase its operational capabilities and make progress
in its substantive work, in line with its mandate. The
efforts to ensure geographical diversity as well as a
gender, ethnic and religious balance in appointing
the Iraqi members of the Investigative Team deserve
our high appreciation. Its composition should reflect
the diversity of the Iraqi population and also increase
the Team's capabilities in collecting evidence in the
various communities affected by Da'esh. We commend
the victim-centred approach adopted by UNITAD and
the steps taken to ensure that in particular victims
of sexual and gender-based crimes are provided with
support when engaging with the Team.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland
fully supports UNITAD, its impartiality and its
independence, while welcoming the cooperation of
the different stakeholders with the Special Adviser
and the Investigative Team. Allow me to once again
acknowledge the crucial contribution of the Special
Adviser and his team to promoting accountability and
reconciliation in Iraq and to encourage them to continue
to effectively carry out their mission.

