Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Before
beginning my statement, I would like to congratulate
Pakistan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January and to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank Pakistan, as President of the
Security Council, for initiating this debate on the need
for a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
May I also express Canada's strong condemnation of
the deadly attacks of 10 January in Pakistan, which
have killed scores of innocent people. On behalf of all
Canadians, we extend our deepest sympathies to the
families and friends of those killed.

(spoke in French)
Canada stresses the continuing obligation of
every State to prevent terrorist groups from receiving
training on their territory or crossing international
borders to conduct terrorist operations in other States.
That applies equally to the countries of the Sahel and
the Horn of Africa, to Iran, Lebanon, the West Bank
and Gaza, and Pakistan.

(spoke in English)

Canada recently added the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps Quds Force to our list of terrorist entities,
in response to their provision of arms, funding and
paramilitary training to terrorist groups that include the
Taliban, Lebanese Hizbullah, Hamas, the Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of
PalestinefGeneral Command, and networks inside
Iraq. Indeed, dubious networks thriving in ungoverned
spaces, at the confluence of State and non-State actors,
must be confronted for what they are, wherever they
aspire to fulfil their hegemonic ambitions.

This debate is particularly timely in view of the
destabilizing developments in Mali. Armed groups,
including terrorist organizations listed by this body,
are collaborating to control an increasing amount of
territory, with disastrous humanitarian and human-
dignity consequences for the people of Mali.

It is indisputable that terrorism is a global
scourge that has targeted all our nations, undermining
civilization and subverting popular sovereignty across
the face of the Earth. We are compelled to work more
closely together, united in purpose and coordinated
in practice, to combat the radical sectarianism that
manifests itselfin the lives of the innocent through acts
of unmitigated terror.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a valuable supporting mechanism for
international cooperation against terrorism. The
Strategy emphasizes our shared condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms. It commits us to urgent
and comprehensive action to prevent and combat
terrorism around the world. Canada was very pleased
to play a role in the Strategy's renewal during the
last review period, and we look forward to further
consideration of the Secretary-General's proposal
concerning the establishment of the post of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, as provided for
in the Strategy renewal resolution (General Assembly resolution 66/282). We also continue to serve in our
role as facilitator on behalf of the bureau of the annual
General Assembly resolution on measures to eliminate
international terrorism.
Canada launched its own national road map against
terrorism last year. Our strategy aims to prevent
individuals from engaging in terrorism, detect the
activities ofindividuals who may pose a terrorist threat,
deny terrorists the means and opportunity to carry
out their activities and respond proportionately and
rapidly to terrorist activities in order to mitigate their
effects. Combating the financing of terrorism is a key
aspect of our approach. Canada is a founding member
of the Financial Action Task Force, the global leader
in standard-setting for combating money laundering
and terrorist financing. Canada has worked hard to
establish a robust domestic anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorist-financing regime and continues to adjust
it so as to fully implement the Task Force's international
standards.

(Spoke in French)

Helping to build the capacity of Member States
to fight terrorism is another important part of our
approach. Canada's counter-terrorism capacity-building
programme provides significant training, equipment
and technical and legal support, as well as assistance
in matters of security, to help our partners prevent and
respond to terrorist activities. In that context, Canada is
pleased to be a founding member of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum (GCTF) and to co-chair its working
group on the Sahel. The GCTF provides members
with an action-oriented forum to enable them to work
together to identify gaps and mobilize the resources
necessary to build States' capacity to combat terrorism.

(spoke in English)

Responding to the needs of victims is also crucial
to Canada's overall approach to countering terrorism.
Our recently adopted Justice for Victims of Terrorism
Act provides victims with the means to seek justice by
holding the perpetrators of terrorism and those who
support them, including States, accountable for their
actions. Respect for human rights and the rule of law
frames Canada's entire approach and underpins each
and every one of our counter-terrorism efforts.

The Council can rest assured that Canada is
committed to building on our shared successes and
contributing to our collective duty to combat the global
terror threat in all its manifestations.

