Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): I congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. I thank you for giving my
delegation the opportunity to contribute to this briefing
on the situation in Sierra Leone

Let me at the outset convey on behalf of His
Excellency President Ernest Bai Koroma and the
Government and people of Sierra Leone our deep
appreciation for the continued support and interest
of the Security Council, the wider membership of
the United Nations and our international partners in
consolidating peace and security in Sierra Leone,
as well as in supporting our political and economic
development effort.

In particular, I wish to express our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his eleventh
report (S/2013/547) on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) for the period from 1 March to 31 August
2013, which has been ably introduced by the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen. We note with profound appreciation
his instructive presentation, critically focusing on the
constitutional review process that has recently begun,
the launch of the Agenda for Prosperity and support
for its implementation, the UNIPSIL drawdown and
transition road map, and issues relating to progress
made in building and consolidating peace in Sierra
Leone. We appreciate the excellent manner in which
UNIPSIL continues to partner and cooperate with the
Government and people of Sierra Leone in the delivery
of its mandate even as it progressively draws down. The
signals so far are that it is an orderly process.

We also express our gratitude to the members of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) through its Chair, Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada, for the relentless
commitment and strong support the configuration
continues to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace,
security and stability in Sierra Leone. We note with
particular interest his insightful remarks focusing on the
UNIPSIL drawdown and transition to a United Nations
country team, my Government's Agenda for Prosperity,
and the future of the Peacebuilding Commission's
engagement in the country. We share and agree with
his perspectives detailing the road map for sealing
down the Peacebuilding Commission's engagement in
Sierra Leone, and welcome his support for our effort in
building a more resilient country.

Consistent with the improved security situation in
the country, the Security Council adopted resolution
2097 (2013) to pave the way for the drawdown
of UNIPSIL in Sierra Leone. The Government
acknowledges and supports UNIPSIL's drawdown, as
well as the review of the PBC engagement with the
country as a response to the significantly improved
security environment prevailing in the country.

The progress we have collectively made in improving
peace, security and stability provides a platform for
rolling out the Agenda for Prosperity - the road map
to the attainment of middle-income and donor country
status within the next 25 to 50 years. Thus, in launching
the Agenda for Prosperity on 12 July, President
Ernest Bat Koroma called on all Sierra Leoneans
and development partners to put all hands on deck in
support of this very ambitious development framework.
The Agenda for Prosperity embraces the nexus between
development, peace, security and stability. For us, it
is an incremental path towards building a sustainable
future for Sierra Leone after the Agenda for Change,
which ended last year.

This development framework, which represents
Sierra Leone's third poverty-reduction strategy,
is anchored to the eight pillars, compared to the
four pillars of the Agenda for Change. They are
economic diversification to promote inclusive green
growth; better management of our natural resources;
accelerating progress on the Millennium Development
Goals for human development; improving the country's
international competitiveness; ensuring a more focused
employment and labour strategy; ensuring social
protection; strengthening governance and public sector
reform; and mainstreaming gender.

Based on our experience in implementing the
Agenda for Change, including the lessons learned and
remaining challenges, the Agenda for Prosperity is
all-encompassing and seeks to address peacebuilding
elements, as well as the residual programmes of its
predecessor, the Agenda for Change. It is also consistent
with the "one Vision, one plan" principle of the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States within the Global
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation.

It is encouraging to note that the most recent fragility
assessment of Sierra Leone reveals a reduction in the
overall poverty profile, from 66.4 per cent in 2003 to
52.9 per cent in 2011. Also, preliminary estimates from
the International Monetary Fund indicate that Sierra
Leone's economy is on track to achieve a projected
growth of up to 13.3 per cent, as output in the mining,
agriculture, construction, manufacturing and service
sectors continues to expand. The stable macroeconomic
performance in the first half of 2013 has sustained
that trend. That improvement should be a catalyst and
encouragement for us as a nation and our partners to do
more, by investing in the Agenda for Prosperity. The
country is currently concluding a new programme with
the International Monetary Fund that is consistent with
the stated ambitions of the Agenda for Prosperity.

Sierra Leone remains steadfastly committed to

the fight against corruption, poverty, the illicit trade
in and transfer of small arms and light weapons, drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, which
are currently plaguing our subregion.

We have continued to score highly on the
protection of human rights. We have made significant
strides in creating a stable and secure environment for
investment to create wealth and generate employment
opportunities for our youth. A range of initiatives have
been undertaken to mainstream gender and broaden
opportunities to enhance the role and visibility of
women in decision-making.

Efforts in addressing youth empowerment and
unemployment remain at the heart of the Agenda
for Prosperity. We have undertaken a number of
interventions, including the creation of a national
volunteer service corps, the engagement of youth in
the agricultural sector and the improvement of the legal
and institutional framework for labour administration.
The Government is also negotiating with international
partners to actualize the establishment of a youth skills
development village, aimed at preparing youth for
employment in the private sector.

We are making steady progress in strengthening
the coordination mechanisms between the newly
established Ministry of Youth Affairs and the National
Youth Commission. We welcome the support of the
United Nations team in that regard.

We continue to count on the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and all partners in the implementation of
the Agenda for Prosperity, with particular reference
to the peacebuilding elements, including the regional
approach to peacebuilding, the review ofits engagement
and scaling down its role. In that regard, we applaud the
very good work and commitment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and our development partners. I would
like to urge all members to continue to support our
development process through concessional financing,
the promotion of foreign investments and support to our
educational and key governance institutions, including
through the expansion of the job market and economic
opportunities for our young population.

President Koroma inaugurated the Constitutional

Review Committee on 30 July 2013 to oversee the process
of reviewing the 1991 Constitution. The Committee has
a broad-based membership, drawn from all registered
politicalparties, civil society and democratic institutions
such as the National Human Rights Commission of
Sierra Leone, the National Electoral Commission and
the Political Parties Registration Commission, the
National Youth Commission, the National Council of
Paramount Chiefs, the National Union of Students, the
Sierra Leone Bar Association and the Sierra Leone
Association of Journalists.

The aim of that process, as outlined by President
Koroma in his inaugural remarks, is to produce a
people-friendly, easy-to-understand and easy-to-follow
Constitution that is inclusive and reflects the country's
unity in diversity. The process is intended to also draw
on lessons learned from the country's constitutional
history to capture the country's renewal and dynamism
and best international practices of constitutionalism.

The Committee has commenced public consultations
throughout the country using wide-ranging outreach
tools to ensure the broadest possible participation of
Sierra Leoneans in the process, at the end of which
the Committee will submit its recommendations to the
Government for parliamentary approval. That will be
followed by a national referendum. The United Nations
and our international partners have agreed to provide
technical and financial support for that process.

On internal security, six personnel of the
Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces are currently
being investigated for allegedly holding an illegal
secret meeting at the Tekoh military barracks in the
Northern Province city of Makeni. The findings of the
investigation, when completed, will be made public.
However, the overall security situation in the country
remains under firm control.

The security sector reform programme, aimed at
continually re-training our armed forces and enhancing
the institutional capacity of our security apparatus, is
in an advanced stage. UNIPSIL is providing technical
support for the establishment of the independent police
complaints committee, a matter that will soon be
submitted to Parliament for approval.

We have also successfully resolved, through
diplomatic means, the long-standing border dispute
over Yenga with our sister country the Republic of
Guinea.

Let me conclude by commending the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, and the staff of UNIPSIL,
United Nations agencies, the Peacebuilding
Commission, funds and programmes and other
international and regional partners for collaboratively
working with the Government of Sierra Leone in
supporting our efforts to consolidate peace and security
in the country and our development aspirations. We
stand ready to continue collaborating with UNIPSIL,
the Peacebuilding Commission and our international
partners to ensure a seamless transition to a United
Nations resident coordinator system.

