The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.

At the outset, I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing, and we take note of the twenty-ninth
report of the Court on the Sudan.

The Security Council must be consistent and
integrated when addressing the situation in Darfur,
especially given the latest developments in the region,
which saw the end of conflict and the beginning phase
ofpeacebuilding. The Council has frequently welcomed
the improvements in the security situation there and
encouraged the settlement of intercommunal disputes
through the efforts of the Sudanese Government and
the peacekeeping mission. The Council has also
encouraged States to contribute to the transition process
involving peacebuilding.
We consequently hope that the ICC procedures do
not stand in the way of efforts to bring peace to the
Sudan. The Sudanese people themselves should ensure
the successful outcome of the transitional political
process, while fostering security and stability in the
Sudan so as to meet the hopes and ambitions of its
brotherly people.

The judgment of the ICC against former President
Omer Al-Bashir of the Sudan did not enjoy the
support of international organizations to which the
Sudan is a State party, such as the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. Those organizations are part
of the regional and international partnerships of the
United Nations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the Charter.

As the sole Arab member of the Security Council,
the State of Kuwait recalls once again decision 514,
adopted at the twenty-second Arab League Summit
held in Sirte, Libya, in 2010. The decision outlines
the Arab position on ICC procedures and rejects the
politicization of the principles of international justice
or their use to undermine State sovereignty, unity
and stability.

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
respecting the principles of the Charter, including
those that call for respect for the sovereignty of States
and non-interference in their internal affairs. We stress
the importance of respecting the sovereignty and
independence of States.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

