Mr. Bull (Liberia): At the outset, Sir, I would like
to congratulate you upon your ascendancy to the
presidency of the Security Council for January 1995. The
record of your distinguished career shows us that the
deliberations of the Council will achieve every measure
of success.

I should also like to thank the Ambassador of
Rwanda for his stewardship of the Council last month,
which yielded positive results.

My delegation expresses its profound gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
unrelenting concern with and involvement in the Liberian
crisis. In particular we appreciate his eighth progress
report on the activities of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and on the current status
of peace initiatives being pursued by the Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), His Excellency President Jerry Rawlings of
Ghana, and other ECOWAS leaders, in concert with the
Liberian National Transitional Government, faction
leaders, and others concerned with the conflict in
Liberia - initiatives aimed at finding an acceptable and
durable resolution of the Liberian civil war.

The useful recommendations which have been
advanced by the high-level mission led by Mr. Lansana
Kouyate, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and which the Secretary-General endorses in his report,
capture quite vividly the various dimensions of the
Liberian problem. My delegation shares the optimism that
if those proposals are translated into action it will not be
long before lasting peace is achieved in Liberia and the
subregion as a whole.

While it is a source of considerable regret and
disappointment to note that talks in Accra among the
faction leaders which should have culminated in the
establishment of a new Council of State appear to have
ended in a stalemate, we are hopeful that this is only a
temporary setback.

We the overwhelming majority of Liberians have
publicly declared our desire for peace. It is only in an
atmosphere of peace and stability that our national
aspirations and ambitions can be achieved. The faction
leaders must show courage and flexibility in order to
reach political accommodation and begin the process of

 

national reconciliation.We therefore fervently appeal to their
sense of brotherhood and patriotism and ask them to
empathize with the unnecessary, long suffering of their
compatriots.
While we recognize that it is up to Liberians to end
the war and that the international community, particularly
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States, has expended large resources on peace-
keeping and peacemaking in Liberia, their continuing
engagement in Liberia is needed.

Even though we welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the extension of the mandate of
UNOMIL, my delegation would have preferred a longer
extension in view of UNOMIL's direct responsibilities in
the implementation of the agreed schedule for the cease-fire
now in effect and the disarmament and demobilization of
the combatants, as well as in the holding of democratic
elections on 14 November this year.

The Secretary-General's report emphasized the urgent
need for full compliance with the Council's arms embargo
on Liberia. The truth of the matter is that as long as arms
are provided to the factions this will continue to result in
the use of force.

We welcome the Secretary-General's request that an
ECOWAS summit be convened to address these and other
concerns. However, the Security Council must take
appropriate steps to ensure compliance with its own
embargo, to which I have just referred. In successive
reports to the Council, the Secretary-General has requested
the contribution of Member States to the Trust Fund for
Liberia. As the Fund is used to help provide assistance to
the troop-contributing countries, my delegation joins in the
Secretary-General's appeal for increased contributions to it.
In this connection, we thank those countries which have
responded to the appeal and also the troop-contributing
countries.

The grave humanitarian crisis in Liberia, which the
Secretary-General highlighted in his report, continues to
deserve the international community's sympathy and
support. We welcome the Council's appeal for increased
humanitarian assistance as set forth in the draft resolution.

When the Liberian crisis is finally resolved, it will
herald a significant milestone in what can be attained
through regional peace-keeping buttressed by firm action
from the international community through the Security
Council. We therefore appeal for the Council's steadfast
cooperation and support until peace is achieved in Liberia.

