Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Please allow me to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly country,
Bangladesh, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. I am
confident that with your experience and skill the
proceedings of the Council will be successfully guided.

I would also like to express my gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador James Cunningham of the
United States, for his impressive stewardship of the
Council during the month of May.

It would be remiss of me not to mention Jordan's
deep appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for
his tireless efforts, prudent leadership and
extraordinary sense of purpose, and for his pursuit of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations in
order to attain international peace and security.

Today we are discussing the agenda item entitled
"The situation between Iraq and Kuwait", and our
deliberations take place 10 years after the eruption of
the Gulf crisis that was triggered by Iraq invading the
State of Kuwait.

Our entire region is still suffering from the severe
repercussions of that crisis. Iraq continues to pay a
hefty price as a consequence of the comprehensive
sanctions imposed upon it that will have an impact on
future generations of the Iraqi population in terms of
their food, livelihood, health and prospects for
economic growth and development. The result is an
unprecedented case of civilian suffering.

Jordan has consistently called for an end to the
plight and suffering of Iraq and its people. This type of
collective punishment, the most severe in the history of
the United Nations, did not achieve its declared
purposes of consolidating peace and security. On the
contrary, those sanctions created conditions that in the
long run may endanger the future of the whole region.

Jordan is one of the countries that continue to
endure dire economic consequences as a result of its
adherence to the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Large segments of our economy, including land,
maritime and air transportation, manufacturing,
agriculture, and labour, continue to incur substantial
losses. This, in itself, should prompt work to eliminate
the adverse impact on Jordan of the sanctions imposed
on Iraq.

My delegation is aware that the Council is
currently engaged in consultations aimed at reviewing
the policies and modus operandi of the oil-for-food
programme that was initiated in 1996 on the basis of
the Memorandum of Understanding signed with Iraq to
implement Security Council resolution 986 (1995).
However, we would like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the fact that any revised
policies elaborated should be viable. They should be
implementable and should enjoy the agreement of all
concerned, including Iraq, especially given that these
policies are based on prior understandings among all
parties.

In this context, we would like to emphasize that
the parameters for improving the humanitarian
conditions in Iraq must prevail over all other
considerations. Furthermore, a clear line must be drawn
between the policies governing the modus operandi of
the oil-for-food programme and the process of calling
for the implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

It must be stressed that the Council itself must
bear the consequences of any preventive collective
measures, as is clearly provided for in Articles 49 and
50 of the Charter, as well as the legal implications
thereof. This is all the more so in view of the extremely
sensitive circumstances prevailing in the region as a
result of the stalling peace process and the spiralling
cycle of violence.

Hence, we believe that the Council should
carefully and thoroughly examine the implications of
any actions to be taken on Jordan and the region, and
should act according to its sense of responsibility under
the Charter.

In this context my Government has submitted a
memorandum to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations illustrating the gigantic repercussions that
would face Jordan and its economy if the existing
agreements governing all aspects of economic relations
between it and its primary trade partner, Iraq, are
interrupted. These include Jordan's import of all its oil
needs from Iraq. Jordan notified the Council of this
matter in 1990.

The call for the faithful implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions should respect
the preservation of Iraq's unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and should refrain from any actions
that may infringe on these principles. We believe that
the only way out of the current crisis lies in the lifting
of sanctions imposed against Iraq by the Council,
thereby extricating Iraq from this dilemma, and by
reviving a comprehensive dialogue between Baghdad
and the United Nations in order to settle all the
outstanding issues that emanate from Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait, including those relating to Kuwaiti and third
country prisoners and missing persons, and the
maintenance and security of the sovereignty of both
Kuwait and Iraq.

