President Saakashvili: I thank
you,Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for inviting me here today and giving
me the opportunity to address the Council.

This is not my first time at the United Nations
building. The Secretary-General used from time to time
to teach a United Nations peacekeeping operations
seminar at Columbia University here in New York,
which I attended. We had heated arguments with him
there, as he was not yet Secretary-General, but an
Under-Secretary-General at that time, and a very
promising one. As a student, I participated in a training
programme here at United Nations Headquarters, and I
enjoyed it greatly. I am even one of the 200 trainees
who had a photograph taken with Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, and I value that photograph and keep it
with great respect.

In fact, I even addressed the Security Council
once before, but that was in another place and at
another time. As a third-year student at Kiev State
University, I was leader of the Soviet delegation to the
model United Nations in The Hague. Out of all the
Soviet students, I had won a competition on the best
knowledge of the United Nations system. It was 1989,
and I was appointed as "Ambassador of France to the
Security Council". So I was there in The Hague, and on
the first day I sharply attacked the position of the
Soviet delegation - with great internal joy. The next
day, I managed to veto a draft resolution proposed by
the United States delegation. I did not mean in any way
to show France as an aggressive or non-conciliatory
member of the Council, but some people told me back
in 1989 that I behaved and sounded very much like a
real Frenchman. It was a great honour.

Now, this second time addressing the Council, I
am much wiser and much more constructive. I am
happy to be here as President of my country, Georgia.

Before going to the essence of my statement, I
want to express my deep grief at the death of the
President of Macedonia. I know how the people of that
country must be feeling right now, and I appreciate
your words of sympathy, Mr. President. On behalf of
my country, I also want to extend deep condolences to
the struggling people of that country, who have
suffered so much during the last several years and who,
I am sure, will have a great future. The late President
laid the foundations for that future.

This is a very special opportunity for me, an
opportunity to discuss some of the most urgent, most
important and most critical challenges facing my
nation. It is clear to me that much work needs to be
done if we hope to advance the cause of lasting peace
and stability in my country and in my region of the
world, a region that for far too long has been beset by
poverty, suffering, separatist conflicts and tragedy.

Georgia is a small country located in an
extremely important geographic region, which is both
complex and rich: complex given its long and proud
history and rich given its ethnic diversity and unique
cultural heritage.

I believe, as President of Georgia, that all of us
here at the United Nations have a moral obligation to
advance the cause of peace and security wherever it is
threatened.

Unfortunately, it is still threatened in Georgia
today. Today, Georgia still suffers from the painful
wounds of civil conflict, wounds that have left
hundreds of thousands homeless, separated families
and destroyed the future of a generation.

As the democratically elected leader of my
nation, it is my responsibility and my obligation to do
everything in my power to try to heal those wounds and
to build a better, brighter, more peaceful and more
stable future for all citizens of Georgia.

As all who are gathered here today know, the
citizens of Georgia made history during the month of
November. Using peaceful, non-violent methods, they
rose up in defence of the principles of freedom and
democracy. The Georgian nation did something truly
remarkable during our "revolution of roses". They
showed the entire world that they dared to believe in a
better future. They showed the entire word that Georgia
is a nation characterized by a deep and universal
commitment to the values of liberal democracy.

The revolution of roses did not take place as a
result of years of chronic energy shortages, endless
corruption or economic decline. The revolution did not
take place because of anger over wage and pension
arrears. The revolution did not take place because
people came out to support me personally. Our rose
revolution occurred because the previous Government
tried to rob our citizens of their last and most precious
right: the right to freely choose their Government, to
freely chose their future and to live in a peaceful and
stable society. I am proud of the values that unite our
people, values that firmly establish Georgia's national
identity, which is rooted in the very principles that led
to the creation of this Organization.

On behalf of our new Government, I would like
to once again state our unwavering commitment to the
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Abkhazia,
Georgia. I would like to thank the Secretary-General's
Group of Friends of Georgia and the forces on the
ground serving in the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG) for their dedication, hard work
and commitment to peace. In particular, I would like to
thank Heidi Tagliavini for her tireless efforts.

We are encouraged by certain positive
developments in the peace process, and I would like to
highlight some of them. We welcome the development
of the Geneva process and attach great importance to
the outcome of that process. The task forces
established in that framework may form a powerful
mechanism for the entire peace process. However, we
expect the Geneva process to be results-oriented in all
three designated directions. The expectations are very
high, and no effort must be spared to avoid the
transformation of the Geneva process into a debating
society. Certain specific developments are of particular
importance to the advancement of peace. Specifically,
the deployment of a civilian police unit in the Gali
region is a real and positive step forward that should be
fully implemented. We consider the new approach a
necessary instrument for the return of the internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Two weeks ago, I visited Moscow and spent more
than four hours speaking with Mr. Putin. It was a very
constructive and positive meeting. I came to Moscow
with my hand extended in peace and friendship and
that hand was met. For the first time since Georgia
regained its independence in 1991, I began to get the
sense that a new door is opening leading towards the
establishment of truly positive relations.

In my opinion, Mr. Putin is a strong, thoughtful,
pragmatic and engaged leader. For the first time, we
were able to move beyond the poisonous rhetoric of the
past and define a common set of interests. That
development created a spark of hope. At the same time,
I have no illusions that our relationship will be
transformed overnight. Real challenges lie along the
path towards establishing a long-term positive

relationship.
In order to confront and solve the challenges that
divide our nations - challenges that have led to

mistrust and misunderstanding - Mr. Putin will have
to apply a new degree of political will and leadership
towards resolution of the conflict and the creation of
lasting peace, and he has expressed his strong desire to
act in that direction. I am also ready to move forward;
however, we will need to apply a greater degree of
energy and demonstrate a new level of commitment, if
lasting peace is to be achieved.

In concrete terms, that will mean ending Russia's
policy of providing citizenship to the population of the
conflict regions. It will mean either ending the visa-
free regime now in place in Abkhazia and the former
South Ossettia, or introducing the same kind of regime
for every individual inhabitant and citizen of Georgia,
in conjunction with the Georgian Central Government
and the Georgian authorities - not unilaterally with
unrecognized local authorities. It will mean putting a
stop to illegal acquisition of property on Abkhazian
soil. Each transaction and each such acquisition should
be properly registered by the Central Authority in
Georgia, according to Georgian law; otherwise, they
will have no legal force.

Today, I issue an appeal to all members of the
Security Council to work together to reverse those
damaging policies which reduce the chance for lasting
peace and security.

I would like to use this opportunity to present to
the Security Council our vision for achieving progress
through the peace process led by the United Nations.
We maintain that the definition of Abkhazia's political
status, as outlined in the Boden paper, provides the key
to resolving the conflict.

However, I would like to use this opportunity to
issue a call to the Abkhaz people to rise above the
confrontation and seize the unique window of
opportunity now open due to the recent developments
and changes in Georgia. That window of opportunity
offers us a chance to jointly build a new common
future.

We are talking about a very desperate place, a
place where the pre-war population was at least 10
times greater and 20 times richer than it is now. We are
talking about a situation where, just being ethnically
Georgian means that you will be automatically killed if
you enter that territory. That is not a situation which
can be tolerated for whatever diplomatic considerations
by this respectable body. Council members know
perfectly well that it is a classical situation of ethnic
cleansing and a situation that goes totally against every
principle of humanity.

From that situation, returning to my vision, I note
that not only Georgians are suffering, but also the
ethnic Abkhaz, ethnic Russians, ethnic Ukrainians,
ethnic Estonians, ethnic Greeks and ethnic Jews - all
of whom lived there before the war, some of whom
continue to live there.

So we need to find solutions that will lead to a
future defined and based upon the firmest guarantees of
security, human rights and the promise of living in a
free and open society.

In order to promote that process and give it
genuine meaning, I am ready to guarantee the highest
possible degree of autonomy to Abkhazia within the
Georgian State and am committed to dedicating and
directing enormous resources towards the development
of Abkhazia's economy. However, Abkhazia's
economic potential can only be realized when the
internally displaced persons of all ethnic origins are
allowed to return.

It is here that the political process must do its
work and must provide an institutional framework for
the return of the internally displaced persons,
reconciliation and lasting stability. We are ready to
consider all kinds of different relationships. Broad
autonomy, of course, a United Georgian State, elements
of a federal relationship between the centre and the
subjects of the country should all be part of a
negotiated settlement that provides, first, for the
territorial integrity of Georgia and secondly, for firm
guarantees for human rights.

I stand before you today as the President of a
nation that just completed a non-violent revolution
which created enormous and positive change. We
achieved this change without even the slightest hint of
violence and without setting brother against brother.
Our accomplishment is a direct indication of Georgia's
ability and commitment to bring about dramatic,
difficult and very positive changes under the banner of
national unity. That turn of events gives me hope and
confidence that we can build a new relationship based
on the trust and cooperation of all.

I am in the process of travelling all around the
world. We had a very good meeting with President
Putin, a perfect, excellent meeting yesterday with
President Bush in Washington and a very good meeting
with Chancellor Schroeder. I am looking forward to
going to France and meeting with President Chirac.
France has done a lot for Georgia over these many
years, especially in conjunction with other friends of
the Secretary-General in connection with the conflict.

We have noted regional cooperation, but
primarily, we need to deal with our internal problems,
and that is where we also count on members of the
Council and our other friends. The entire world
watched our peaceful "rose revolution" on CNN - and
that term itself was simultaneously invented by one of
the Georgian independent television channels and
CNN. I am sure that the Abkhaz were also paying close
attention to it.

If the revolution embodies a message, it is that
the new leadership in Tbilisi is offering a new set of
values and principles. The new Government has
demonstrated its firm political will by cracking down
on those forces that believe that solutions to conflict
are based on violence or on using illegitimate means
against people. Unlike the previous Government that
was weak or sometimes tolerant towards the use of
violence and criminal acts, we have firmly and
resolutely proven that such a road leads nowhere. It is a
road with a dead end.

It is time for the de facto leadership in Abkhazia
to take similar steps to promote peace and to recognize
that their current path is counter-productive and will
only lead to more dead ends.

As I said before, there is a unique window of
opportunity in Georgia today, one that gives credibility
and promise to the advancement of peace. If the
Security Council is serious about bringing lasting
peace to Abkhazia and finding a genuine solution, we
must enhance and strengthen our efforts.

Within the Geneva process, there was also a
process initiated in Sochi by President Putin, which we
consider to be a part of the Geneva process. That
process also has to advance.

We must work harder today so that those who
have suffered can rebuild their future tomorrow. No
one here underestimates the complexity and difficulty
of that challenge. At the same time, this conflict has
gone on too long. For too long we have sat around the
table trading accusations and threats instead of sharing
ideas and proposals that would lead to a lasting
solution.

For all those forces that are unable or unwilling to
make that commitment, the Security Council must
establish a firm and clear policy in support of peace
and reconciliation and reject violence and further
division. The Security Council must make it clear that
those who are not on the side of peace will be held
accountable, that there will be sanctions, that visas will
not be issued and that the International Criminal Court
awaits those who perpetrate criminal acts, regardless of
their ethnic origin.

I am proud to stand before the Council today and
tell members that the new Government in Tbilisi, led
by myself and my team, are ready to be held
accountable and ready to provide the necessary
leadership and political will.
At my inauguration in January, when visitors
from across the globe travelled to Tbilisi, including
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell and
Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov and
representatives of the presidency of the European
Union, I dedicated my presidency to the peaceful
restoration of Georgia's complete and total territorial
integrity.

I made a promise and a pledge on the first day of
my presidency to ensure the rights and freedoms of all
citizens of Georgia and to celebrate the rich tapestry of
Georgia's multi-ethnic composition. I believe that our
diversity is in fact our strongest and most important
asset. I stand by that pledge and promise today and ask
all of you to join me with renewed energy, dedication,
commitment and purpose that Georgia will once again
become a prosperous, stable and fully unified nation.

Our contribution to peace and stability in the
world will be to be strong, to be adequate, to have a
free and transparent society and to respect human
rights, the rule of law and the rights of each individual.
I am sure that we will achieve such a society because
we have accomplished quiet miracles throughout these
years, especially last year, which was the proudest for
me personally and for the whole current generation of
Georgians. We want to extend that proud moment of
our history and transform Georgia into a stronger and,
of course, responsible member of the international
community. We need the Council's help with that. I
thank the Council for its support and cooperation.

