I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. Niger salutes the daily efforts of humanitarian agencies to help people in need throughout Syria, especially during the current pandemic. My delegation would like to reaffirm its support for the cross-border mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria. We welcome the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/401), on the review of United Nations humanitarian cross- line and cross-border operations in Syria. The Niger commends the cooperation between the Syrian authorities and the World Health Organization and national organizations in their efforts to prevent and fight against the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Considering the fact that even countries with better health care are struggling against COVID-19, we remain concern about the capacity of the Syrian health infrastructure, degraded by years of conflicts, to adequately cope with the situation. Similarly, a large number of vulnerable people, including internally displace persons and refugees, primarily women and children, are at high risk of contracting the virus. That would create a larger crisis, given that social distancing is near impossible in overcrowded camps. The Niger calls on the Syrian Government and humanitarian agencies to work out additional partnership initiatives to protect Syrians in all parts of the country. We also call on all the stakeholders to fully comply with the calls of Secretary- General and his Special Envoy for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria and beyond to enable an all-out effort against the COVID-19 pandemic. We regret that the full capacity of the cross-border operation in north-east Syria could not be realized. According to the estimates of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, only 30 per cent of prior humanitarian access has been sustained since the border closure. This has resulted in aid not being delivered at its optimum level. Therefore, improvements and enhancements need to be made. The alternative modalities that the United Nations chose still require sustained cross- border and cross-line access. Moreover, COVID-19-related restrictions make the situation more acute. Furthermore, we call on the donor community to respond favourably to the many appeals of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs concerning the need for increased assistance to the millions of Syrians in need. Therefore, the Niger reiterates its support for resolution 2165 (2014) and calls for the opening of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing on humanitarian grounds. The border crossing is necessary for United Nations agencies to provide aid and medical support to the millions of Syrians in the north-eastern provinces of Syria. In conclusion, the Niger calls on all stakeholders to ensure that the delivery of humanitarian assistance is sustained and unhindered and that humanitarian workers are protected in their work in all parts of Syria.
