Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): One cannot simply remain unfazed by
what is happening. Since the beginning of the Israeli
ground military operation, the situation around Gaza
has entered a dangerous new spiral of tension. We are
extremely alarmed by this turn of events. There is every
reason for concern that the scale of the bloodshed will
increase substantially.

The most important pressing issue today is to stop
the armed conflict, the victims of which are peaceful
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.
Civilians in both Palestine and Israel need to be rapidly
protected from terrorist attacks and the disproportionate
use of force.

In its latest statement, on 12 July, the Council,
inter alia, called upon the parties to abide by the norms
of international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
are alarmed by reports of Israeli bombardment of the
Al-Wafa rehabilitation centre in Gaza, as well the Belt
Hanoun, Shejaiya and Al-Quds hospitals.

The firing on other civilian objects, including
residential houses, is also unacceptable. There are
reports today of helicopter strikes on a building housing
journalists. At least one of them has been wounded.
International humanitarian law also requires the
demilitarization of civilian facilities. In that regard, it is
with concern that we hear reports that Hamas militants
and other factions in the Gaza Strip are using schools
for military purposes, including stockpiling munitions
and using them to fire on residential neighbourhoods
and civilian facilities in Israel.

We understand Israel's concerns regarding the
continuing shelling of its territory from the Gaza Strip.
However, it is important to prevent the unleashing of
an unending spiral of violence, otherwise the situation
will irreversibly spin out of all control.

In those circumstances, we again urge all sides to
spare to no effort to rapidly achieve a ceasefire. We
welcome and support Egypt's mediation efforts. Cairo's
initiative, which Israelis and the central Palestinian
Authority have agreed to in principle, could serve as
the basis for a ceasefire agreement. Such a truce should
not only be long-term, but also ensure that peace
and stability is restored for Israelis, dignified living
conditions for the population and development for the
Gaza Strip. Russia is ready to participate in bilateral
and multilateral formats towards finding a solution to
the very dangerous crisis in the Gaza Strip. The current
crisis must prompt us to assist in the efforts to achieve
Palestinian unity.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the Gaza
Strip must be under a single, legitimate Palestinian
Government that complies with its Palestine Liberation
Organization commitments and the provisions of
resolution 1860 (2009), as well as with the plan for
the normalization of border crossings and further
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. At the same time, we
underscore that the current serious escalation of the
situation should remind us that there is no prospect
for the current status quo and of the importance of a
substantive negotiations process.

We are convinced that this process must be
supported collectively. Even intensive attempts to
achieve unilateral results have failed yet again. Now is
the time to step up the work of the international Quartet.
The representatives of the League of Arab States need
to work with the Quartet, and not merely follow its
decisions. Work towards a solution must be elaborated
jointly with the Arabs - first and foremost with the
Egyptians - so to ensure that they are participants in
the process to elaborate initiatives.

