Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. Thomas Markram and their respective teams for
their exhaustive briefings.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its gratitude to the French Republic and to the other
members of the Council that called for the convening of
this afternoon's meeting. We also thank the President
of the Security Council for having decided to hold this
afternoon's meeting under the agenda item "Threats to
international peace and security: The situation in the
Middle East". This is an appropriate topic, since recent
events in the Middle East represent a genuine threat to
peace and security, not only in that region but at the
international level as well. From the protests in the
Gaza Strip, with their loss of human lives, to the missile
attacks on Syria, as well as the horrendous chemical
weapons attack in the Syrian town of Douma, those
are all situations of deep concern for the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.

This past weekend we awoke to news that added
a new low to the saddest and bloodiest episodes of the
Syrian conflict. According to reports published in the
international media, on 7 April, in the Syrian town of
Douma in eastern Ghouta, more than 40 people, mostly
women and girls, died from asphyxiation caused by
inhaling a poison gas.

As we heard in this Chamber on 4 April from the
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mr. Thomas Markram (see S/PV.8221), the
conclusions and recommendations of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic are
not binding and do not attribute responsibilities in the
case of evidence of the use of chemical substances
prohibited under the relevant international treaties.
In the light of that fact, we take this opportunity to
recall the obligation of all parties to take essential
steps towards the full implementation of resolution
2118 (2013), and we underscore the need to establish
an independent investigation mechanism of the United
Nations whose task should be focused on preventing
impunity, identifying those responsible and preventing
future attacks to the best of its abilities.

As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is concerned, no use of chemical weapons should
go uninvestigated or unpunished. As a result, the
alarming information coming out of Syria, especially
that pertaining to the use of chemical weapons
targeting civilians, both the case of Douma, which
we are discussing today, as well as similar events in
the past, must be investigated exhaustively, fairly,
objectively and independently by international bodies
in accordance with OPCW standards. The results of
such investigations must be made public and those
responsible must answer for their crimes before the
implacable face ofjustice.

The fact that chemical substances continue to be
used, especially against civilians, is cause for serious
concern to the Government of Equatorial Guinea.
During the general debate of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly, the President of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, condemned in the strongest terms
the use, manufacture, possession and distribution of
chemical weapons in armed conflicts (see A/72/PV.l3).
It is worth recalling that no member of the Council
should be considered exempt from that obligation,
which also reflects Chapter I of the Charter of the
United Nations, which enshrines the determination of
Member States to build a world of peace and ensure the
well-being of humankind.

The Security Council now finds itself at a
crossroads with respect to its options. It can either
strengthen the presence of international forces with a
view to future military intervention, as some military
Powers have been suggesting, or we can pursue
international negotiations, be they in Geneva, Astana,
Sochi or Ankara. However, history continues to teach
us that military interventionism has never resolved
conflicts; rather, it exacerbates and entrenches them,
sowing desolation and ruin in its wake.

As far as the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
concerned, the only solution to the Syrian conflict is to
be found in the words spoken yesterday by Pope Francis
in the traditional Sunday mass in Saint Peter's Square
in the Vatican:

"There is no such thing as a good war and a bad
war. Nothing, but nothing, can justify the use of
such instruments of extermination on defenseless
people and populations military and political
leaders choose another path, that of negotiations,
which is the only one that can bring about peace
and not death and destruction."

In conclusion, we reiterate the appeal made by
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea to the countries
and actors with influence in Syria, as well as in Israel
and Palestine, to wield that influence in order to force
all parties involved in those conflicts to mitigate the
suffering of their people and to sit down to negotiate to
put an end to that chronic threat to international peace
and security which persists in the Middle East.

