Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to join other delegations in expressing our sincere
condolences to the people of Burkina Faso and France
and the families of the victims of the attack on a church
in Dablo, as well as the families of the two fallen
French soldiers.

I would also like to warmly welcome Mr. Alpha
Barry, the current President of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). His presence
today in the Chamber demonstrates the enormous
importance he attaches to cooperation within the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. Finally, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend all the member countries
of the Joint Force - Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger - for their excellent regional
cooperation, which should serve as an example for
other regions of the world.

As a number of delegations and Assistant Secretary-
General Bintou Keita have already described, the Sahel
is facing some very diverse challenges, from climate
change and irregular migration to trafficking in arms
and drugs and Violent extremism and terrorism. All of
them have a transnational and transboundary character,
which means that they can be effectively addressed
only through international and regional cooperation.
In that context, cooperation and coordination
between neighbouring countries and within regional
organizations, particularly African regional and
subregional organizations, is crucial to achieving
tangible and long-lasting progress in conflict resolution
and stabilization efforts. In that regard, the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force remains a critical part of a series of regional
and international security responses addressing cross-
border challenges in the Sahel region.

It goes without saying that Poland fully supports
the mandate of the Joint Force and hopes that with the
international community's necessary assistance it will
soon be fully operationalized. To echo Mr. Barry's
words, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force cannot fight alone. It
needs the continued assistance of the Security Council,
regional and subregional organizations and the European
Union, as Mr. Buyoya highlighted. The European Union
and Poland, as part of the European Union, are ready to
stand with the Joint Force and to continue supporting
its efforts to tackle its various challenges.

We also commend the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime - and we thank Mr. Fedotov for
his very informative briefing * for its support to the
operationalization of a police component for the Joint
Force. The restoration ofjustice will play a fundamental
role in securing peace and stability in the Sahel region,
and its effectiveness will have an impact on the Joint
Force's capacity to fight terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

Furthermore, we welcome the continued commitment
of the G-5 Sahel to establishing a human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.
As was highlighted by a number of delegations, as well
as Ms. Keita and Mr. Delattre, respect for human rights
is critical to gaining the trust of the local communities,
which in turn is crucial to enhancing the effectiveness of

the anti-terrorist activities of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
That is why it is so important for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force to continue cooperating, in particular with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

It is of the utmost importance to focus
priority training targets around the protection of
civilians - which is one of Poland's priorities as
a Security Council member - in order to prevent
human rights Violations and abuses committed by
army and police components when conducting counter-
terrorism operations.

Lasting peace, security and prosperity in the
Sahel region cannot be achieved without major
reforms. Underdevelopment, poverty, exclusion,
poor governance, lack of access to basic services and
economic opportunities and the effects of climate
change in the region need to be addressed in line with
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.

Therefore, there is a need to discuss how the
international community can continue to support the
G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force, through both bilateral
and multilateral cooperation, to increase not only
its operational capabilities, but also its development
initiatives. If we wish to ensure long-standing
peace, stability and prosperity, we need to address
simultaneously three pillars: peace and security;
development, as has already been mentioned by some
speakers; and the pillar of human rights. That requires
a creative approach focused on financial or material
contributions, as well as on political and diplomatic
cooperation. In that regard, we welcome the accelerated
implementation of the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment
Programme and the focus of development interventions
on areas where the most vulnerable communities live.

Currently, Poland supports the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
through both European Union channels and bilateral
channels. We have provided the contingent of Chadian
troops operating within the Force with significant
material support. We need to look at support for the G-5
Sahel and its Joint Force from a broader perspective.
It is most of all a long-term investment in regional
security, which is a prerequisite for creating durable
peace, security and prosperity in the Sahel region.

Finally, we commend Mr. Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, and
the personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, who spare no
effort to ensure that the Mission stands ready to provide
support to the Joint Force, in line with resolution 2391
(2017) and the technical agreement.

