Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
would like to thank Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Lacroix and Urbina for their briefings and their joint
statement of cooperation. We would also like to
express our gratitude for Ambassador Jurica's
dedicated leadership. The Committees they chair are
doing vital work to curb terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Today is an
opportunity to recognize the accomplishments of those
Committees and to encourage all Member States to
cooperate fully with their efforts.

Global terrorism and the threat of non-State
actors obtaining weapons of mass destruction are two
of the greatest challenges of our time. None of us is
immune to that modern-day plague. That is why the
international community joined together to create
interlocking, complementary tools to respond to
terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. These include not only the Security
Council's Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, but
also the General Assembly's Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. Those bodies demonstrate our seriousness
of purpose.

The Council's adoption of resolution 1822 (2008)
to renew the 1267 regime and implement a number of
ground-breaking requirements has helped the 1267

Committee to conduct its business in a fair and
transparent manner. When combined with the existing
procedures, those new safeguards - such as
publishing information justifying the listing of terrorist
entities and conducting a mandatory review of all the
names on the 1267 list - represent a new standard for
equitable clear procedures. We encourage all those who
are interested in the future of this regime to pay
attention to the sweeping nature of these reforms.

The Committee now faces a mountain of work to
fully implement resolution 1822 (2008). As a State that
has designated or co-designated more names than any
other Committee member, the United States is
committed to facilitating this work and helping the
Committee meet the ambitious timeline set forth in
resolution 1822 (2008). Full implementation of this
resolution is crucial to ensuring that the regime
continues to enjoy widespread legitimacy and support.

To guarantee the credibility of the consolidated
list, we also encourage the Committee to remove
outdated or poorly justified listings. The list must be
able to withstand rigorous scrutiny. As nations work on
the requirements of resolution 1822 (2008) and on their
own national processes for imposing Security Council
sanctions, we must remember that while the decision to
impose sanctions is taken very seriously by all Member
States, it is not a judicial process. Resolution 1822
(2008), however, was only the most recent step in an
almost decade-long evolution of the regime.

In addition to developing this new web of
procedural protections, the regime has sought to adapt
to the changing nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. The Committee must continue to
respond nimbly and effectively to new challenges. The
United States hopes that this tool remains the
international community's pre-eminent mechanism for
targeting those responsible for some of the most
heinous violence of our age. We stand ready to help the
Committee fulfil this important function and to help
Member States implement their obligations under the
regime.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) have
done excellent work in facilitating States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We also
commend Mr. Smith for his leadership of CTED. The
United States strongly supports focused national visits
by CTED to address specific technical needs. The
revised organizational plan has given CTED a more
flexible and effective approach to assessment missions.
We also see regional visits as a good way to assess
several countries simultaneously and a wise economy
of travel funds.

In addition to these assessment missions, since
November 2008 CTED has assisted the Committee in
conducting a first review, or stock-taking, of the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments of more than
60 countries, most of which had not regularly reported
to the Committee in the past. The United States fully
supports any initiative CTED can take to enhance the
capacity of the South Asian region to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

We welcome the establishment of four working
groups to support the eighth programme of work of the
1540 Committee. These working groups will enhance
the focus and transparency of Committee members'
efforts in achieving a common goal. The United States
is looking forward to our new role as the coordinator of
the transparency and media outreach working group,
which will have its first meeting tomorrow.

The United States places great importance on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We are now
seeking broad geographic expansion of the G-8 Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction to address threats posed
by weapons of mass destruction worldwide, which will
provide foreign assistance in support of the aims of
resolution 1540 (2004). We have promoted regional
initiatives across the globe as a means of helping to
build other States' capacity to implement the
resolution, as called for in the renewal mandate for the
Committee in resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), and we have partnered with a range of regional
organizations.

Moving ahead, the United States looks forward to
consulting with our partners and allies to capitalize on
the benefits of a full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Effective non-proliferation is not just the work
of one committee, nor is it the responsibility of just a
few States. The proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction threatens all of us. We call on all Member
States, large and small, to share the burden and reap
the rewards of implementing comprehensive non-
proliferation mechanisms.

These three Committees constitute a vital
Security Council contribution to the United Nations

counter-terrorism strategy. We are committed to
continuing to work with them and other counter-
terrorism bodies to confront and stop all those involved
in terrorist activity.

