Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: On behalfofthe Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, I would like
to thank the Security Council for this opportunity to
brief it on the latest developments in Syria.

Month after month, since the adoption of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014), in February and July
2014, respectively, the Council has been briefed on
the suffering of the Syrian people. We have repeatedly
described in detail the countless and blatant Violations
of the basic tenets of international humanitarian and
human rights law. For nearly five years, we have
watched as Syria has sunk deeper and deeper into
Violence and brutality, and yet no words can do justice
to the despair and devastation that millions of Syrians
experience every day.

The Emergency Relief Coordinator, Stephen
O'Brien, visited Syria from 12 to 14 December to find
ways to improve the ongoing response efforts. I myself
recently visited the cross-border hubs in Jordan and
Turkey. During his mission, Mr. O'Brien Visited the
Al-Waer neighbourhood of Homs city, where a cessation
of hostilities was reached. That agreement has allowed
the humanitarian community to deliver assistance to all
60,000 people in Al-Waer, whom the United Nations had
not been able to reach since January. That is a welcome
development that demonstrates what can be done when
an agreement is reached between the parties. We are
encouraged by that, but reiterate that humanitarian
access should be unhindered and sustained at all times,
and not be made conditional on negotiated agreements.

The case of Al-Waer highlights the severe needs of
many of the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach
areas, of whom nearly 400,000 are besieged. From
September to November, because of imposed access
restrictions and insecurity, the United Nations and its
partners reached only 32 per cent of the hard-to-reach
locations. Similarly, during the same period, parties
to the conflict continued to heavily restrict access to
besieged areas. As a result, only some 1 per cent of
the besieged population received food assistance, and
less than 1 per cent health assistance. That is simply
unacceptable. I once again call upon the Syrian
authorities to approve the 47 pending inter-agency
convoy requests and to allow convoys previously agreed
in principle to proceed. I also call on non-State armed
groups, as well as listed terrorist groups, to allow the
deliveries they are preventing from proceeding.

Cross-border operations authorized by the
Council have had a significant impact on improving
humanitarian access, bringing life-saving assistance
to millions of people in desperate need. As of
30 November, that included food assistance for over
2.4 million people, medical supplies for 4.1 million
treatments and non-food items for 1.6 million people.
We are very grateful for the cooperation and support of
the Jordanian and Turkish authorities who have made
that possible.

However, we are deeply concerned at the escalation
of fighting on the ground and airstrikes, reportedly
by Syrian and allied forces, in the northern part of
the country and their impact on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Several hospitals, markets and bakeries
have been hit, and scores of civilian deaths and injuries
are reported almost on a daily basis. The doctors who
work to save them have become a target, and they
fear that the Red Cross and Red Crescent emblems
are no longer the shield of protection that they must
be. The violence has also disrupted the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Just yesterday, six airstrikes hit a busy marketplace,
several public buildings and residential areas in the
Idlib city centre. Rescue workers reported that 43
people had been confirmed dead, and approximately
30 more bodies are yet to be identified. According
to preliminary reports, at least five aid workers were
killed in the attack while performing their duties in
ldlib. One White Helmet staff was killed while driving
an ambulance carrying injured people to a nearby
medical facility. That loss of innocent lives and wanton
indiscriminate destruction of populated areas is an
outrage, and those responsible must be held accountable.
One non-governmental organization (NGO) suspended
all activities as of today, as its water, sanitation and
hygiene programme manager was killed during the
airstrikes on Idlib city. Since late September, at least
five international NGOs have suspended operations.

Since the start of this crisis, Physicians for Human
Rights have documented 336 attacks on at least 240
medicalfacilities,andthedeathof697medicalpersonnel.
Such attacks are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law and an affront to the core of our
shared humanity, which must be guarded - caring for
the wounded and the sick. I plead with the parties to
the conflict to ensure the protection of health facilities,
workers and patients under international humanitarian
law. Similarly the removal of surgical supplies and
trauma kits from convoys by the Syrian Government
must end.

In Al-Waer, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
visited one of the hundreds of hospitals in Syria that
have been either damaged or entirely destroyed during
the conflict. The hospital lacked all basic supplies.
Without any blood bags, transfusions were made
directly from a donor to a patient, placing patients at
a considerable risk of contracting infectious diseases.

Over the past month, Violence continued to escalate
and intensify across Syria. Indiscriminate attacks by
all parties to the conflict resulted in the loss of life,
the destruction of infrastructure and the denial of
access to basic service of thousands of people. On
13 December, eight students and four staff were killed
when an elementary school was reportedly hit in Duma,
in eastern Ghouta. A month earlier, on 12 November,
eight civilians, including six children, were reportedly
injured when a mortar struck a school in the Bab Touma
neighbourhood of Damascus.

We again remind all parties to the conflict on
their responsibility to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. In particular, as the Syrian skies become
more crowded, we urge all forces carrying out airstrikes
to comply with this basic principle, which is enshrined
in international humanitarian law.

Contamination due to explosive remnants of war is
also a major challenge in many parts of the country,
and there is a critical need clearing explosive hazards
in Syria. That is an immediate, life-saving priority, and
the humanitarian partners courageously undertaking
that work need our urgent support.

Civilian displacement, which is a defining
characteristic of the crisis in Syria, continued at a
relentless pace over the past month. More than 121,000
people had to flee their homes in nine governorates,
many of them for the second or the third time. Over
half of the total population in Syria has been displaced
since the beginning of this crisis, with some 6.5 million
people displaced internally. Nearly 4.3 million people
have fled the country, with neighbouring countries in
the region bearing an enormous burden.

Under extremely challenging circumstances,

humanitarian partners continue to reach millions of
people every month with life-saving assistance. But
much more is needed. The humanitarian community
recently finalized a humanitarian response plan for
2016, asking for nearly $3.2 billion to provide life-saving
assistance to the 13.5 million people in need inside the
country. The plan sets out a joint framework for the
response efforts based on prioritized needs across the
different sectors. As 2015 draws to an end, the response
inside the country is only 42 per cent funded. I call on
all partners to contribute generously to those plans, in
preparation for the upcoming conference on the theme
"Supporting Syria and the Region, London 2016". Only
with the help of partners can we assist those in need
inside the country and in the neighbouring countries.

In a rehabilitation centre at the Turkish border, I
saw the deep trauma in the eyes of Syrian girls and boys
who had lost arms and legs in Violent attacks. One young
man had only one arm left. I also saw the commitment
and courage of the doctors and nurses who were
earnestly trying to help them back to life, physically
and mentally. Together, they were emblematic of their
country and people - broken in so many ways but still
desperately and defiantly struggling to hold on to life.

As we enter a new year, we must do our utmost
to bring hope back to Syrians, who have suffered so
much. The conflict must be brought to an end through
a comprehensive political solution that addresses its
underlying causes. We pin our hopes on the efforts
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG), and
are encouraged by resolution 2254 (2015), which the
Security Council adopted on 18 December.

May I reiterate the call made by the Secretary-
General to the ISSG while welcoming that Council
resolution to apply the necessary pressure on the
Syrian parties to immediately implement the following
confidence-building measures: to stop the use of
indiscriminate weapons against civilians, including
barrel bombs; to allow unconditional and unimpeded
access for aid convoys; to halt attacks on medical and
educational facilitie, and lift all restrictions on medical
and surgical supplies from humanitarian convoys; and
to release all detainees.

It is our earnest hope that the Council, in support of
the ISSG, has started to pave the way to peace in Syria.

