Mr. Otunnu: I thank you, Mr. Minister, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council, a
meeting devoted to taking action to ensure the
protection of children exposed to armed conflict. I have
had the opportunity to witness - particularly in the
context of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), here at the United Nations and at
the African Union - the concern of the Government of
Benin and your personal leadership on this issue. Your
presence here today testifies to that engagement and
leadership. We are grateful.

I warmly welcome in our midst Ms. Asha-Rose
Migiro, Minister for Community Development, Gender
and Children of Tanzania. We are delighted that she is
here with us today.

I am very grateful to Ambassador Jean-Marc de
La Sabliere and the rest of the French delegation for
their continued stewardship of this issue in the
Council. I thank them for their steadfast commitment.

On this occasion, I wish to pay a special tribute to
a pioneering leader who is not in our midst today. I
refer to Ms. Graca Machel, whose seminal and
compelling report, issued in 1996 (A/51/306), laid the
foundation upon which we have been building over
these years.

We have come this far in the development of this
important agenda because of the important
collaboration and contribution of many stakeholders:
delegations, United Nations partners, regional
organizations and the community of non-governmental
organizations. I wish to express particular appreciation
to Carol Bellamy and all our other colleagues from the
United Nations Children's Fund, represented here
today by Rima Salah.

I am pleased to report that, since the adoption of
resolution 1539 (2004) last year, the heads of United
Nations field teams have become fully seized of their
responsibility for follow-up, monitoring of progress
and coordination of response on this issue. As a result,
the United Nations field teams have been the primary
sources of the information contained in the present
report.

The United Nations field representatives have
informed us of the various constraints they have
encountered in fulfilling that responsibility. They
include security problems, lack of access and non-
cooperation of parties. But the most important
constraint has been the absence of an organized and
functioning mechanism for monitoring and reporting at
the country level.

The Council has before it a report of great
consequence. The report is about instituting a serious,
formal and structured compliance and enforcement
regime to ensure the protection of children who are at
present being brutalized in many situations of conflict.
The report brings together all the necessary
components for the establishment of such a regime.
This marks a turning point in our collective campaign
for the "era of application": for transforming protective
standards into compliance and condemnation into
accountability. This is the culmination of several years
of a block-by-block building process.

Members of the Council will see that specific,
concrete and practical features of the compliance and
enforcement regime have been laid out in the report. I
draw attention in particular to three features of the
report, which together comprise the key components of
the compliance and enforcement regime: review of the
conduct of parties to conflict, resulting in the
systematic naming and listing of offending parties;
ensuring accountability for offending parties,
particularly through the imposition of concrete and
targeted measures; and the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism.

The efforts deployed over the last several years
have yielded significant advances and created strong
momentum for the protection of conflict-affected
children. Those gains include: greatly increased global
awareness of and advocacy for child protection; an
impressive and comprehensive international body of
protection instruments and norms; the protection of
war-affected children being firmly placed on the
international peace and security agenda; the protection
and well-being of children being increasingly reflected
in the mandates, training and reports of peacekeeping
missions, as well as in the deployment of child
protection advisers; children's concerns being
incorporated in peace negotiations, peace accords and
post-conflict programmes for rehabilitation and
rebuilding; and the mainstreaming of this issue taking
hold in several institutions and mechanisms, within and
outside the United Nations.

I am pleased to report that the overall situation
for children has improved considerably in some
situations. Those include Afghanistan, Angola,
Ethiopia, Eritrea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Timor-
Leste. Clearly a great deal has been achieved in the
space of a few years, most of it with the Security
Council at the forefront.

But much more remains to be done, because far
too many children continue to be brutalized in
situations of conflict. Consider the following. Although
the overall figure has decreased in the past few years,
more than a quarter of a million children continue to be
exploited as child soldiers, used variously as
combatants, porters, spies and sex slaves. Tens of
thousands of girls are being subjected to rape and to
other forms of sexual violence, sometimes as a
deliberate tool of warfare. Abductions are becoming
widespread and brazen, as we have witnessed, for
example, in northern Uganda, Nepal and Burundi.
Since 2003, more than 11 million children have been
displaced within their own countries and some 2.5
million children have been forced to flee their own
countries and to become refugees because of conflict.
Approximately 800 to 1,000 children are killed or
maimed by landmines every month. As the horror of
Beslan and other incidents have demonstrated, schools
are increasingly being targeted for atrocities and
abductions.

Against that background, the present report has
reviewed developments in 17 situations of concern,
recording systematically the following five grave
violations: the killing or maiming of children, the
recruitment or use of child soldiers, attacks against
schools or hospitals, rape and other grave sexual
violence committed against children, and the abduction
of children. Altogether, 54 offending parties have been
specifically named and listed; they are drawn from 11
situations of concern. All 54 offending parties are
responsible for the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. In addition, many of them are responsible for
committing other grave abuses, as recorded in the lists.

Compared with the lists in the last report
(S/2003/1053 and Corr.l and 2), which was discussed
by the Council in January 2004, eight parties have been
dropped from the lists because of change of conduct;
six offending parties have been added to the lists this
year, mainly because of improved information-
gathering; and a few parties have been dropped from
the lists for lack of verifiable information.

This is the third report received by the Council
that systematically documents grave abuses and lists
offending parties. The Council has already, on previous
occasions, expressed its intention to take concrete and
targeted measures against those parties. It is most
important that the Council make good on its promise
on this occasion; the credibility of this exercise
depends on that. The targeted measures should include
the imposition of travel restrictions on leaders and their
exclusion from any governance structures and amnesty
provisions, the imposition of arms embargoes, a ban on
military assistance and restriction on the flow of
financial resources to the parties concerned.

In the light of the facts, the lists and the trends
towards impunity recorded in the three consecutive
reports, I would propose and urge that the Council
undertake a four-pronged response to end impunity:
first, decide to impose concrete and targeted sanctions
measures against the offending parties named in the
monitoring lists; secondly, constitute a committee of
the Council to review and monitor the imposition of
specific sanctions measures for the protection of
children exposed to conflict; thirdly, demand that the
parties on the monitoring lists, working in
collaboration with the United Nations field
representatives, prepare within six months time-bound
action plans to end the grave violations for which they
have been named; and fourthly, endorse the monitoring
and reporting mechanism with a View to putting it into
operation expeditiously.

The purpose of the compliance and enforcement
regime is to ensure that the offending parties take heed
and that the necessary actions are undertaken to end the
violations for which those parties have been named. In
that connection, I should like to report that yesterday, I
received a letter from Mr. S.P. Tamilselvan, head of the
political wing of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) of Sri Lanka - a party named in this year's
report - taking note of their inclusion on the lists and
expressing their readiness to enter into dialogue using
the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. While I welcome that message from the
LTTE, I call on its leadership to embark immediately
upon tangible actions leading to a time-bound action
plan to end, once and for all, the practices of recruiting,
abducting and using children as soldiers. And I urge all
other parties named in the report to take immediate
concrete steps to demonstrate their commitment to
ending their grave violations against children.

I am very sad to report that one of the most
disturbing developments in the reporting period has
been the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeeping personnel, both
civilian and military, particularly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. United Nations peacekeepers
are warmly welcomed into war-torn communities
because they are viewed as a God-sent presence to end
impunity and to restore protection and respect for
vulnerable and long-suffering populations. I pay tribute
to the vast majority of peacekeepers who have carried
out their mission with honour and dedication. But the
notion that some peacekeepers would use their position
to prey on local children and women in this way is a
particularly shocking and unacceptable betrayal of
trust.

I commend my colleague from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guehenno, for
his swift and transparent response to these
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is important that we get to the bottom of this
issue through a fundamental and comprehensive
review. What is the scope of this problem? What are
the reasons for the prevalence and level of abuse?
What issues must be addressed concerning institutional
capacities, the enforcement of existing standards, the
investigation of allegations and the multiplicity of
jurisdictions?

In order to mount a truly comprehensive and
effective response, we need to receive solid answers
drawn from an across-the-board review. That must
necessarily involve the United Nations Secretariat
working hand in hand with countries that contribute
military and police peacekeepers. Together, we must
move - without any compromise or complacency -
to punish the offenders and to root out this practice
from all United Nations field presences.

The report before the Council sets out a concrete
plan of action for establishing a comprehensive, from-
the-ground-up monitoring, reporting and compliance
mechanism to provide for the gathering of objective,
specific, reliable and timely information - the "who,
where and what" - on grave violations being
committed against children in situations of conflict. In
turn, that information should lead to action and
accountability.

The plan identifies the grave violations that
should be particularly monitored. It sets out
instruments and standards that should constitute the
basis for monitoring - the yardsticks for judging the
conduct of parties to conflict. It identifies the key
bodies that constitute "destinations for action", those
responsible for taking concrete measures in response to
these grave violations against children, with the
Security Council at the forefront.

As we move to put in place a compliance and
enforcement regime, it is important to underscore a few
pertinent issues. It is crucial to engage in protection
dialogue with all parties whose actions have a
significant impact on children, without any
implications as to their political or juridical status. The
only purpose for such dialogue is to ensure protection
for and access to vulnerable children.

It should be stressed that the accountability lists
do not name States or countries as such. The purpose
of the lists is to identify particular parties to conflict,
whether Governments or insurgents, that are
responsible for specific grave violations against
children. In this respect, the names of countries are
referred to only in order to indicate the locations or
situations where offending parties are committing the
grave violations in question.

The monitoring lists name all offending parties,
while preserving a clear distinction between parties in
situations on the agenda of the Security Council and
parties in situations not on the agenda of the Council
and other situations of concern. Concrete and targeted
measures should aim to bring an end to all grave
violations by all listed parties, while preserving the
aforementioned distinction.

The idea of drawing up lists of offending parties
is, above all, about ensuring accountability. For a party
to be listed, therefore, it should be a specific,
identifiable and identified entity; it is not sufficient to
refer to a broad or non-specific category of actors.

The mention, review or discussion of any
particular situation in the monitoring reports should not
be construed as a legal determination that there exists a
situation of armed conflict within the context of the
Geneva Conventions and its Additional Protocols. Our
approach has been to focus on ensuring broad and
effective protection for children exposed to situations
of concern.

A monitoring and reporting mechanism is of
limited value unless it leads to action - unless the
information compiled can serve as a trigger for action.
In this, the Security Council has to lead the way, as the
most important "destination for action", because of its
primary responsibility for peace and security.

The time has come for the international
community to redirect its energies from the normative
task of the elaboration of standards to the compliance
mission of ensuring their application on the ground.
Today, as never before, we have the necessary
means - normative, juridical, institutional, and
political - to realize the "era of application" for the
protection of children exposed to armed conflict.

When the tsunami tragedy struck in Asia, we felt
almost entirely helpless in the face of a mighty fury
unleashed by the force of nature. Alas, what is
recorded in this report before the Council is a human-
made catastrophe. This is nothing short of a process of
self-destruction, consuming the very children who
assure the renewal and future of all our societies. How
can we allow this? Unlike the onslaught of the tsunami
yesterday, we can do something today to bring to an
end this human-made horror, the horror of war being
waged against women and children.

In conclusion, as we deliberate today on what
measures to take for the protection of children, I return
to Bob Marley, whose life and music is being
celebrated worldwide this month. I return to his
prophetic voice, to his spiritual rendition of the themes
of suffering and redemption for those who are
vulnerable and abused. As we debate here, I can hear
Bob Marley challenging us, singing:

"Hear the children cryin'

From Beslan to Bar-Lonyo to Bunia
And so we tell them:

'No, Children, no cry

Don't worry about a thing,

'Cause everything gonna be all right.'

"Hear the children cryin'

From Mazar-i-Sharif to Jumla to Darfur,
Won't you help sing

'Cause all they ever asked:

Redemption Songs. Redemption Songs.

"Rising up this mornin',
I saw three little birds
Pitch by the doorstep of the Council
Singin' sweet songs
Of melodies pure and true,

Sayin', 'This is our message to you.'

"Hear the children cryin'

From Apartado, to Malisevo, to the Vanni
But I know they cry not in vain

Now the times are changin'

Love has come to bloom again."

And so, the children are waiting. They are
waiting for the Redemption Songs from this Council. I
know you will not let them down.

