Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I would
like to start by conveying my country's appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honore for her statement this morning. We would also
like to take this opportunity to offer the condolences of
all Canadians to those who knew Lieutenant Jaborandy,
Jr., the late Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who
tragically passed away a few weeks ago.

Canada aligns itself with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Uruguay on behalf of the Friends of the
Secretary-General for Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Haiti is at a very critical point in its democratic
development. The current electoral process is an
opportunity to advance long-term stability and
democracy in the country, and it must be seized. We
must start today by expressing sadness and offering
condolences, on behalf of all Canadians, at the tragic
loss of life during the recent election. Canada deplores
the acts of violence that led to those situations, and we
have encouraged the Haitian authorities to investigate
those incidents without delay and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. Canada strongly encourages all
Haitian political actors to respect democratic principles
and contribute to the success of the current electoral
process. It is crucial that the Haitian authorities and
all political actors work together for the completion of
transparent, inclusive, credible and peaceful elections,
in keeping with the established calendar.

(spoke in French)

Canada also reminds all Haitian citizens, and in
particular women and young people, of the importance
of voting. While we are pleased that many exercised
their right to vote during the first round, we hope for
greater participation on forthcoming election dates.
We also encourage efforts under way to raise voter
awareness.

(spoke in English)

The organization of the first round of legislative
elections reflects the efforts of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government of Haiti and the
Haitian National Police, and we very much welcome
the progress made. We thank all members of the
international community who have also contributed,
via both their expertise and their financial resources, to
the organization of these elections.

(spoke in French)
We recognize and appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH in providing logistical support and other
electoral assistance, while stressing the importance of
strengthening the capacity of Haitian institutions to
take on their full role in the future.

(spoke in English)

Canada has a long-standing commitment to
the people of Haiti and continues to play a leading
international role in support of its development and
prosperity. Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.6 billion in development and humanitarian assistance
to the country. We are one of the largest contributors of
humanitarian aid that has improved the health, education
and economic opportunities for Haitians, especially in
the area of maternal, newborn and children's health.
Our future engagements will be strongly anchored in
mutual accountability and greater aid coordination to
ensure concrete and sustainable results for the Haitian
people. We have the responsibility to ensure that aid is
delivered in a manner that is effective for those in need
and accountable to Haiti, its partners and Canadians in
our country. We will continue work with the Haitian
Government, the Haitian people and the Haitian
diaspora across Canada to achieve that progress, and
we will continue to focus our efforts on ensuring that
we achieve long-term sustainable development and
stand ready to offer our support to the people of Haiti.

Canada continues to support the important work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For

10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve security
conditions and contribute to lasting stability in Haiti.
Considerable progress has been made in this regard.

(spoke in French)

Canada supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Mission be maintained at
its current levels for a further year, and that a needs
assessment mission be conducted once the new Haitian
President has been inaugurated and a new Government
is in place.

(spoke in English)

Canada maintains that any further reduction of
the United Nations footprint in Haiti must reflect the
situation on the ground and the capacity of the Haitian
State to deliver security to its population. Indeed,
the Haitian National Police (HNP) has demonstrated
increasing capacity, and we commend the Government
of Haiti, MINUSTAH and the HNP itself for this
achievement. Canada is proud to be among the top police
contributors to MINUSTAH, including with several
specialized teams. We are proud of the contributions we
have made to the strengthening and professionalization
of Haiti's police, in particular in the area of training
and mentoring. We salute the fellow Member States we
are working alongside and urge others to join in this
essential work.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the recent efforts of MINUSTAH
and the Government of Haiti to address the problem of
long-term preventive detention. We urge the Haitian
Government to prioritize the development of the
National Police and to prioritize the establishment of
an independent and strengthened judicial sector, so that
the Haitian people can enjoy the rule of law.

(spoke in English)

While MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution
for security in Haiti, we must avoid mission drawdown
scenarios that could jeopardize the results achieved
to date, with increased risks to security and stability
for all Haitian citizens. Indeed, we want to ensure that
MINUSTAH is the last United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Haiti, which means we cannot be too hasty
in encouraging the departure of the Mission.

(spoke in French)

Haiti and Haitians deserve a stable, secure and
prosperous future, and together we are contributing to
making that a reality.

