Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement's appreciation for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, at this critical time for Palestine
and the Palestinian people and for the international
community at the start of a new year. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Jens Toyberg-
Frandzen for hiss briefing today.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new members of the Security
Council - Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela - and to wish
them success in their endeavours during their tenure as
members of the Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with the
Palestinian people, and reiterates its support for the
realization of their legitimate national aspirations and
inalienable rights, including to self-determination and
freedom in an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, as well as a just solution for
the plight of the Palestine refugees in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The question of Palestine has been on the United
Nations agenda for more than 67 years now. Yet, as
regrettably reaffirmed with the failure of the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities during the vote
on 30 December 2014 (see S/PV.7354), the Palestinian
people have no glimmer of hope for realizing their
right to self-determination and freedom and finally
experiencing the justice and peace so long denied to
them.

Despite decades of participation in peace efforts
undertaken in good faith and a clear commitment by the
Palestinian people and their leadership to international
law, which was reaffirmed by the recent accession by the
State of Palestine to several international conventions
and treaties, the Palestinian plight and predicament has
worsened on all fronts. That is directly due to Israel's
illegal policies and practices that have entrenched the
occupation and undermined all peace efforts, to the
point where the viability of the two-State solution has
been cast into grave doubt. As we witness escalating
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law by Israel, the occupying Power,
we stress that it is high time to take a historic step
towards ending the occupation of the Palestinian land
and paving the way for a just and peaceful settlement
to the conflict. In doing so, the Council would fulfil its
duty under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
genuinely contribute to a solution of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict,
which remains a source of grave concern for the region,
the international community and for prospects of global
peace and stability.

In 2014, despite its proclamation by the United
Nations as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the situation deteriorated
dramatically, and the brutalization of the Palestinian
people reached new heights under the Israeli military
aggression waged against a besieged and blockaded
Gaza Strip in July and August. Israel has not been
held accountable for those crimes, despite the fact that
the occupying forces launched tens of thousands of
missiles, bombs, artillery shells and live ammunition
against a defenceless Palestinian civilian population
in an inhuman and criminal onslaught that killed more
than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of them civilians,
including hundreds of children and women, injured
and maimed more than 11,000, displaced hundreds of
thousands and terrorized the entire population. It also
caused vast destruction of homes and vital civilian
infrastructure, hospitals and schools, including more
than 100 United Nations facilities and the majority of
schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as mosques, churches and agricultural and industrial
properties, further decimating the Palestinian social
fabric and economy and traumatizing the population.

Another year has passed, and the suffering and
injustice borne by the Palestinian people continue.
Another year has taken us farther away from realizing
the just, lasting and comprehensive peace long sought
by Palestinians and other peace-loving countries on
a basis of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

NAM. strongly condemns Israel's continued and
escalating settlement construction throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in and around
occupied East Jerusalem, in a grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council. Those and other
systemic violations, such as the demolition of homes,
the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians, the
arrest and detention of Palestinians, including children,
and incessant violence, terror and provocations by
Israeli settlers and extremists, including at sensitive
religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
worsened conditions on the ground, increasing already
grave doubts about Israel's claim of commitment to this
twisted solution and peace.

Despite serious international efforts and repeated
calls for a peaceful solution in accordance with
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Israeli military occupation ofPalestinian
and Arab lands continues, as do the denial and violation
ofthe inalienable rights and freedoms of Palestinians by
Israel, the occupying Power. The failure to resolve this
question continues to undermine the credibility of our
international system and the rule of law. The Security
Council cannot remain on the sidelines in the quest for
ajust and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine,
especially when the situation continues to deteriorate
so dramatically and threatens to become completely
destabilized. NAM. therefore urges the Council to act
forthwith, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to end the plight of the Palestinian people and
take resolute action to end the Israeli occupation and
this decades-long injustice.

It was in that context that the Palestinian
Government and the Arab Group took an initiative
designed to mobilize the Security Council to act to
defuse this volatile situation, reaffirm the basis for a
just resolution of the conflict and redress of a historic
injustice, and establish a political horizon capable of
restoring hope to the Palestinian people that the 47-year
Israeli military oppression and occupation of their land
could soon come to an end, by delineating a time frame
for ending the occupation and affirming that justice,
freedom and peace are within reach.

However, the Security Council has again failed
to uphold its responsibility to address the crisis and
contribute meaningfully to a peaceful solution in
the Middle East, even leaving its own resolutions
unimplemented. The results of the recent vote on a
draft resolution (S/2014/916) showed that the Security
Council as a whole is not ready or willing to accept
its responsibilities, contrary to the overwhelming
international consensus on the issue, as reflected in the
vote of 180 Member States in the General Assembly
supporting the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and freedom and the many other
declarations from around the globe - governmental,
inter-governmental and non-governmental - calling
for an end to the prolonged conflict.

NAM. believes the message is clear worldwide. It
is high time to end the abhorrent Israeli occupation
and impunity that have brought so much suffering,
caused so many crises and sown so much instability
and anger throughout the Middle East, and that
continues to undermine regional and global peace
and security. Besides its manifestation in the annual
resolutions of the General Assembly, that message
was strongly reaffirmed at the recent Conference of
the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention convened by Switzerland, the Convention's
depositary. It also continues to be reaffirmed in the
motions by numerous European Parliaments calling
for the recognition of the State of Palestine and by
the fact that 135 countries already recognize the State
of Palestine. It is therefore most regrettable that the
Security Council remains paralysed and unable to act
to uphold its own responsibilities in this regard, with
all the implications that has for peace and security in
the Middle East and beyond. Nevertheless, NAM. once
again calls on the Council, and will continue to do so, to
act in accordance with its duties under the Charter, and
stresses the important role the NAM. caucus members
on the Council can play in that regard.

Lebanon continues to suffer from the persistent
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions into its
territory that were followed by years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese air space, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006),
whose provisions should be implemented in a manner
that guarantees consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and prevents Israel
from undertaking its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the area, and which were
intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that Israel
abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from
the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

I would now like to make some brief remarks in my
national capacity, in response to the allegations made
by the representative of the Israeli regime about my
country.

It is ridiculous that a regime that is famous for
its atrocities and apartheid policies, well documented
by the United Nations, its repeated violations of
internationally recognized borders, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, its attacks and threats of use
of force against its neighbours and beyond; a regime
with an atrocious record of developing, producing
and stockpiling various kinds of inhumane weapons,
including weapons of mass destruction; a regime
that has mass-murdered thousands of Palestinians,
including women and children, in Gaza, as recently
as last summer, should preach peace, democracy, the
rule of law and freedom to the Security Council and
the international community, in order to cover up its
heinous record of State terrorism, aggression and
occupation.

We should not allow this regime to make a mockery
of international institutions any longer. The Islamic
Republic of Iran, by reaffirming the inherent right of
Lebanese and Palestinian resistance forces to oppose
occupation, repel aggression and reclaim their occupied
lands, wishes to see peace and justice prevail in the
Middle East, which requires respect for international
norms and regulations by all, without discrimination.

