Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Kobler for both his briefing and his steadfast work.

More than a year after the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement, regrettably no significant progress
has been made in the political transition process that
has given concrete legitimacy to the establishment of
the Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. The support the former has garnered within
the Libyan political system has been minimal, which
undermines the chances for quickly stabilizing the
country and putting it back on the path to normalcy.
It is crucial that the Presidency Council succeed in
securing broad support among the population, thereby
achieving full legitimacy, failing which it will be very
difficult for it eventually to govern the country, or even
the majority of its territory.

Among the few news we can highlight once again
is the progress in the counter-terrorism fight, which has
made it possible to defeat the troops of the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, especially in the cities of Sirte and
Benghazi. We also welcome the announcement by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
that the remaining Libyan chemical weapons arsenal
had been eliminated following its removal from the
country for subsequent destruction, in line with the
provisions of resolution 2298 (2016).

We continue to be concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation affecting the Libyan people,
given that, according to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 1 million people
are urgently in need of assistance. Similarly, we are
concerned about information in the latest report
(S/2016/1011) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The
report condemns attacks against civilian infrastructure,
especially hospitals and medical facilities. Almost one
year since the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), we
note with concern the continuation of those crimes. As
such, we would like to have more information about
those attacks, to include how many have taken place,
the number of victims and any other information that
may be deemed relevant to shed light on such despicable
acts.

The situation of migrants who use Libya as a
country of origin and transit in order to cross over
into Europe in flight from hunger, war and political
crises in their countries continues to be a desperate
one. In spite of the measures adopted by the Security
Council, in 2016 the number of deaths resulting from
shipwrecks in the Mediterranean Sea of vessels in a
precarious state increased, although the total migration
flows decreased as compared to previous years. In that
connection, the meeting a few days ago between Prime
Minister Serraj and European Union officials takes on
special importance in trying to reduce migration flows.
We hope that the measures to be adopted prioritize the
human rights of migrants and refugees.

We reiterate our support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and for
UNSMIL's role. We encourage them to continue
their joint work with Prime Minister Serraj and the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord. That will be key in the Government being able
to enjoy legitimacy throughout the country, which is the
only way by which it will be able to urgently address the
enormous challenges before it in responding to Libya's
multiple and growing needs, including combating
terrorism and the grave humanitarian, economic and
security crisis affecting millions of people. In that
context, we think it will be important to carefully set
the Mission's new mandate. Likewise, the strategic
assessment review recommended by the Secretary-
General in his latest report will be a good opportunity
for the presence of the United Nations in Libya to be
adjusted to the political, operational and security
realities on the ground.

