Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/20l2/818) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation in
today's meeting of the Serbian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ivan Mrkie, and thank him and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for their statements.

The position of Azerbaijan with regard to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia
and non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence remains unchanged.
Resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the binding
international legal basis for a comprehensive settlement
through a political process and negotiations. As the
Secretary-General stated during his visit to the region,
it is critical to seek peaceful solutions to politically
sensitive issues and to exercise moderation in order
to avoid a possible increase in tension. In that regard,
we emphasize the utmost importance of UNMIK's
presence and activities in Kosovo. We believe that the
Mission's mandate and budgetary capacities should
remain unchanged and possibly enhanced. Furthermore,
UNMIK should maintain and further develop its key
role in coordinating all international efforts under its
status-neutral framework, as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).

As the report of the Secretary-General notes, the
Special Representative has closely interacted with key
actors at the community and political levels, including
in Belgrade and Pristina, to promote constructive
engagement. We encourage the Special Representative
and UNMIK to continue such interaction and dialogue.
According to the report, the overall security situation
remained generally calm during the reporting period.
However, security incidents, ethnically motivated
attacks and violence, and acts ofvandalism and religious
intolerance have continued, affecting first and foremost
the rights and freedoms of minority communities in
Kosovo. Obviously, the atmosphere of impunity for
such violations can hardly contribute to enhancing
public confidence or to building the foundation for a
long-term reconciliation.

The situation regarding the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs
of improvement during the reporting period. At the
same time, the existing socioeconomic problems and
recurring security incidents in several returnee areas
only strengthened perceptions of insecurity among
potential returnees and thus stalled the progress in
sustainable returns. We take note of some efforts made
by local authorities to improve relations between the
majority population and the minority communities
and to address socioeconomic hardships. Continued
international engagement is needed to complement
those efforts.

The protection of religious and cultural heritage
must remain a priority for UNMIK. Although some
progress was observed in that area during the reporting
period, frequent acts of vandalism and instances of
religious intolerance have continued to undermine
the process of reconciliation among the communities.
We once again recall the obligations to comply with
the commitments made by the respective sides in that
regard. Undoubtedly, the preservation of the region's
rich cultural diversity and the further promotion of its
cultural and spiritual heritage on the basis of ethnic and
religious tolerance remain key to achieving peace and a
prosperous future in the region.

We take note of the information regarding the
investigation of the facts contained in the report of
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty
related to a wide range of criminal offences, including
organized crime, the inhumane treatment of people
and organ trafficking. We strongly believe that the
establishment of truth will strengthen the principles of
justice and the rule of law and contribute to a lasting
political settlement.

We also note that, during the reporting period,
UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress
on the issue of missing persons, which remains one of
the essential aspects of reconciliation. We encourage
the sides and international partners to continue their
efforts to that end.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its efforts and important role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.

