Mr. Jacob (Israel): Allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to express our sincere
appreciation to the representative of Jamaica for her
excellent stewardship of the Security Council during
the month of November.

The past two weeks have seen an incredible
escalation of Palestinian terrorism against Israel which
is unparalleled in more than 14 months of violence.
Though one would never know it from the draft
resolution before the Council, surely we are all aware
of the devastating triple bombing that occurred on 1
December in a crowded pedestrian mall in the heart of
Jerusalem, claiming the lives of 11 Israelis, all between
the ages of 14 and 20, and wounding nearly 200 others.
Barely 12 hours after that attack, a Palestinian suicide
terrorist, with more than 10 kilograms of explosives
strapped to his body, blew up a public bus in the
northern Israeli city of Haifa, killing 15 civilians and
wounding 38 others, several of them seriously. That
same morning, an Israeli professor was shot and killed,
and several others were wounded, by two Palestinian
terrorists disguised as Israeli soldiers.

Three days later, a Palestinian terrorist blew
himself up on a side street in Jerusalem, wounding two
people at a nearby bus stop. Four days later, more than
40 civilians were wounded when a Palestinian suicide
terrorist detonated his charges in the northern city of
Haifa. Later that same day, Palestinian terrorists shot
and seriously wounded an Israeli civilian after his car
was ambushed near the village of Na'aleh.
The following day, Palestinian terrorists fired
mortar shells into the community of Gush Katif,
wounding a 3-year-old boy and his 4-year-old sister.
This past Wednesday evening, Palestinian terrorists
struck again when a public bus was ambushed near the
community of Emmanuel. Two roadside bombs were
detonated, and several terrorists opened fire, with
automatic rifles and anti-tank grenades, on passengers
as they fled the vehicle, as well as on ambulances,
rescue workers and medical personnel who arrived at
the scene. Ten Israelis were killed in that attack, and
approximately 30 others were wounded. At almost
precisely the same moment, Palestinian suicide
bombers attacked two Israeli vehicles near the
community of Neve Dekalim, wounding the four
occupants.

The list goes on and on. Palestinian terrorism
continues even as we speak, despite the insistence of
the international community that Chairman Arafat
fulfil his responsibility to fight terrorism. Even a
cursory analysis of the events of the past 14 days
indicates that Chairman Arafat has abjectly failed to do
so.

The terrorism that has afflicted Israeli civilians is
part and parcel of the fundamentalist terrorism that is
now the focus of the comprehensive international
campaign aimed at its eradication. The same
rejectionist ideologies that have imperilled the safety
and security of Israelis for decades are finally being
recognized as a clear and present danger to the world
order. This danger emerges from the fanatical mindset
that justifies any and all means to achieve its ends. It
makes no distinction among its targets. It is
remorseless and unforgiving in its brutality and must
be condemned and fought unequivocally, without
reservations, without hesitation and without fear.

Unfortunately, there are those who refuse to
acknowledge that Palestinians who target innocent
Israelis are, in fact, terrorists. They refer to the so-
called cycle of violence, to the poverty and despair of
the Palestinian population, and even bestow the noble
title of"freedom fighter" on those who kill children.

This notion is as repulsive as it is mistaken. There
is no cycle of violence in the Middle East in the
manner in which that term is usually understood. There
is no equivalent between those who perpetrate terror
and those who fight it.

For Israel, every death of a civilian is a tragic
consequence in a conflict in which civilians have been
used by terrorists as human shields. For the Palestinian
terrorists, however, civilians are the target, and each
civilian casualty is the benchmark of a successful
operation.

Israel recognizes, and has repeatedly expressed
its sympathy for, the unfortunate deaths of Palestinian
civilians and for the Palestinian populations that must
endure the precautionary security measures foisted
upon Israel by the inaction of the Palestinian
leadership. But while Israel considers the death of any
civilian, whether Israeli or Palestinian, to be tragic, for
the Palestinian terrorist, these deaths are deliberate,
premeditated and desired.

For Palestinian terrorists, every Israeli casualty is
a matter of pride, a religious obligation and an occasion
for celebration. Palestinian terrorists routinely produce
videotapes prior to embarking on a murderous rampage
in which they speak with evident pleasure of their
desire to kill as many men, women and children as
possible. These videos are virtually indistinguishable
from that of another notorious terrorist, who, in a
videotape with which we are all by now familiar,
rejoiced over the murders of thousands of Americans in
New York; Washington, DC; and Pennsylvania.

When Mr. Arafat announced his historic decision,
in September 1993, to part ways with his terrorist past,
he showed no confusion over who was a terrorist. He
demonstrated a perfectly clear understanding of the
fact that the murders he himself had orchestrated in the
name of the Palestine Liberation Organization were the
very terrorist tactics that he was renouncing.
Increasingly, however, we now hear representatives of
the Palestinian Authority and others attempt to justify
the unjustifiable and to distinguish between one kind of
terror and another, as evidenced by their conspicuous
refusal to employ the term "terrorism" when referring
to attacks on Israeli civilians. But if Palestinian
terrorism is truly a legitimate method of liberation,
why, then, did Chairman Arafat even make a pretence,
back in 1993, of rejecting it? And if it is not, then on
what basis is Israel to be condemned for taking action
to prevent it?

We must be clear. There is no cause so just, no
grievance so severe, no objective so noble that it can
justify killing innocent civilians. Terrorism must be
defined by what one does, not by what one does it for.
By refusing to condemn terrorist murder
whenever and wherever it exists, we only empower
extremists. We legitimize those who seek to achieve
their goals through violence and terror at the expense
of leaders willing to resolve disputes through peaceful
dialogue. If the international community tolerates any
act of terrorism, if it turns a blind eye to it, it renders
irrelevant the very methods it has championed for the
peaceful resolution of disputes.

In the Palestinian case, the grievance that is cited
is that of occupation, and the objective ascribed to the
terrorist murderers is that of liberation. Yet even if one
were to accept the ludicrous notion that occupation is a
legitimate basis for killing innocent civilians, the
Palestinians still would not qualify. The Palestinians
have sought to portray Israeli occupation as an
outgrowth of a type of colonial quest for power and
domination over another people. And yet the historical
record demonstrably asserts the contrary.

Israel's presence in the West Bank and Gaza was
the result of a war in which Israel's very existence was
threatened by the combined armies of several Arab
nations. The hostilities of 1967 were a war imposed
upon Israel, not a war undertaken in order to conquer
new territory and subjugate its people. The Israeli
presence in the West Bank and Gaza is a result not of
Israeli aggression, but of Israeli self-defence.

More recently, Israel has transferred sufficient
territory to the Palestinians that now the overwhelming
majority of Palestinians live under the jurisdiction of
the Palestinian Authority. In July 2000, at the Camp
David Summit, Israel was prepared to go even further,
extending an offer that would have transferred virtually
all of the West Bank and Gaza to the Palestinians, an
offer that numerous observers have described as fair
and generous. The Palestinians not only spurned that
offer, they launched a terrorist war that continues to
this very day.

Surely the tired notion that occupation is the root
of this conflict cannot withstand the forces of history
and common sense. And even more surely, it in no way
justifies the unconscionable murders of innocent Israeli
civilians.

What we are witnessing today in the Middle East
is the continuation of a struggle begun not in 1967, but
in 1948, when members of the League of Arab States
collectively rejected General Assembly partition
resolution 181 (II) and launched a war to eliminate the
Jewish State. Every day that terrorism threatens
civilians simply because they are Israeli; every day that
the Jewish right to self-determination is equated with
racism; every day that Palestinian incitement
encourages hatred of the Jewish people, Israelis
become further convinced that this is a conflict not
about occupation, but about our legitimacy and our
right to exist.

The obstacle to peace in the Middle East is not
occupation - an occupation that Israel never wanted
and that it has gone to great lengths to bring to an end.
The primary obstacle to peace and to a negotiated
settlement between our peoples is the continuing
murder of civilians and the abhorrent attempts to
justify those murders by the Palestinian leadership.
There is absolutely no alternative to the immediate
arrest of Palestinian terrorists, the dismantling of their
infrastructure and putting an end to officially
sanctioned incitement and demonization.

Israel had hoped that the mounting international
pressure on Mr. Arafat would finally mobilize him to
act. We were cautiously optimistic that, following the
carnage in Jerusalem and Haifa, he had finally been
made to realize that the only hope for his people and
the survival of his leadership was to act, and to act
quickly.

Unfortunately, reports today indicate that Mr.
Arafat has officially suspended his campaign against
terrorists - if it ever really existed to begin with. By
this statement, Mr. Arafat has made it clear that he has
no intention of ending the violence, taking action
against terrorists or bringing himself into accord with
the will of the international community, the principles
of international law and the standards of international
legitimacy. It further substantiates the fact that, while
the Palestinians claim to have made a strategic choice
for peace, they have made a tactical choice for
terrorism. By his statement and his pattern of action -
or, more precisely, his inaction - Mr. Arafat is
reinforcing his reputation as an unworthy and
unreliable leader who is leading his people to yet
another catastrophe.

I will not deny that the situation we are facing is
as bleak as it is dangerous. But all is not lost. There is
an ever-diminishing window of opportunity for us to
reverse the descent into hopeless violence if the
Council acts prudently today. Unfortunately, the draft
resolution before us does not further that objective.
While serious international efforts are under way
to bring an end to the Palestinian terrorist campaign, a
draft resolution which fails to recognize that terror as
the primary obstacle to peace and security in the region
sends a misleading and dangerous message. At a time
when Israeli civilians are being continuously targeted,
the failure to condemn such actions and call in clear
terms for Palestinian leadership to combat that terror,
as it is morally and legally obligated to do, amounts to
a reward for violence and an indirect endorsement of
the inaction of the Palestinian Authority.

After all that has passed, is this draft resolution
really the message the Council wants to send? Does the
carnage of the past 14 months not deserve more than
the cursory mention of terrorism?

It is my hope that Council members will find it
within themselves to deal honestly with the situation
before us. But as it stands, the draft is unbalanced and
counterproductive and, quite frankly, out of touch with
the reality in the region, in which innocent Israeli
civilians are being targeted day after day, precisely
because they are innocent. As it stands, the draft
resolution cannot help the parties return to the
negotiating table, which is the only place - as the
parties themselves have acknowledged - where
outstanding issues can be resolved.

Israel is as committed to combating terrorism as it
is to the pursuit of peace through a process of dialogue,
negotiation and reconciliation with our Palestinian
neighbours. We are committed to the implementation
of the Mitchell report, which calls first and foremost
for a complete and unconditional cessation of violence;
we are committed to implementing the confidence-
building measures detailed in the Mitchell report; and
we are committed to engaging once again in substantial
peace negotiations with the Palestinians aimed at
achieving a just and lasting resolution to the conflict
between our peoples, on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

But we cannot do it alone. We cannot take actions
towards these ends while our citizens are being gunned
down at will. We cannot take action without reciprocal
Palestinian action. We cannot be the lone voice calling
for peace and reconciliation while terror, hatred and
incitement continue to emanate from the other side.

We call upon the Palestinian people to end the
litany of historic opportunities missed by their leader
and to join us in the historic endeavour to reaffirm, not
just in word but also in deed, their commitment to non-
violence and direct bilateral negotiations. In this way,
and only in this way, can we clear the path for
negotiations and finally put to rest the tragic and
painful conflict that both peoples have endured for so
long.

