The President: At the outset, I should like to
speak in my national capacity concerning the death of
Yasser Arafat. The death of Yasser Arafat is a
significant moment in Palestinian history. We express
our condolences to the Palestinian people. For the
Palestinian people we hope that the future will bring
peace and the fulfilment of their aspirations for an
independent, democratic Palestine that is at peace with
its neighbours. During the period of transition that is
ahead, we urge all in the region and throughout the
world to join in helping make progress towards those
goals and towards the ultimate goal of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Letter dated 8 October 2004 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2004/807)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Japan and
the Netherlands, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ivanie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mladen
Ivanie, Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Lord Paddy
Ashdown, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Lord Ashdown to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 8 October 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the twenty-sixth report of the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, document
S/2004/807.

At this morning's meeting the Security Council
will hear a briefing by the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Lord Paddy Ashdown.

I now give him the floor.


