The delegation of Guatemala would like to thank Annegret Kramp- Karrenbauer, German Federal Minister of Defence, for convening this open debate, and to extend our acknowledgment to the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, and to the Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer, for their remarks. As a troop-contributing country, we believe that it is essential to discuss all aspects of peacekeeping under the United Nations flag, especially at a time of rapid change due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As previously expressed before the Security Council, Guatemala attaches singular importance to United Nations peacekeeping operations as an indispensable instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security. This vision has given rise to our readiness to contribute to peacekeeping operations in Africa, the Middle East and, years before, in Haiti. During our participation throughout the years, we have witnessed how peacekeeping efforts have evolved, both conceptually and operationally. However, as conflicts have become more complex, the risks of human rights violations rise. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic is challenging our societies, presenting a colossal test of leadership and humanity, as the High Commissioner for Human Rights indicated in her 2019 annual report. The role of human rights and United Nations mechanisms remain essential. Human rights violations are both cause and effect of destructive conflict, which does not distinguish between women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and others. We strongly believe that connecting the agendas of human rights and maintaining peace offers a unique strategic entry point to help shift a culture from reactive crisis management to one of prevention, especially in a global context where human rights tend to be restricted or attacked for the sake of security approaches. In this regard, Guatemala considers the report of the Independent High- level Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) to be extremely relevant, in that it recalls that all efforts are necessary to promote and protect human rights as a means of conflict prevention and relapse prevention. The Secretariat has provided considerable technical cooperation to develop national capacities to prevent human rights violations, as well as to strengthen the capacities of civil society and communities for early warning and response systems. Furthermore, we stress that the integration of human rights strengthens the implementation of mandates as a whole. Security, human rights and development must be considered holistically. If human rights are not protected, there is no security or any way to guarantee development for many countries and communities. The reality in the field proves the need to focus on prevention, adopt comprehensive and coherent approaches, and be able to rely on mechanisms that prioritize human rights in efforts related to security, protection, politics, humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and socioeconomic development. United Nations peacekeeping operations are key for conflict management and may play a critical role in the promotion and protection of human rights. They contribute to strengthening the rule of law and fostering national reconciliation and unity, including through facilitating inclusive dialogue and mediation, access to justice and accountability. In conjunction with host countries, they can assist in promoting good governance, democracy, reliable institutions, gender equality and the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms - all conducive to sustaining peace. I conclude by reiterating Guatemala's commitment to continuing to provide personnel of the highest degree of efficiency, competence and discipline to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Mindful of the relevant role of women as agents of change and peacebuilders, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), our country contributes both women and men committed to the cause of peace and security in the world. Lastly, Guatemala wishes to pay tribute to all those who work in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and especially to those who have made the ultimate sacrifice for this noble cause.
