Allow me first of all to thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her commitment to peace and stability in Libya. I would also like to thank the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Ambassador Juergen Schulz, for his outstanding briefing. Ceasefire violations by both sides in Libya have significantly undermined the peace efforts sponsored by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of innocent civilians. Thousands of people have been forced to leave their homes since the beginning of the clashes between the protagonists in the Libyan crisis. Alas, the violence has spared neither hospitals and airports nor residential areas, thus weakening the already fragile capacity of the country's health-care system at a time when it must help respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It cannot be said often enough that these attacks on civilian infrastructure are a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and should stop immediately. Indeed, if health workers and patients themselves are not protected from these attacks, even in hospital facilities, which are supposedly inviolable, a coordinated and effective fight against the coronavirus pandemic will simply not be possible. That is why the Niger joins the appeal launched by seven United Nations agencies to support the Libyan population, which is dangerously threatened by the conflict and COVID-19. The Niger deplores the fact that despite the repeated calls for a humanitarian ceasefire, in particular the one launched on 23 March by the Secretary-General, hostilities are continuing unabated, hindering access and the delivery of essential humanitarian assistance. My country deplores the continued external interference and reminds all actors of the commitments they made at the Berlin Conference. We urge Council members to spare no effort and to use all their influence to help achieve a ceasefire and to create an environment conducive to political talks, in accordance with resolution 2510 (2020). Violations of the arms embargo and the introduction of foreign mercenaries into Libya to fight alongside the various factions will only increase the escalation of violence. Those acts are a source of major concern to Libya's immediate neighbours, including the Niger in particular, and to the entire Sahel subregion in general. While it may not be the only one, the main reason for the destabilization of Libya has undoubtedly been the serious security situation facing the Sahel today. We fear that the thousands of jihadists transferred to Libya today will spread out throughout the Sahel in the same way as the Libyan army's formidable arsenals have fuelled the destabilization that the region is facing. On the economic front, we are deeply concerned about the consequences of the continuing conflict, which is seriously hampering the proper functioning of the Libyan National Oil Corporation. Indeed, the drop in the price of oil and the difficulties faced by the Corporation will further aggravate the country's economic difficulties, with serious consequences for the livelihoods of many Libyan families. I would like at this juncture to commend the European Union on having set up the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, in accordance with resolution 2292 (2016). We hope that the Operation will work closely with the Libyans, neighbouring countries and the African Union to ensure compliance with the arms embargo and help in the fight against organized crime, the smuggling of migrants and the illegal export of Libyan oil. The Niger hopes that the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya will take place very soon so that the momentum for peace and reconciliation in Libya can be revived. In that regard, the Niger supports the work of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya established by the African Union and expresses the hope that the inter-Libyan reconciliation conference will be organized very soon under the auspices of the African Union. Regarding the reconciliation process, my country believes that the time has come for us to show courage and imagination to find a lasting solution to the serious Libyan crisis. It is clear today that no solution to the Libyan crisis can be found without the full and complete participation of all the daughters and sons of Libya, without any exclusion. Today is the time for reconciliation. The daughters and sons of Libya have endured enough suffering to be asked again and again to pay. Libya, once a model of stability and peace, has become a country of chaos, war and distress whose immense resources are being plundered in the most abject manner. At this time, when the COVID-19 pandemic is forcing us to revisit our convictions and question our certainties, it is high time that we overcome our divisions and assume our responsibilities by working towards the only goal that is worthwhile today for Libya and its people: reconciliation, peace, justice and prosperity.
