Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Uruguay for convening today's meeting
and Special Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing.

Under the leadership of Prime Minister Al
Abadi, the Iraqi Government has made progress
in promoting reform of Government institutions,
facilitating national reconciliation, fighting terrorism,
improving the humanitarian situation and advancing
economic development, and China commends all those
achievements. We hope that Iraq will be able to achieve
national security and stability as soon as possible and
that the Iraqi people will be able to lead peaceful,
tranquil lives at an early date.

At present, Iraq is still dealing with an array
of political, economic, humanitarian and counter-
terrorism challenges. The international community
should continue to give greater attention to Iraq,
enhance its engagement in the country, support all the
parties involved in staying committed to resolving their
differences appropriately through political dialogue,
support the Iraqi Government in promoting national
reconciliation throughout the country and support a
continued role for the United Nations in providing good
offices and coordination.

Since its establishment, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has played an
important role in supporting the Iraqi Government
in promoting an inclusive political dialogue, national
reconciliation and reconstruction and coordinating
international assistance. China supports the work of
Special Representative Kubis and appreciates the efforts
of UNAMI. We hope that the international community
will continue to support UNAMI in the implementation
of its mandate.

China welcomes the Iraqi Government's efforts
to maintain domestic stability. China supports the
international community's efforts in that country by
providing Iraq with assistance to fight terrorism. In the
broader context of maintaining stability in the Middle
East, the international community should enhance its
coordination, adopt unified standards and respond
forcefully so as to prevent terrorist organizations from
threatening the region and beyond.

China appreciates Iraq's ongoing efforts to improve
its relations with Kuwait and other regional countries,
and encourages Iraq to work with relevant regional
countries to resolve outstanding issues through dialogue
and consultations. At the same time, China hopes that
those countries will fully respect Iraq's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, and
contribute to its stability and development.

