Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is an
honour for me to address the Security Council only a
few days after the important Visit of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres to the Central African Republic. It
was a visit rich in symbolism, which he undertook as
a signal of the solidarity of the United Nations and the
international community with the Government and the
people of the Central African Republic so as to ensure
that the Central African Republic will remain on the
busy international agenda.

I am pleased to take part in this meeting of the
Security Council along with other key partners of the
Central African Republic and the United Nations, as
you noted earlier, Mr. President. This reflects the rich
and indispensable collaboration among us.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2017/865), this year has been marked by a great many
serious incidents. Many more Central Africans have
lost their lives. As the deteriorating security situation
has not allowed for the sustainable return of those
affected since the beginning of the crisis, the country
now has nearly 600,000 internally displaced persons
and half a million refugees in neighbouring countries.
Their fate and the volatility of the security situation
have further overshadowed an already disastrous
humanitarian environment.

But I must also deplore the violent deaths of many
humanitarian workers - 13 in total, the latest of which
occurred yesterday - making the Central African
Republic the most dangerous country for humanitarian
action. It is in that context of unprecedented brutality,
where there is often no peace to be preserved, that Blue
Helmets are engaged and risk their lives every day.
Twelve have succumbed since the beginning of this
year, victims of Violent targeted attacks, and several
others have been wounded. Their hard work and their
sacrifice alongside the Central African security forces
have maintained a appreciable calm in the capital,
Bangui, and elsewhere in the country.

But wherever the presence of the State is lacking,
brutal attacks on civilians have persisted, particularly
in the south-east and north-west of the country.
Although limited in resources, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) increased
the number of road patrols, as in Pombolo, to limit the
risks to civilians. Redeployment in the affected areas
is particularly slowed by the rainy season and acts of
sabotage by armed groups.

In addition, with the onset of the dry season and
transhumance, there is reason to fear a resurgence of
clashes in the west of the country, particularly between
local anti-balaka fighters and armed members of
the Fulani community or armed elements affiliated
with ex-Seleka. Despite the hard work on the ground
and the negative impact of the misunderstanding that
arises from excessive expectations of the mandate of
MINUSCA and inevitably disappointed - although
understandably so - the Mission continues to carry out
its mandate with courage and determination. That was
recently the case in Bocaranga, where it rebuffed the
armed group Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation, or
in Bang against elements of the Mouvement patriotique
pour la Centrafrique.

The multiplication of hotbeds of tension and
the exacerbation of armed violence over a large part
of the vast Central African territory highlight the
limits of the MINUSCA force, which the withdrawal
of Ugandan forces under the mandate of the African
Union has accentuated.

It was also in order to better understand the
dynamics of the conflict that continues to rage in many
parts of the territory, and to appreciate the complexity
of our mission, on the eve of the renewal of the
MINUSCA mandate, that the Secretary-General visited
the Central African Republic from 24 to 27 October. In
Bangui and Bangassou, he paid a well-deserved tribute
to our troops, recognizing their immense sacrifice and
invaluable contribution to the efforts to restore lasting
peace in the Central African Republic. The Secretary-
General and President Faustin-Archange Touadera also
honoured the thousands of Central Africans who have
fallen Victim to the armed conflicts that have affected
the Central African Republic for decades.

When he left Bangui on 27 October, the Secretary-
General noted that the Central African Republic
was at a turning point in its history, the outcome of
which will depend primarily on the Central Africans
themselves. But to succeed, it is undeniable that, at
this stage of the country's capabilities, the decisions of
the Security Council and the continued support of the
international community will continue to be critical to
further progress.

That is why the Secretary-General has called for
greater solidarity with the Central African Republic,
stressing that it is a country that faces immense
challenges but also has real opportunities to achieve
a political resolution to the crisis and to launch an
economic recovery to benefit as many citizens as
possible. He pleaded for the strengthening of the
legitimate institutions of the country and a substantial
increase in the resources of MINUSCA to enable it to
better protect the civilian population and support the
expansion of State authority.

The Secretary-General also supported greater
national responsibility for the security of the country,
including through the gradual deployment of Central
African armed forces battalions that were retrained
by the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic, in line with paragraph
9 of resolution 2301 (2016). And in order for the peace
dividend to be felt without further delay by the Central
African people, the Secretary-General also advocated
the effective implementation of the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, both in the mobilization of
the promised resources and in the carrying out, at the
national level, of the selected programmes.

To succeed on all fronts, all actors must be committed
to an inclusive political process under the auspices of
the President of the Central African Republic. In that
respect, the 17 July adoption in Libreville of the road
map for peace and reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, initiated by the African Union, offers real
hope for a lasting exit to the crisis through the voices
of dialogue. My brother Moussa Ne'bie', in Bangui, and
I have been having daily discussions on that issue and
we are ready to work hand in hand to ensure the success
of that important initiative.

MINUSCA will fully support the efforts of the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative and the
Government of the Central African Republic so as
to ensure its success. Working together, we will also
promote local dialogue aimed at achieving a sustainable
reduction of violence, better humanitarian access and
the return of local Government. Ensuring stability
throughout the country will require strengthening
the presence and capacity of State institutions at
the local level, especially to support dialogue and
reconciliation efforts.

I am pleased to report notable progress in
the implementation of the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan and the Framework for Mutual
Engagement, which provide key strategic instruments
for strengthening institutions and promoting the
economic recovery of the country. But it is regrettable
that more than 2 million people in the Central African
Republic are in urgent need of food assistance. The
humanitarian response plan was revised upwards in
August to reflect increased needs, but has only been
34 per cent funded.

Communities devastated by violence often have to
take refuge around places of worship, in hospitals and
near MINUSCA camps. This forced displacement has
created new enclaves in many localities in the east of
the country. In Bangassou, Mbomou prefecture, some
1,500 displaced persons - primarily Muslims - found
shelter in the Catholic church premises under the
protection of MINUSCA. In Bria, Kaga Bandoro and
Bocaranga, thousands of displaced people are suffering
the consequences of merciless clashes between
anti-Balaka and ex-Seleka elements. The prospects for
the return of displaced persons and refugees remain
significantly reduced by persistent tensions.
(spoke in English)

The Secretary-General's request to increase
MINUSCA force level by 900 troops is part of a
comprehensive strategy to address the deteriorating
situation in close collaboration with the Government,
and to create an opportunity to advance the political
process. The proposed increase should include highly
mobile troops that would provide the force with greater
flexibility to rapidly deploy in areas of heightened threat
to civilians. We intend to increase our support for and
engagement in the political process, as requested by the
authorities of the Central African Republic, supported
by the African Initiative, together with other important
stakeholders, such as the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Community of
Sant'Egidio - and I am glad to see Mr. Garofalo here
with us today - in the knowledge that only a political
solution will bring lasting peace to the Central African
Republic. We will seek to improve the protection of
civilians with a stronger emphasis on early warning and
prevention, and we will make greater efforts to ensure
humanitarian access to populations in need.

The Mission will also continue to support the
restoration of State authority, working together with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
We will strengthen our support to Central Africa's
judicial system and to the security sector, including
the gendarmerie, the police and the gradual
operationalization of the Central African armed forces
units trained by the European Union. In that regard,
we applaud the tripartite agreement between the
Government, the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic and MINUSCA
for a joint deployment and use of the Central African
armed forces.

The Mission I have the honour to lead will spare
no effort in helping the Government and the Central
African authorities, as well as all national actors
committed to peace, to realize the aspirations of
their people, especially its valiant youth, women and
children, to a safer and more prosperous future. We
will do that while ensuring that all of our civilian
and uniformed personnel respect more than ever the
spirit of the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
against sexual exploitation and abuse. During his
visit to the Central African Republic, the Secretary-
General himself reaffirmed that imperative and when
he met the Victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, he
assured them of all his compassion and determination
to eradicate this scourge.
I thank troop-contributing countries that have taken
important steps to curb this type of criminal behaviour.
Our concerted actions have already resulted in a
significant reduction in cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse. We can and must do even more.

(Spoke in French)

I wish to sincerely thank the Council for
recognizing the crucial role that MINUSCA plays in
the Central African Republic. Significant progress has
been achieved through the adoption of resolution 2301
(2016) towards establishing the national and legitimate
institutions that are essential to the future of the
country. The creation ofthe Special Criminal Court and
the deployment of judicial authorities outside Bangui
will allow the slow but gradual return of the rule of law,
which will end impunity and the spiral of violence.

During his visit, the Secretary-General called on
Central African politician and the leaders of public
opinion to take urgent measures to put an end to the
political manipulation and instrumentalization of
ethnicity or religion, which fuel hatred and Violence.
There will be no peace in the Central African Republic
for some so long as there is no peace for all. The Council's
continued commitment will be crucial to the country's
long-term stabilization and development efforts. We
count on the Council's support to ensure that the current
cycle of Violence in the Central African Republic is
broken and that the resilience and hope shown by so
many Central Africans continue to benefit from the
unwavering support of the international community.

I should like to borrow an idea from Saint
Augustine in saying that, in the case of the Central
African Republic, it is better to progress slowly in the
right direction - even at a limp - than quickly in the
wrong direction. Today, the Central African Republic is
moving in the right direction. We must do our utmost to
help it to that end. The Secretary-General is committed
to that effort, and has called for a great deal of sacrifice,
endurance and patience.

