Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Angelo, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/760).

I would also like to express particular gratitude to
the representatives of the Central African Republic and
of Chad for their statements. Statements from countries
from the concerned regions add useful elements that
members of the Council should take into account, as is
the case here.

My country supports the concept of the
operations outlined by the Secretary-General in his last
two reports. That is, for a military operation of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) to replace the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) at
the expiry of its mandate.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that this force should include a highly
mobile and responsive capacity, including a strong air
component. Along with other members of this Council,
my country has supported the establishment of a
United Nations military component and we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the submission of
three options in his report.

Taking into account the repeated requests of the
Government of the Central African Republic to this
Council, and the broad recognition that EUFOR's
presence has contributed to improving the security

08-6445]

situation in its zones of operation, my country has
listened very closely to what was said by the
representative of the Central African Republic. In
going through the Secretary-General's report we tended
to favour the second option, and without a doubt his
words have confirmed our beliefs. We hope that the
Council and the Special Representative will have a
fruitful discussion on the viability and effectiveness of
these options.

In regard to the first of these options, we should
consider whether this might lead to a most unwelcome
security vacuum at this point in time. On other
occasions, my country has also underscored the
importance for this Council to address the root causes
of conflicts and not only the consequences or
symptoms of these armed conflicts.

As a result, we wish to agree with the Secretary-
General's report on MINURCAT of 12 September
(S/2008/601), in which it was stated, in paragraph 83,
that

"the expansion of MINURCAT to include a
military component would only be effective if, in
addition to its present police, rule of law, human
rights and civil affairs mandate, the Mission were
mandated to support Chadian stakeholders in
addressing underlying causes of insecurity
relevant to the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons."

In this regard, we welcome the information
contained in this latest report of the Secretary-General
considering the activities undertaken by MINURCAT
in order to support the Chadian authorities in regard to
the judiciary and prisons in terms of the training and
deployment of the Detachement Integre de Securite, as
well as their joint work with the Government of Chad
and with civil society in preventing sexual violence.

In particular, we are greatly interested in
MINURCAT's work in promoting reconciliation and
dialogue on a local level, as was the case in Kerfi. We
would like to seek additional information from the
Special Representative concerning these efforts and the
lessons learned from that process.

We believe that this form of support activities
could be further strengthened and for this reason, we
support the recommendations for additional tasks for
the Mission outlined in paragraph 83 of the report
dated 12 September which recommends, first of all,

"(a) support to national and local
authorities in resolving local tensions to enhance
the environment for internally displaced persons;

"(b) support the Government's efforts to
end impunity for crimes against civilians and
humanitarian workers;

"(c) at the regional level, continue to play a
role as a observer along with the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the
contact group that was established in the 13 March
Dakar Accord to monitor its implementation and
assist, as necessary, the Governments of Chad and
the Sudan in building good, neighbourly
relations." (S/2008/601, para. 83)

We believe that through these undertakings and
efforts, it would be possible to meet the benchmarks
set for MINURCAT'S withdrawal as listed by the
Secretary-General in section IX of this latest report.

On the regional situation, once again, my country
would like to emphasize the importance of this context
and would like to congratulate the Government of
Libya and the Contact Group for their important efforts
in seeking to improve relations between Chad and the
Sudan.

We welcome the news of the exchange of
Ambassadors between these two countries and hope to
see a successful implementation of the deployment of a
peace and security force along the border between
these two countries as agreed.

Finally, once again, we must condemn the attacks
and the harassment of humanitarian workers in eastern
Chad, behaviour which is wholly unacceptable,
particularly in view of the lives of the men, women and
children whose lives depend on this assistance. We
hope that the deployment of the second MINURCAT
force will provide hope and relief to these persons.

