Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
his report and to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for introducing it. We agree with the
assessments and recommendations contained in the
report. Unfortunately, they paint a troubling picture of
developments in the province.

We note, of course, the progress that has been
made in the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), in
particular in the economic area and with regard to
assisting in the setting up of the Kosovo Police
Service. However, we share the concern expressed in
the report of the Secretary-General at the challenge
presented to the international community by the leaders
of the Kosovo Albanians. Their actions run counter to
resolution 1244 (1999) and to the authority of the
Mission.

The Kosovo Assembly's attempts to enact laws
on higher education and on a property tax, without
their being approved by the Special Representative, are
a clear example of this. Furthermore, the Kosovo
Albanian leaders are taking these actions in spite of the
clearly expressed negative position of Michael
Steiner - actions that could derail the inter-ethnic
dialogue and reconciliation process in Kosovo.

Unfortunately, in this area the overall picture is
far from what we had hoped for. As is clear from the
report, in two thirds of the Kosovo municipalities
conditions are unsatisfactory for the return of non-
Albanian refugees. Violence, harassment and
discrimination are continuing against minorities,
primarily the Serb minority. There is still no equality in
terms of conditions of security or freedom of
movement for all inhabitants of the province.
Minorities continue to face serious obstacles in terms
of employment in the administrative structures and in
the area of access to public institutions or to the
judicial system.

This year saw an upsurge in ethnically motivated
violence and political crimes within the Kosovo
Albanian community. Terrorist acts have even been
committed, including the destruction of the railway
bridge in Zvecan. The perpetrators of those acts openly
proclaim their presence and their goals. Those
activities must be strongly condemned and specific
measures taken to put an end to them.

We are seriously concerned at the maintenance of
the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) as a paramilitary
organization. It is, in fact, the successor of the so-
called Kosovo Liberation Army. We deem it
unacceptable that, notwithstanding the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999) and of the Constitutional
Framework, KPC leaders openly proclaim their
allegiance to the military values of the KLA and their
goal of turning the KPC into an army of an independent
Kosovo. Maintaining the status quo regarding the
KPC is a potential source of destabilization in the
province - one that could spark a new war of violence
on inter-ethnic grounds.

We are convinced that mere pro forma verbal
assurances by the Kosovo political leaders with respect
to their commitment to resolution 1244 (1999) and to
the Constitutional Framework are not sufficient. Such
assurances need to be backed by real practical steps.
Failing that, we cannot hope to see full participation by
minority representatives in the activities of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
province or in the dismantling of parallel structures.

Naturally, we agree with the View of the
Secretary-General regarding the need for the
constructive participation of all Kosovo communities
in the work of the provincial and municipal Institutions
of Self-Government. We hope that UNMIK and its
leader, Mr. Steiner, will continue to take a consistent
position in opposing the growth of radical tendencies in
the province and in preventing Albanian extremists
from using the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to attain their political goals and to turn
Kosovo into a quasi-State.

We call on UNMIK to continue its robust action
to establish the rule of law in the province, as required
by resolution 1244 (1999). Attempts by the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to call into
question UNMIK's authority are unacceptable.

We reaffirm our support for the concept of
"standards before status". We note the importance of
the planned process of transferring further
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of the province, which are clearly outlined
in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework. This
process must be carried out in strict compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999). We do not deem it advisable to
accelerate action in this area. We believe that the pace
should be set taking account, inter alia, of the
effectiveness of the work of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in areas in which they have
already received all of the necessary authority. The
process of handing over authority should in no way
subvert the decision of principle regarding the status of
the province; that decision should be taken at a later
stage, in strict compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).

We consistently advocate the continuation of
constructive cooperation between UNMIK and the
Belgrade authorities. In this connection, we welcome
Belgrade's invitation to the Mission to become
involved in the resolution of practical questions related
to the opening of two new border crossing points on
the Kosovo section of the border between Serbia and
Montenegro and Macedonia.

We agree with the view of the Secretary-General
regarding the need to establish dialogue, in a
constructive spirit, between Belgrade and Pristina on
practical issues. That is the key to resolving that many
problems that continue to impede the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) as a whole.

