Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing
to the Security Council on the latest developments
concerning the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

I will focus on two points in my statement: first, the
developments of the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
and, secondly, the political and security developments.

With regard to the developments of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, we just heard Mr. Lowcock's
briefing in which he provided troubling numbers
and statistics that demonstrate the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Yemen, especially in
Al-Hudaydah. That situation unfortunately reached
unprecedented levels of daily suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people, which has been exacerbated by the
activities of the Houthi groups who exploit routes used
for the delivery of humanitarian aid. Those groups
set up intensive military checkpoints clearly intended
hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those
in need of it - people who are suffering cruelly from
the possibility of famine and ongoing epidemics.

In order to ensure humanitarian access, the
Yemeni Government forces, backed up by the alliance
to restore legitimacy, conducted targeted operations
that temporarily closed the main road between
Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah; communicated through the
Al-Riyadh Evacuation and Humanitarian Operations
Committee with the active international humanitarian
organizations in order to inform them about alternative
routes available for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance from Al-Hudaydah to Sana'a; and confirmed
that the road would be reopened as soon as possible
after ensuring that it is de-mined and that checkpoints
are lifted, which have hindered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and undermined international
efforts aimed at easing humanitarian suffering. The
latest of such efforts include the donor conference held
in April in Geneva on the situation in Yemen.

Concerning political and security developments,
today's meeting is taking place to discuss the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which is the outcome of the stalemate in political
efforts to end the crisis, owing to the Houthis' absence
during the 6 September round of consultations, which
were fully supported by the Security Council.

The pro-legitimacy coalition has stepped in at
various stages of the crisis to support and facilitate
a political solution in Yemen based on resolutions
of the international legitimacy. The latest of the
coalition's actions include ceasing military operations
in Al-Hudaydah, supporting United Nations efforts
led by Mr. Martin Griffiths, and providing sufficient
time to resume the dialogue among Yemeni parties,
despite security challenges posed by the Houthis, as
they continue their practices that constitute a threat
to regional peace and security, through controlling
Al-Hudaydah port and threatening the safety of
international maritime navigation.

Those threats were confirmed by the letter addressed
on 17 September to the President of the Security
Council from the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), regarding sanctions
on Yemen. The letter underscored the conclusions of
the Committee's Panel of Experts, reaffirming the
direct responsibility of the Houthis for the attack on
the oil tanker Abqaiq and another commercial ship
transporting wheat, while noting that if the attack on
the oil tanker had been successful, it would have caused
an environmental disaster with wide negative impact
on the transport of merchandise from and into Yemen.
That letter also reaffirmed that those attacks are a
Violation of international humanitarian law and would
have a negative impact on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Given this unprecedentedly terrible
humanitarian situation, the Security Council must send
a message to the Yemeni parties, and especially the
Houthis, that emphasizes the following points.

First, attempts to consolidate gains and strengthen
personal interests rather than those ofthe Yemeni people
by ignoring Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015), and by continuing to refuse to participate
positively in the political process, are unacceptable.
Secondly, ballistic-missile attacks on neighbouring
States and threats to maritime commercial routes in
Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea are also unacceptable.
Thirdly, it is equally unacceptable to use civilians as
human shields, utilize civilian facilities and maritime
ports as bases for launching military attacks or
recruit children for military purposes, all of which are
considered war crimes punishable under international
law. Fourthly, it is vital to cooperate with the United
Nations to ensure the safe delivery and full distribution
of humanitarian assistance in every region of Yemen
and without targeting United Nations field personnel.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, and the importance of stepping up efforts to
end the crisis in Yemen based on a political solution
that complies with the three political terms of
reference - the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, the outcome of
the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant
Security Council resolutions - in order to ensure
Yemen's sovereignty and territorial integrity and
non-interference in its internal affairs.

