Mr. Vieira de Mello: For the sake of brevity, I
will also speak on behalf of Jose Ramos-Horta.

I would like first to thank all the speakers for
their generous words addressed to my colleagues, to
the second Transitional Government and other
Timorese institutions, not least the Constituent
Assembly. Whatever our joint achievements, they
would not have been possible without the unfailing and
unanimous support of this Council over the last 27
months. We thank the Council for the unanimous
support it has expressed for UNTAET's mandate
extension until independence. With regard to the
successor mission, we welcome the approval in
principle of the concept outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General, as well as the support expressed by
many speakers for the civilian positions in core areas
that the Secretary-General proposed be funded from the
assessed budget of the United Nations.

With regard to the request made by some
speakers that the Secretary-General present specific
proposals in his next report - his end-of-mission
report - for the successor presence of the United
Nations in East Timor, we have taken note with great
attention of the suggestions formulated here by many
delegations, in particular by the Russian Federation and
France.

I would like to confirm to the representative of
Guinea that, indeed, we shall be convening a last
donors conference in Dili about 10 days before the
country becomes independent, a donors meeting to
which we will be presenting the outcome of the work
being carried out by the Planning Commission. That
outcome should be a mid-term development strategy
for East Timor, which is what, I believe, the
representatives had in mind.

Finally, on the comments that were made on a
variety of topics, I would like to say that we have not
only taken them into account in the past. We will
continue to do so in the future because we definitely
share those observations, in particular those made
about the extension of the mandate of the Constituent
Assembly and the good use this extension should be
put to in refining the text of the first constitution of
East Timor with regard to the presidential election, the
justice system, the truth and reconciliation commission,
economic development, as well as the situation of the
remaining refugees in West Timor.

To conclude, I would like to thank the Council
and Ministers very sincerely, on behalf of Jose Ramos-
Horta and the second Transitional Government he
represents here today, for the support and solidarity
extended to us by this Council in the course of today's
debate, which will serve as strong encouragement to all
of us, particularly the people of East Timor, in the final
phase of the transition to independence of a territory
the Council tasked us to administer and steer.
I thank you, Minister Gayan, for presiding over
this meeting today, and, through you, we extend our
gratitude to Ambassador Koonjul and his team for the
keen interest and sympathy they have demonstrated in
the preparations for this debate of the Security Council
on East Timor.

