Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay would like to underscore the
importance of today's open debate on children and
armed conflict, and that of the annual report of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Once again, we have an opportunity to
stress the importance of continuing to make progress in
improving the working methods of the Security
Council with a View to adopting substantive reforms of
those methods as soon as possible, within the
framework of Council reform.

Children are one of the most vulnerable sectors of
society, but at the same time they are society's present
and its future. In that regard, we are particularly
gratified at the high level of ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child; we appeal to
those States that have not yet acceded to the
Convention and its Optional Protocols to do so. We
also urge full and effective implementation by States
already party to them.

Uruguay recognizes the contribution of the
International Criminal Court, which defines as war
crimes those crimes that involve sexual violence or the
recruitment or enlistment of persons under 15 years of
age or their use as active participants in the hostilities
of armed conflict, along with the contributions made

by other international tribunals that have included the
protection of children in their respective spheres of
jurisdiction.

The delegation of Uruguay appreciates the efforts
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and recognizes the role that the
Council has played; here, there has been movement
from words to implementation. We also know that this
item is included in the agenda of the General
Assembly, a forum in which year after year Uruguay
plays an extremely active role with a view to
strengthening and increasing the involvement and
responsibility of that universal organ regarding a
matter that falls within its mandate and that is of
universal concern.

We also owe special recognition to the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, whose mandate Uruguay
fully supports.

The figures set out in recent reports on the impact
of armed conflict are particularly disquieting. We are
concerned at the continuing illegal recruitment of
children in conflict zones, many of whom are abducted
from refugee camps; at the various forms of sexual
Violence against children, which leave devastating
permanent scars on their victims; by the cases of
children detained in contravention of international law;
at the systematic and deliberate attacks against schools;
and at the nearly total impunity enjoyed by those who
continue to commit crimes against children.

We reaffirm the need to assess the
implementation and the format of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism established through resolution
1612 (2005). We believe that its scope should be
broadened to include all kinds of grave violations
against children, for no violation is more serious than
the others, and all must be given equal weight. We
appreciate the broad and inclusive nature of the
mechanism, which works with the involvement of all
parties to a conflict: Governments, non-governmental
armed forces, the United Nations system and civil
society.

We believe that only through concerted and
coordinated endeavours, through strengthening the
norms of international law and through enhancing the
use of available judicial mechanisms - in particular
the International Criminal Court - will it be possible
to formulate and implement plans of action against the
grave Violations that continue to assail children in
situations of armed conflict.

The delegation of Uruguay is of the view that
greater attention needs to be paid to the reintegration of
children associated with armed groups and of those
who have been victims of other grave violations of
their rights, in particular sexual abuse or exploitation.

In that regard, we agree that there is a need to
take a broad and comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention, tackling the root of the problem in order to
achieve a sustainable, long-term solution.

We applaud the work being done jointly by civil
society and the United Nations system, including
peacekeeping missions, in building lasting mechanisms
to protect children. We believe that the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict in peacekeeping missions
and the inclusion by UNICEF of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping missions should be
strengthened and should be given the appropriate
support in terms of human, financial and technical
resources.

