Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I am
pleased to report to the Security Council on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I). I would like
to begin by thanking Special Representative de Mistura
for his briefing on the important work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). Mr. de Mistura's work and the work of his
colleagues are critical to cementing the gains we have
seen in Iraq, and I wish to extend our appreciation to
him and his staff for their hard work and sacrifices. We
remain committed to ensuring that UNAMI receives
the support necessary to carry out its mission.

This year has been one of significant
achievements in which the Iraqi Government, the Iraqi
people and the international community can take pride.
Yet a lot of work remains to be done. Progress in Iraq
is fragile and reversible. It is critical that Iraq receive
the continued support and encouragement of the
international community as it faces the next set of
challenges in rebuilding the country: legitimate and
peaceful provincial, district and national elections in
2009; restoring essential services for its people;
humanitarian efforts to support the return of
approximately 4 million refugees and internally
displaced persons; peaceful resolution on the status of
disputed internal boundaries, most notably Kirkuk;
and, of course, the constitutional review.

Today, I would like to update the Council on the
progress that has been achieved.

As mentioned by Mr. de Mistura, the security
situation has significantly improved since June 2007.
The number of overall attacks has decreased by 86 per
cent. Civilian deaths due to violence have decreased by
80 per cent. Iraqi Security Forces deaths have
decreased by 84 per cent. United States military deaths
in Iraq have decreased by 87 per cent. Coalition
military deaths in Iraq have decreased by 88 per cent,
and ethno-sectarian deaths have decreased by 95 per
cent.

Coalition and Iraqi Security Forces have
degraded the capabilities of Al-Qaida in Iraq and
militia groups, as is evidenced by the 81 per cent
decrease in improvised explosive device (IED)
explosions and the 72 per cent decrease in suicide
explosions.

A reduction in violence across northern Iraq can
be attributed in part to the removal and displacement of
key Al-Qaida leaders as a result of Iraqi-led security
operations. But some political and factional tensions
that have affected the delivery of services remain. The
Government of Iraq, with coalition assistance, has
begun addressing the complex underlying ethnic and
religious tensions that contribute to violence by
ensuring adherence to the rule of law and by
establishing reconstruction operation centres to bring
much needed essential services and economic
investment.

Coalition and Iraqi Security Forces have
maintained those security gains even with the reduction
of coalition forces to pre-surge levels. Joint operations,
in concert with the Awakening movement, have
improved the security situation such that, even as a
number of coalition countries depart the theatre, the
United States has announced the early withdrawal of
the Second Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division
from Baghdad, bringing the number of brigade combat
teams to below pre-surge levels.

Ongoing security operations have produced
encouraging results, with arrests of significant
Al-Qaida targets in Diyala, Mosul and Baghdad, as
well as leaders of other armed groups in Baghdad,
Basra, Maysan and Wasit provinces. The Iraqi people's
increasing trust of the Iraqi Security Forces has also
led to a number of record-breaking seizures of weapons
caches, including several hundred IEDs in the Mada'in
area and two tons of explosives in Ninawa. Primarily
as a result of successful operations against Al-Qaida
facilitation and support networks inside of Iraq, we are
also beginning to see a decrease in the number of
foreign fighters crossing into Iraq.

Nevertheless, we remain concerned by the flow
of foreign fighters and lethal aid into the country. Syria
remains the primary gateway for foreign terrorists
moving into Iraq, and Damascus has taken insufficient
action to combat the terrorist facilitation networks
based in Syria. We urge Syria to take additional steps
against these networks.

For all this progress, Al-Qaida in Iraq remains a
significant threat, as do Iranian surrogate militants and
Jaysh al-Mahdi militia forces. All retain the intent and
capability of carrying out lethal attacks against the
Iraqi people, such as the multiple bombings that
occurred this week. Al-Qaida in Iraq's use of person-
borne improvised explosive devices and its increasing
shift towards female suicide bombers remain a
particular challenge.

In countering the continued extremist threat, the
increased capability of the Iraqi Security Forces has
substantially improved the overall security

environment. More than 601,000 personnel now serve
in the Iraqi Security Forces - an increase of over
21,000 personnel since our last report to the Council in
August.

There are now 165 Iraqi Army combat battalions
conducting operations, an increase of four since our
last report. Nearly 70 per cent, or 115 of those Iraqi
Army combat battalions, are assessed now to be in the
lead for operations. The expansion of the Air Force and
the Navy lags behind that of the Army. There is
nothing surprising about that fact, given the technical
platforms that the Air Force must acquire and learn to
sustain. While the Air Force and the Navy possess
limited capabilities, comprehensive force development
strategies are being implemented.

The Air Force is now flying over 300 sorties a
week and playing an increasingly active counter-
insurgency role, flying surveillance and reconnaissance
missions in support of the Iraqi Security Forces and
providing important logistics support with its mobility
aircraft. The Iraqi Air Force recently graduated its first
initial entry pilots, who are now flying, and there will
be many more to follow.

The Navy is conducting three times as many
patrols as it did last year, with increasing amounts of
boarding and searching of vessels coming into Iraqi
territorial waters in the northern Arabian Gulf. The
Navy has just taken delivery of the first six of 26
modern patrol craft and is expecting the delivery of
four large patrol ships in 2009.

The National Police also continues to increase its
effectiveness and is now staffed at over 41,000
personnel. The Police continues to stress better ethno-
sectarian balance within the force both through
recruiting and assignments.

With regard to the coalition role, in September,
on the margins of the General Assembly, President
Talabani noted with thanks the role of those countries
that have contributed to the coalition and NATO
Training Mission-Iraq. Currently, coalition members
other than the United States contribute over 6,000 force
members to the Multinational Force and some 300
personnel to UNAMI. Since our last briefing,
approximately 3,000 coalition personnel departed the
theatre and others will return home soon.

At the same time, the continued political and
economic support of the coalition and the international

community will remain critical to the success of Iraqi
efforts to build a stable and secure country. MNF-I is
continuing to progressively transfer responsibility for
security to the Iraqi Government. This process of
transitioning security responsibilities to the Iraqi
security forces is increasingly being led by Iraqi
officials. Thirteen out of 18 provinces are now under
provincial Iraqi control. Al-Anbar province - once a
stronghold of Al-Qaida in Iraq - transitioned on
1 September, Babil province transitioned on
23 October and Wasit province transitioned on
29 October.

A joint coalition-Iraqi effort is anticipated to
assess conditions in and facilitate transition of the
remaining provinces: Salahaddin, Tamim, Diyala, and
Ninawa within the next several months, culminating
with the planned transfer of security authority for
Baghdad in June 2009.

The improvement in security has helped to foster
political reconciliation. Since our last report, the Iraqi
Council of Representatives unanimously passed a
provincial elections law that will provide for local
elections in 14 of Iraq's 18 provinces early next year.
The provincial elections are a major step toward
political stabilization. Sunni Arabs, who boycotted the
2005 provincial elections, will compete for political
power in provinces that once were the heartland of the
insurgency. UNAMI also remains deeply engaged in
elections preparation. Indeed, UNAMI's work with the
Iraqi Government proved critical in achieving this
elections law and we congratulate Mr. de Mistura for
that.

We commend UNAMI's plans to expand its
footprint in Iraq and will dedicate ourselves to
providing assistance, as necessary, so that UNAMI can
continue to assist the Iraqi Government with other
critical issues, such as the relocation and reintegration
of Iraqi refugees and the internally displaced. We
strongly support the construction of the proposed
United Nations compound in Baghdad and commend
the Government of Iraq on its initial pledge of
$25 million so that planning for this facility may
proceed.

UNAMI is heavily involved in assisting with the
resolution of the disputed internal boundaries between
the Kurdistan Regional Government and the
Government of Iraq. The resolution of this dispute is a
key step in creating stability for all of Iraq. We
appreciate UNAMI's efforts and assistance on this very
important issue.

Iraq has made significant diplomatic gains, with
most of the countries in the region normalizing their
diplomatic presence in Baghdad. Since our last report,
Syria and the Arab League have joined Iraq's other
neighbours in naming ambassadors to Iraq - and
many of these ambassadors are now on the ground in
Baghdad. Other neighbours, including the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon, have
sent high-level delegations to Baghdad. We encourage
others in the region to follow their example.

Finally, I want to highlight that negotiations
continue between the United States and the Iraqi
Government on transitioning our relationship, with a
goal of a strong and strategic relationship with Iraq,
which respects both countries' sovereignty and serves
both countries' interests.

The report of the Secretary-General, which is
before the Security Council today, highlights the
sustainable progress that has been achieved by the Iraqi
Government, with the assistance of the United Nations
and the support of the MNF-I and Iraqi security forces.

The United States supports a free, democratic,
pluralistic, federal and unified Iraq, and I call upon all
parties to renew their commitment to assist the Iraqi
Government in continuing the hard work to overcome
the challenges that remain.

