Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore' for
her comprehensive briefing. ljoin Council members in
expressing my deepest condolences and in conveying
my heartfelt sympathy on behalf of the Government
and people of Malaysia to the Government and people
of Haiti in the tragic aftermath of Hurricane Matthew.
Our thoughts and prayers and solidarity are with the
people of Haiti during this difficult time.

The onset of Hurricane Matthew has undoubtedly
dealt a severe blow to the ongoing national and
international efforts in support of Haiti's political
security transition and socioeconomic development to
say the least. Even so, we take to heart the courage and
resilience demonstrated by the Haitian people in the
aftermath of the 2010 earthquake and we are convinced
that they will be able to rise to the present challenges
as well.

Malaysia remains committed to and will spare
no effort in helping to galvanize and mobilize the
necessary support, aid and assistance for Haiti. We take
good note of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Honore's comprehensive and sobering briefing
and wish to place on record our great appreciation to
her and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations country team
and other agencies on the ground for their unstinting
efforts to address the immediate humanitarian needs
of the population. In this connection, we welcome the
launch of the flash aid appeal by the Secretary-General
yesterday. It is critical that the request for assistance be
met and that it be met soon.

I wish to also place on record Malaysia's
appreciation to the Secretary-General for recognizing
the United Nations contributory role to the spread of
cholera in Haiti in the wake of the 2010 earthquake.
More importantly, we commend the Secretary-
General's recent announcement during the General
Assembly's high-level week on a proposed new package
of measures, including intensifying efforts to build
some water sanitation and health systems.

To say that Hurricane Matthew has had a severe
negative impact on Haiti and its people would be a gross
understatement. The cost of rebuilding the civilian
infrastructure, transport and communications network
is immense. With regard to short-term and immediate
assistance by United Nations actors and agencies. We
are of the View that it would be helpful to quickly
identify possible quick-impact projects with a View
to stabilizing the socioeconomic situation of Haitians
in light of the devastation of crops and food stocks
towards ensuring food security for the most vulnerable
segments of the population.

But for Hurricane Mathew, this past weekend
would have seen Haitians going to the polls to elect a
new president. As such, while we understand the need
for postponement, we hope that any rescheduling of
the presidential and legislative elections can take place
as soon as possible. This is crucial to ensuring that
Haiti can continue on the path towards full restoration
and constitutional order. To this end, we call upon
all Haitian political parties and players to cooperate
with the interim Administration and the Provisional
Electoral Council so that credible, smooth, transparent
and inclusive elections could be held as soon as possible.

The results of the municipal level elections released
last July set a good example, and we are pleased to note
that in all 139 municipal councils, at least one in three
members is a woman, in line with the constitutional
provision of a 30 per cent quota for women in public
positions. In this regard, we urge Special Representative
Honore to continue her good office's work in building
consensus in paving the way forward for the presidential
and legislative elections.

On a related note, we welcome the efforts towards a
steady strengthening of rule of law institutions in Haiti,
especially the strides made by the Haitian National Police
(HNP). We are encouraged by the close cooperation
and collaboration between HNP and MINUSTAH in
terms of operational planning and training, as well as
on joint operations and patrols in combatting crime, as
well as election-related violence. No doubt, the current
situation is extremely challenging for the interim
administrations, including the security forces who are
now faced with increased demands by the population.
We hope that the safety, security and welfare of the
civilian population, especially of women and children,
the disabled and the elderly will be prioritized. We
welcome the ongoing implementation of the HNP's
2012-2016 strategic plan and note that the drafting of
the 2017-2021 strategic plan has also commenced. We
see these as crucial steps towards assessing needs and
identifying areas to further strengthen the HNP so that
it may fully assume its responsibilities, particularly
after the drawdown or exit of MINUSTAH.

In this regard, we could support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend MINUSTAH's
mandate by six months. At the same time, we are of
the view that the Secretariat could undertake initial
preparatory work on the future presence and role of the
United Nations in Haiti soon on the understanding that
a full strategic assessment would take place after the
inauguration of the new president.

In conclusion, I wish to once again express
my delegation's utmost appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore, the
entire MINUSTAH team, as well as the United Nations
country team for their tirelessness and diligence in
spearheading the international community's relief
and assistance effort in Haiti. They have our utmost
gratitude and respect.

