Mr. Mangueira (Angola): At the outset, Sir, on
behalf of my Government, I would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I would
like also to congratulate the outgoing President for the
dynamic way in which she steered the proceedings of
the Council during her mandate. Further, I recognize
the presence here of Their Excellencies the Foreign
Ministers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and Zimbabwe, the Adviser to the President of
Rwanda, and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the United Republic of Tanzania.

I take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the holding of this second open meeting on the
activities of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
annex to whose report is contained in document
S/2001/1072. In our view, that document makes
reference to some matters that are of particular concern
to the Angolan delegation, in spite of the fact that the
Panel of Experts recognizes that the presence of
Angola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
based on strategic reasons and that Angola is the only
country that did not receive significant compensation
for its military action in that country, as was previously
recognized by the same Panel in its report contained in
document S/2001/357.

The reaffirmation of that fact, as we had the
opportunity to state at the first public meeting of the
Council on this topic, reflects a recognition of the
policy of the Government of Angola, which is based,
inter alia, on the principle of the defence of its
sovereignty and of its national borders, on respect for
the sovereignty of other States and on a policy of good-
neighbourliness.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
sovereign and independent country recognized by the
whole international community, and it has the capacity
to sign agreements with other States in accordance with
its national law and with international law. Therefore,
the Government of Angola, as a matter of principle,
cannot support some of the recommendations set out in
the addendum to the report, particularly with regard to
the question of the revision of concessions, trade
agreements and other agreements signed between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other States, allied or not, because we consider that
recommendation to constitute interference in the
internal affairs of that country. That sovereign capacity
is undisputed. Only the States concerned have the
power to review those agreements, which they signed
in accordance with public international law,
particularly the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties of 23 May 1969, and the power to make use of
mechanisms for appropriate revision or amendment.

The Sonangol company, as part of its regional
business strategy, has established partnerships with its
counterparts in other countries aimed at contributing to
the economic development of the countries concerned.
Such partnerships include Sonangol-Cape Verde,
Sonangol-Sao Tome and Principe, and Sonangol-
Congo. These are mixed-capital companies established
under agreements signed by the two Governments
concerned in each case. I stress the importance of the
partnership for the economy of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in keeping with the comments
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the document entitled "Note of the
Government on the report of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo":
(spoke in French)

"Under the economic convention signed by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Angola, Sonangol imports and distributes
petroleum products, thus ensuring a regular
supply of its strategic products for the Congolese
economy. Moreover, it builds service stations and
creates jobs." (S/2001/1156, annex (French only),
para. 16)

(spoke in English)

It is our conviction that the solution to the
problems of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
undoubtedly lies in the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and the additional protocols, as well as in
the pertinent Security Council resolutions, which, once
thoroughly observed, will provide the necessary
conditions for a definitive settlement of the issues
related to the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Congo in
which the international community has a relevant role
to play.

To conclude, the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts should formulate concrete measures designed
to put an end to the illegal exploitation of said
resources and should not liken those countries that
have agreements voluntarily signed with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to those which illegally exploit in any way the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without the authorization of that Government.

