Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the detailed report he has submitted on the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). His assessments and conclusions,
supplemented by the report of the Security Council
mission on its visit to Kosovo and Belgrade, provide us
with a good opportunity for a comprehensive review of
the situation in and around the province and to identify
further possible steps fully to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

We listened attentively and with great interest to
the detailed and extremely useful briefing given by
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno. He
has offered a valuable analysis of the situation in
Kosovo; Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We extend our thanks to you, Sir, as the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the United
Nations, for the excellent manner in which you
organized the Security Council's mission to Kosovo
and Belgrade. We are also grateful to the leadership of
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), as well as the
personnel of the Secretariat here in New York, for their
assistance during the mission.

The outcome of the mission's work confirm the
timeliness and value of the visit by members of the
Security Council to Kosovo and Belgrade, which had
been proposed by Russia. It held substantive meetings
of great importance with the UNMIK and KFOR
leadership; the leadership of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia's Committee on Kosovo; the
representatives of Albanian and Serbian communities
in the province; and with delegations from other
Kosovo minorities. I note in particular the importance
of the substantive talks between the mission and
President Kostunica of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and other Yugoslavian leaders in Belgrade.
The main result of the visit was a clearly stated
demand to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and all Kosovo
political leaders that they ensure the full and
comprehensive implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), primarily with respect to the
security of minorities.

One very important event was, in our opinion, the
meeting between the Security Council mission and the
President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Putin, on 17 June at the headquarters of the Russian
contingent in Kosovo. At that meeting, what was
particularly stressed was the need to isolate extremists
on both sides in Kosovo and to prevent them from
driving a wedge into the position held by members of
the international community on a settlement in Kosovo.

Today, first and foremost, we must put an end to
violence, terrorism and drug trafficking in and around
Kosovo, ensure security and equal rights for all
communities in the province without exception, and
create appropriate conditions for the return to the
province of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Further serious efforts are essential to complete the
disarmament of combatants and to eliminate their
illegal armed units. We must step up the battle against
crime, smuggling and illegal deliveries of weapons into
the province, in violation of Security Council
resolution 1160 (1998).

The recent steps taken by the UNMIK leadership
against the illegal possession of weapons, the illicit
crossing of the administrative and other borders of
Kosovo, and terrorism create additional opportunities
here.

One of the key issues now is the preparation of
the Kosovo-wide elections. Our position on the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government in Kosovo is well known. Too many
concessions have been made to the radicals. The
document has a whole range of substantive
shortcomings, to which Russia has frequently drawn
attention. First of all, the Constitutional Framework
contains no reference to the need for full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999), including its basic
provision of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia. We regard as hasty the rushed
adoption of the Constitutional Framework by the head
of UNMIK and the declaration that province-wide
elections would be held this autumn. Truly democratic
and representative Kosovo-wide elections require
careful preparation and - I would stress this point -
the active involvement of Belgrade. We believe that in
order to hold the elections, security conditions must be
established that would guarantee that the genuine will
of all ethnic communities in the province is respected
and that they can all participate fairly in the new bodies
of self-government. In this regard, it is important that
even before the elections, the steady process of the
return of refugees and displaced persons should begin.

We have often said - and we would like once
more to stress the point - that haste in holding the
elections would only strengthen the mono-ethnic nature
and the radical and nationalistic mood of Kosovo.

We would like again, to warn very seriously
against any attempts to impose coercive measures
under the pretext that the status quo is unacceptable
and that the situation in Mitrovica needs to be resolved
before the elections. Solving the problem of Mitrovica
is inseparable from imposing order and security
throughout the territory of Kosovo. Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Marie Guehenno spoke of this. Only
when the Serbs can feel safe everywhere can one start
establishing a normal multi-ethnic life in Mitrovica.
We agree with the opinion that was expressed at the
meeting between the Security Council mission and the
municipal administrator of Mitrovica, Mr. Rogers, that
the status quo is preferable to extremist scenarios. Any
acts of violence here would be fraught with the most
dangerous consequences: a flare-up of violence
throughout northern Kosovo, the involvement of
Albanians in it, and then Serbs being forced out of that
part of the province, which in fact would mean that
they would be driven completely out of Kosovo. The
solution can only be a political, comprehensive and
carefully monitored one, and the basis for it must be a
strengthening of trust between the Serb and Albanian
communities.

We note the work done by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative in Kosovo, Mr.
Haekkerup, and the Mission that he heads as they try to
establish normality in the province. We welcome steps
to develop a dialogue between UNMIK and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In
particular, we welcome the recent visit by Mr.
Haekkerup to Belgrade. We are counting on further
development of such cooperation on all matters relating
to implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999),
and not just in those cases where UNMIK comes up
against problems that require it to count on assistance
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We would
like to emphasize once more that unless there is solid
involvement with Belgrade, the Mission will not be
able to discharge its mandate.
In this connection, I would like to note in
particular the importance of fully taking into account in
the work of UNMIK and KFOR the proposals made by
President Kostunica in his meeting with the Security
Council mission on specific steps by the international
presence there to ensure that real progress is made in
enhancing the level of security for Serbs and other
minorities. We confirm the need for signing with
Belgrade a status-of-forces agreement for UNMIK and
KFOR. As was stressed by President Putin of the
Russian Federation, in order to speed up stabilization
in the Balkans it is necessary to coordinate the efforts
of the international community in countering terrorism
and extremism and to ensure strict implementation,
without any exceptions, of resolution 1244 (1994) and
the Dayton Peace Accords on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The aggressiveness of the terrorist and extremist
groups is extending to new areas, threatening further
territorial spillover and undermining general security in
the whole region. The main source of instability is still
Kosovo. Any attempts to appease the terrorists will
simply worsen the current explosive situation and
expand it to include the entire Balkan region. This
applies fully to what is happening today in Macedonia.

All of this confirms yet again that in order to
stabilize the situation in the Balkans we need
approaches based primarily on the political will of the
States in the region and active assistance from the
international community. That was the thrust of
President Putin's proposal to convene a Balkan summit
so that States of the region could conclude a legally
binding agreement setting forth their mutual
commitments to comply fully with the basic principles
of inter-State relations, including, primarily, the
inviolability of borders, sovereign equality, respect for
territorial integrity, non-intervention in one another's
internal affairs and non-use and non-threat of force.

The signal from the international community
must be clear and unambiguous. There can be no
further redrawing of borders in Europe, including in
the Balkans. It is necessary to establish a solid,
effective barrier to extremism, national intolerance and
religious fanaticism. People who try to solve extremely
complex problems of a national and religious nature by
force of weapons are not worthy of support from the
international community.

