Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): As the time is
getting on, I shall try to keep my remarks very brief.
My thanks go first to our three briefers today: the
Presidents of the two Tribunals and the chief
Prosecutor. I am sorry that other business meant that I
had to leave the room for some of their presentations,
but I have been fully briefed by my delegation as to
what was said. I think it was a particularly useful set of
interventions, especially what we heard from Ms. Del
Ponte about her plans for future prosecutions. It was
very helpful, as others have said, to have that analysis
and to hear about that intention.

The United Kingdom is strongly committed to
both Tribunals. I do not need to repeat the details, but I
want to assure those three invited guests and the
Minister of Justice of Rwanda that that commitment
will not waver, and that they can expect our continued
support. We were pleased to hear about the progress
made with internal reforms, particularly from the
Presidents of the two Tribunals. We very much
appreciate the efforts that are being made to maximize
the use of resources - for example, the court rooms.

But as others, notably Ambassador Mahbubani of
Singapore, have said, this needs to be a continuing
process. The escalating budgets of the Tribunals
remain, for us, a cause of concern. That said, we
commend the recent initiatives that have been taken,
for example the meetings of the judges from the two
Tribunals, and the Web site of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). All of those
things are very helpful.

But, as others have said, we must remain focused
on bringing the key perpetrators to justice. The
Milosevic trial is clearly going to be a landmark event,
and we note that the indictment now includes the crime
of genocide. It is clearly central that we secure the
detention of the remaining indictees still at large,
particularly Messrs. Karadzic and Mladic. In that
regard, it is very helpful that Ms. Del Ponte has worked
so hard to develop cooperation with the former
Yugoslav States. We listened carefully to her comments
about this - some encouraging and some, frankly,
rather disappointing.

I would like now to say again to the Governments
of the region how important it is that they cooperate
with the Tribunal. I would like to emphasize again the
Tribunal's importance in bringing peace, justice and
reconciliation to the Balkans, and in helping safeguard
the stability of the region.

On ad litem judges: it is encouraging that those
now integrated into the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) have made a good
start. We are willing to give consideration to the
proposal for similar ad litem judges in the ICTR. But
that investment, if approved, will need to show rapid
results in a much swifter throughput of cases and in
demonstrating clearly that a greater sense of urgency
now exists.

It is important that we should all keep thinking
about the exit strategy. We need to do that, however,
while demonstrating that there is no diminution in our
commitment to justice for the victims of war crimes in
the two regions. We must, as I said before, concentrate
on the main offenders and avoid indictments for lesser
offenders, which should ultimately be dealt with by
national courts. It was helpful to hear Ms. Del Ponte's
forecasts in that regard, particularly for the Rwanda
Tribunal, but I want to emphasize once again the point
about concentrating on the main perpetrators.

Finally, we recognize that the mandate of the
ICTY embraces the whole of the former Yugoslavia
and that the Tribunal should and must be seen to be
taking an interest in contemporary events. But, as I
think others around the Council table have said, the
long-term objective should be for national courts to
prosecute new cases.

