Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for his detailed
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. We actively
support his work and that of his highly professional
team in Afghanistan and of the Secretariat. We are
prepared to extend the mandate of his operation, with
just a few slight changes.
We listened with interest to the statement made by
Ms. Samar, as we did to the one by Mr. Saikal. I want
to say at the very outset that, for Russia, Afghanistan
has always been, and remains, a friendly country, one
which today is undergoing difficult times.

We once again reiterate our condolences to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan for the
victims of the deadly terrorist attacks. We earlier stated
our solidarity with our diplomat colleagues from the
United Arab Emirates, who were also killed as a result
of dastardly terrorist attacks.

We are worried at seeing how things are developing
in Afghanistan. We are concerned by the deterioration of
the security situation and the surge in terrorist activity
over the past few months. The negative trends we are
seeing are hampering regional and international efforts
to resolve problems in Afghanistan and bring about
sustainable development. Civilians are increasingly
suffering from the violence. In 2016, the number of
peaceful Afghan civilian victims and of people dying
as a result of military action or terrorist attacks reached
an alarming level of 11,500 victims. We need urgent
measures in order to stop those dangerous trends.

We must be honest in recognizing that many issues
facing the international military presence have gone
unresolved in the past 15 years. We say that not to
point the finger at any one, allocate blame or distract
attention. We mention it so that everyone realizes that
the goal of a resolution in Afghanistan requires the
consolidation of regional and international efforts. Only
by working together can we address the entire host of
built-up complex problems, of which unfortunately
there are many.

We are particularly concerned about the growth
of the Islamic State and its aspirations to absorb other
elements of the armed opposition. The strengthening of
that group has been demonstrated by the attack on the
hospital in Kabul on 8 March, resulting in numerous
victims. We believe that approximately 3,500 members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham are operating
within the country. Given all the sympathizers and
sleeping cells, a much higher number may be more
realistic. The main theatres of operation are centred
in the provinces of Nangarhar, Kunar, Helmand,
Kandahar, Faryab, Baghlan and Kunduz. We therefore
call on everyone to devote increased attention to that
problem and not attempt to ignore it.

A serious threat to the stability of Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries, our friends in Central
Asia, is generated from the drug problem. We are
concerned that, once again, in 2016 there was a surge
in poppy cultivation. The increase in drug revenue will
inevitably further fuel terrorist activities. We therefore
believe that it is necessary to step up international
efforts towards combating Afghan drug trafficking.
We deem that efforts to assist Afghanistan in that
regard need to proceed through using tried and tested
regional structures such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization. We see much potential in strengthening
counter-terrorist and counter-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and those entities.

We support the Afghan Government's policy aimed
at achieving national reconciliation. We are ready
to provide assistance to advancing the negotiation
process, including flexibly approaching the issue of the
possibility of easing the sanctions regime ofthe relevant
sanctions committees with regard to Afghanistan,
provided that it does run contrary to the national
interests of the country. The main priority of national
reconciliation is to bring on board the Taliban in the
framework of peace talks. That matter remains to be
resolved. We need the harmonization of approaches and
the synchronization of all the stakeholders including
for collectively combating terrorism.

We take note of the positive potential of
Kazakhstan's initiatives. A fundamental response
to the challenges that we face involves establishing
genuine good-neighbourly relations in the region. The
Taliban movement must join the national reconciliation
process with Kabul playing the lead, based on the three
well-known and approved United Nations principles:
recognizing the Constitution of Afghanistan,
disarmament and cutting off ties with Al-Qaida, the
Islamic State and other terrorist organizations.

Ensuring stability in Afghanistan must lie with
the national security forces. Russia has provided
Afghanistan free of charge a large provision of
weapons and ammunition. We are training Afghan
personnel in relevant Russian education institutions.
Russia is playing an active role in combating terrorism
in Afghanistan. We intend to help Kabul establish
its army and police. In order to reinvigorate the
settlement process in Afghanistan, Moscow decided to
intensify efforts towards developing a single regional
approach aimed at promoting the process of national
reconciliation. To address that issue, on 27 December
2016 we convened a meeting with China and Pakistan
in Moscow and continued with the same format on
15 February with Afghanistan, Iran and India. During
the next phase of that process, we believe that it would
be important and timelyto involve our Central Asian
partners as well as the United States.

