Mr. Sparser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein thanks
the Swedish presidency, and in particular Foreign
Minister Wallstrom, for this Security Council open
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
After a year of overwhelming conflict-induced human
suffering, a discussion on how to strengthen preventive
action in the United Nations is indeed timely and
pertinent, not least in the light of the Security Council's
difficulties in finding appropriate responses to many
of the predominant crises of our time. We also warmly
welcome the Secretary-General at his first official
appearance in the Council and thank him for outlining
his vision for a renewed emphasis on prevention, as well
as his commitment to stronger diplomacy for peace.
A close and well-functioning working relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Security
Council will be a crucial element in that regard.

Liechtenstein welcomes the shift initiated by

General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) towards a more
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace that
spans the entire conflict cycle - from early warning
and action to reconciliation, reconstruction and
development - and flows through all three pillars of
the United Nations, including development and human
rights. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
reflects such a comprehensive approach, in particular in
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16. Ifthoroughly
implemented, the SDGs can be a powerful prevention
tool, and the same holds for the United Nations body of
human rights obligations. At the same time, substantial
gaps in the implementation of sustainable development
commitments and consistent violations of human rights
obligations are important early warning signs that can
constitute the basis of a decision by the United Nations
to take early and preventive action.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
have both committed to a comprehensive approach to
transitional justice when reviewing the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. Transitional justice is an
important prerequisite for consolidating peace and
preventing conflicts, and it decreases the likelihood
that post-conflict societies relapse into conflict.
Research on transitional justice has turned attention
to the possibility of using transitional justice while a
conflict is ongoing in an attempt to resolve disputes
and grievances sooner, thereby bringing the conflict to
an end more quickly. That is one of many reasons that
Liechtenstein initiated General Assembly resolution
71/248. It was in order to establish an international,
impartial and independent mechanism that will collect
and preserve evidence of the most serious crimes
committed in Syria since March 2011. In addition to
contributing to justice, the mechanism will also have a
deterrent effect.

Deterrence is a key preventive tool and one of the
main achievements of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) when it comes to preventing mass atrocities.
As the international judicial institution promoting
accountability and an end to impunity, the ICC
directly contributes to preventing the commission of
future atrocity crimes. It is also an important global
institution in the context of resolution 1325 (2000) for
its pioneering work on gender justice. By recognizing
a range of sexual and gender-based crimes experienced
by women in conflict, the ICC also acts to deter the
commission of such crimes in the future.

Membership in the Security Council is a privilege
that entails the responsibility to take action when
confronted with mass atrocity crimes in conflict
situations. The code of conduct on Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity
or war crimes, as elaborated by the Accountability,
Coherence, Transparency Group, is an expression
of the commitment that Council members will take
timely and decisive action aimed at preventing or
ending said crimes. The code of conduct is also a
pledge not to vote against a credible draft resolution
before the Security Council that is aimed at ending
or preventing the commission of genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. Recent experience
in the Council shows that, unfortunately, we are still
far from realizing that vision. One hundred and twelve
Member States have signed the code, among them a
majority of Council members. Those 112 States expect
the code to be applied in practice, including on the basis
of information provided by the Secretary-General. We
therefore encourage the implementation of the code
in the Council and call on all the remaining Member
States, especially Council members and those aspiring
to become members, to join the code of conduct.

