Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association countries members of the European
Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein declare that
they align themselves with this statement.

Since this is the first time that I have taken the
floor under your presidency, Sir, allow me first to
congratulate you on the assumption of your duties and
to wish you success during your term of office. I
should also like to extend my congratulations to the
previous President, the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation, Ambassador Lavrov, for his
excellent work.

We welcome the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Michael Steiner, and we should like to express our
most sincere appreciation for the work he has done to
achieve full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

The strong commitment of the European Union to
the Western Balkans region was confirmed at the
European Union-Western Balkans Summit, held at
Thessaloniki on 21 June. On that occasion, the
European Council - as we have recalled here -
reaffirmed its determination to fully support the
European perspective of the Western Balkan countries,
which will become an integral part of the European
Union family once they meet the established criteria. A
Stabilization and Association Process enriched with
instruments drawn from the European Union's pre-
accession strategy will be at the centre of our action,
whose pace will depend on the determination of each
of the countries concerned to introduce and implement
the necessary reforms. The Thessaloniki Declaration
and Agenda for the Western Balkans, which were
adopted at the Summit, provide the framework for
moving towards European Union integration. It will be
up to the Italian Presidency to begin to translate into
concrete action the political commitments undertaken
by the European Union at Thessaloniki.
The European Union will ensure that Kosovo's
European prospects are not held back by the issue of
final status. But, before that, a democratic, multi-ethnic
and multicultural Kosovo, with full respect for the rule
of law and for human and minority rights, will have to
be built. To that end, the European Union and the
Western Balkan countries reaffirmed in the Summit
Declaration their support for the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and for the "standards before
status" strategy, which remain the bases of European
Union policy in Kosovo.

In that context, as Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated in his report of 26 June (S/2003/675), much
remains to be done to ensure active assistance for the
return process at both the central and the local levels.
The European Union supports Kosovo's economic
recovery and development, and it reconfirms its
commitment to get the privatization process under way.
The European Union also welcomes the willingness of
the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina to begin a direct
dialogue on practical issues of mutual interest, and it
hopes that such a dialogue can be launched as soon as
possible.

Political stability in Kosovo requires democratic,
stable and functioning local institutions. We therefore
fully support the transfer of competencies to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government set out in
chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, depending
on the capacity of the Institutions to handle them. Our
common objective is to build effective, transparent and
accountable institutions for the benefit of all
communities while adhering to the obligations
stemming from resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework and without prejudice to
Kosovo's future status.

