Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome
the presence here of the President of the Republic of
Poland, His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, and his
delegation, and to thank him for having convened this
important meeting. We also express our appreciation
for the important participation of the President
Emeritus of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Hisashi Owada, and the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Theodor Meron. We also thank the Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General for her briefing.

We would like to take this opportunity to extend
warm and fraternal greetings to all our Muslim brothers
and sisters and wish them a blessed Ramadan.

International law is built on the rights and duties
of States and on the limits that these mutually agree to
observe in the exercise of their sovereignty. With this
in mind, the assigning ofprerogatives to various organs
and systems establishes an international order regulated
by international agreements and treaties, which form
the backbone of international relations and establish
a binding framework providing certainty, equality
and security. The acceptance of these international
norms by all States is what guarantees the existence
of an international order that involves all States and
makes the maintenance of international peace and
security possible.

The twentieth century was characterized by the
strengthening of multilateralism as a basic element of
relations among States and respect for the fundamental
norms of international law. Thus, in a multipolar world,
equality among States prevails, and the Charter of the
United Nations is the cornerstone that makes possible
this interaction and coordination. However, along with
the emergence of this community of relations and
interaction, we are also seeing breaches of international
law, which are posing a major threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

During the twentieth century and at the beginning
of the twenty-first century, we have witnessed such
violations, which have involved a reinterpretation,
redefining or selective application of the provisions of
these various instruments by some so as to adapt them to
their points of view and agendas. They have even gone
so far as to extend their internal security policies to
the sphere ofinternational relations, applying a kind of
exceptionalism in complying with their obligations and
United Nations resolutions. Such a breach of the rule of
law and the sovereign equality of States is reflected in
interventions, occupations, regime-change policies and
the application of unilateral coercive measures, which, in
flagrant violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States, have led to humanitarian
disasters and have destroyed entire nations under
the rationale of enforcing international law. In that
regard, the Charter of the United Nations is very clear,
through the provision in Article 2, paragraph 4, that
Members shall refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or in

any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations. One can clearly not claim to defend
international law by violating international law.

The effectiveness of the efforts of our Organization
in preserving and maintaining international peace and
security lies precisely in the degree of its Members'
adherence to, respect for and compliance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as actions that are implemented by the
Security Council, which must at all times prioritize
dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes as
opposed to the use or threat of force, intimidation
or interventionism.

The effective application of negotiation, mediation,
reconciliation, prevention and the legal arrangements
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the
primary use of the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, are indispensable
to the analysis and comprehensive consideration of
conflicts and their particularities. To that end, it is
essential to recall and to bear in mind the provisions of
Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which establishes
the obligation of States to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security, and justice, are
not endangered.

It is important to emphasize that the Charter could
have stipulated the obligation to settle disputes in
accordance with international law. However, instead
it emphasized that the obligation is to settle them in
such a manner that international peace and security,
and - I underscore - justice, are not endangered.
In that context, justice is a value that all Members of
the Organization are obliged to respect and promote.
It is a positive duty, which requires more than only
refraining from acting unlawfully. It requires effective
efforts to establish a fair outcome in situations where
international relations are distorted by injustice.

In that context, as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, the International Court of Justice plays
a key role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
reinforces the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter.
The universal jurisdiction for which the Court was
established and the work that has developed over the 71
years since its establishment demonstrate the ongoing
call for dialogue, at all times prioritizing negotiation
and peace over the use of force and aggression. As a
highly peaceful State, Bolivia reaffirms its commitment
and support to the work undertaken by the International
Court of Justice.

It is also important that, in the context of the
responsibilities set out in Article 36, paragraph 3, of
the Charter, the Security Council make use of all the
tools and mechanisms provided by the Court, including
the delivery of advisory opinions, which represents
a preventive way to settle disputes and contributes
significantly to the fulfilment of the obligation of
States to settle their international disputes through
peaceful means.

Furthermore, the Rome Statute, which provided for
the establishment of the International Criminal Court,
made it possible to create a universal criminal justice
system in order to investigate and prosecute crimes
against humanity and war crimes and to fight impunity.
Unfortunately, the effort to achieve true universality in
criminal jurisdiction did not receive the support of all
Member States, since several members of the Security
Council, including permanent members, are not States
parties to the Rome Statute despite the fact that it is
precisely the Council that has the powers to refer cases
to its jurisdiction. In that regard, universality is still
a clear challenge and requires the commitment of all
States to fighting impunity.

In that regard, a successful example in the pursuit
of justice and accountability was the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda through resolutions 827
(1993) and 955 (1994), respectively, which, in addition
to contributing significantly to justice by fighting
impunity, played an important role in restoring the rule
of law in the countries of the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda.

In conclusion, we reiterate that full compliance
with the commitments assumed under international law
is indispensable for the maintenance of international
peace and security. There can and should be no area
where double standards are used in the application of
those norms, since such acts are contrary to international
law and undermine the work of our Organization and
the efforts of the international community.

