Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Please allow me to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing
and continued service. I should also like to thank
Minister Kuburovic' and Ambassador Citaku for their
extensive remarks.

It has been nearly 18 years since resolution
1244 (1999) established the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
played an essential role in restoring peace and stability
to Kosovo and the region. Kosovo subsequently achieved
independence in 2008. The European Union (EU) has
supported the rule of law in many ways, including
through the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. The picture in Kosovo today is vastly different
from that of1999, and the centrality of UNMIK's role
has undeniably diminished.

Japan fully supports peace, stability, democracy and
the economic development of Kosovo. Also, we need to
be clear about our priorities in the Security Council, in
order to make its work more efficient and effective.

The Council today is faced with serious conflicts
and crises in the Middle East, Africa and other parts
of the world. The Council's workload is greater than it
has ever been. By contrast, while the risk of violence
in Kosovo has not completely diminished, it is far less
than in these other regions. The Secretary-General's
most recent report (S/2017/387) notes that there were
no violent incidents in Kosovo surrounding the recent
Serbian presidential election or any major incidents
in northern Kosovo over the past three months. We
therefore believe that we are long overdue to modify
the briefing cycle that has remained in place since 1999.
We believe that a half-year cycle or longer should be
more than sufficient.

With this in mind, Japan believes that limited
peacekeeping resources must be redirected to address
the most acute needs and crises. The time is ripe for the
Council to undertake a review of UNMIK in order to
assess the functions that UNMIK alone can provide, as
well as possible personnel reductions.

None of this is to deny the outstanding issues that
Kosovo faces; reconciliation between the Albanian and
Serb communities is by far the most important. The
Secretary-General's report notes that many Kosovar
Serbs remain unable to return. It will be important for
the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade to continue. For Kosovo to become a truly
multicultural society, ongoing efforts are needed to
expand reconciliation and tolerance, including via the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb-
majority municipalities.

Japan also hopes that Kosovo will become an
increasingly responsible member of the international
community. We thus welcome the entry into force last
year of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between Kosovo and the EU. At the same time, we
noted the adoption of the no-confidence motion
against the Cabinet on 10 May and urge leaders to
ensure that Kosovo continues its steady progress
towards EU membership while avoiding any narrow
nationalist appeals.

Finally, I should like to take note of Kosovo's peace
and stability, its democratic progress and last year's
4 per cent economic growth. It is my strong belief that
Kosovo will become a diverse, multicultural country
through community reconciliation, just socioeconomic
policies and tireless efforts by each citizen. While the
presence of the United Nations in Kosovo should be
scaled down in future, our unwavering support for this
young nation's continued development and democracy
will remain unchanged.

