Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
position expressed by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

First of all, I should like to thank the Chadian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
debate, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan for his briefing, and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

Only three months ago, the uncertainty over the
outcome of the elections in Afghanistan, with the
transition process nearing its end, was a source of great
concern in the country and throughout the international
community. Today, we are pleased to see that this
sensitive moment has come to a positive conclusion
with the installation of a new President of the Republic
and the establishment of a National Unity Government.
Allow me to underline the great commitment and
efforts of the new Afghan leadership - in particular
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah - in meeting the expectations and hopes of
the overwhelming majority of the Afghan population
for a future of peace, stability and development. Let
me also express deep appreciation for the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United States in recent months
to facilitate an agreement between the two former
candidates.

The new Afghan Government has already taken
encouraging steps at the domestic, regional and
international levels. We hope that this positive approach
will continue and the interests of national unity will
prevail. We are all aware of the serious challenges faced
today by Afghanistan and its new authorities, starting
with the security situation, which is threatened by a new
wave of terrorist attacks that have claimed numerous
victims, including unarmed civilians. We condemn these
attacks in the firmest possible terms. This is why we
welcomed the new Afghan Administration's immediate
signature of the Bilateral Security Agreement and the
NATO status-of-forces agreement, later ratified by the
Afghan Parliament. These instruments represent the
legal bases for the upcoming Resolute Support Mission,
which will begin after the completion of the transition
process.

The launch of the Resolute Support Mission
confirms the will of contributing countries, including
Italy as a framework nation, to maintain their support of
Afghanistan in the consolidation of peace and security.
They will work together with the Afghan Government
and in coordination with the United Nations to help the
Afghan National Security Forces and support them in
the performance of their duties.

Italy's support in the security field is one element
of our long-term commitment to Afghanistan, which
we have reiterated on many occasions, including here
and most recently at the London Conference. London
was an important event at which the international
community and its members reaffirmed their
solidarity with Afghanistan and their support for the
new Government on the basis of the principles of the
Mutual Accountability Framework established at the
Tokyo Conference, namely, mutual commitment,
conditionality and the accountability of Afghanistan,
inspired by collaboration with the donor countries.

This is why we welcome and support the reform
programme presented in London by the Afghan
Government in the areas of the fight against corruption,
the promotion of human rights - where we believe
special attention should be reserved for women - the
strengthening of the rule of law, the reform of the
election and judiciary systems, and the enhancing of the
business climate to attract investors. The programme
aims to achieve concrete progress in these areas and
enable Afghanistan to build its capacity for development
and become self-sustaining.

Italy will remain by Afghanistan's side and to
provide assistance, in line with our multi-decade
civilian cooperation.

