Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this monthly
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto
for the informative, comprehensive and updated
briefing that he gave us today.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

At the ministerial-level meeting of the Council
held in September, our foreign ministers expressed
their commitment to move the peace process forward
on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the agreed terms of reference and the road
map. Since then, unfortunately, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories has been deteriorating
at an alarming pace. Rhetoric from both sides is
becoming increasingly hostile, rather than the opposite,
and if we are to take a number of recent statements by
high-ranking officials at face value, we seem to be on
the brink of another catastrophic escalation of violence.

In the context of the very tense, volatile and
potentially explosive situation in the Palestinian
territories, the international community has invested
substantial resources, both human and material, to
ensure that stability will prevail in southern Lebanon,
through the full implementation of all aspects of
resolution 1701 (2006), and that a lasting ceasefire will
be secured and consolidated.

We look forward to continued encouraging
progress in this regard, but at the same time we are
extremely concerned about the potential destabilizing
effect that the deteriorating situation in the Palestinian
territories could have in the region.

It is therefore of paramount importance for the
international community and, in particular, the Quartet,
to remain actively involved and engaged with the
parties, to appeal for restraint to be exercised by both
sides so as to prevent the situation from spiralling out
of control, and to encourage the resumption of
dialogue.

While we support the efforts of President
Mahmoud Abbas to form a Government of national
unity in accordance with his proposed platform for
peace, we cannot ignore the fact that the absence of
credible political prospects for the realization of the
legitimate and recognized aspirations of the Palestinian
people for genuine and viable statehood makes his task
an extremely difficult one - a task whose outcome is
as yet highly uncertain.

In this respect, the absence of a credible political
process leading to progress in the realization of the
two-State solution needs to be addressed as a matter of
urgency.

The Palestinian Authority and its institutions are
on the brink of collapse. If we allow that to happen, we
will be faced with a worst-case scenario, as such a
development will only compound and exacerbate
existing factional tensions among Palestinian groups
and may lead to a complete breakdown of law and
order in the Palestinian territories.

It is in the interests of all of us, not least the
neighbouring States, not to allow this to happen. We
expect the Quartet to urgently move forward on the
basis of its agreement reached in September, and to
meet on a regular basis at the level of both principals
and envoys, including with the parties and other
regional partners, in order to monitor the developments
and actions taken by the parties and to discuss the way
ahead.

