Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome the participation
of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, in
this meeting. We would also like to express our
condolences on his recent loss and his determination to
attend this Security Council meeting in person despite
the sad circumstances. We are also grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ms. Ameerah
Haq for her briefing on the work of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I will be
brief.

We are pleased at how the situation is developing
in that country. The internal political trends are
positive. That is particularly important in the light of
this year's upcoming presidential and parliamentary
elections. We hope that they will take place in a
peaceful environment and will affirm the achievements
of the people of Timor-Leste in national reconciliation.

The security situation is also stable. We commend
the Mission's efforts to support Timor-Leste by
enhancing the security sector, in particular the national
police. We hope that, during the electoral period, the
Mission will serve only as a support to the national
authorities, which will take full control of the situation.
We are pleased to note that the Government of Timor-
Leste has assumed full responsibility for the capacity-
building of the national police and that it has taken a
number of specific steps ahead of the elections,
including improved logistical and technical support of
the law enforcement forces.

The coming spring and summer will be a kind of
graduation test for the Mission. Following that, a final
decision on the modalities for the drawdown of the
Mission will be taken. We hope that everything will be
in line with the ongoing Joint Transition Plan of the
Government of Timor-Leste and the Mission and the
timeline set out by the Secretary-General in his
previous report to the Security Council (S/201l/641).
No less important in the second half of this year will be
the issue of the continuing United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste, the nature and extent of which should be
decided in consultation with the Government of Timor-
Leste, the Mission and other United Nations bodies.

In the period following the Mission's withdrawal,
in the light of the recent conflict, ongoing
peacebuilding support will be needed. We believe that
the United Nations should continue to provide
appropriate support to the people of Timor-Leste
through its specialized programmes and funds,
including in the social and economic areas. Following
the Mission's withdrawal, it should not be felt that the
international presence is fleeing the country. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of those donor
countries that have provided bilateral support to Timor-
Leste during this period.
We are pleased to see that the international
community's efforts to ensure conflict settlement and
post-conflict peacebuilding are having positive results.
The situation in Timor-Leste is a very good example of
that. We hope that by this autumn we will be talking
about the situation in Timor-Leste only positively,
without any reservations whatsoever.

Finally, we support the adoption of the draft
resolution extending the mandate of the Mission until
the end of 2012. We wish the Government of Timor-
Leste and the Mission success in meeting the various
challenges still facing them.

