I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. At the outset, the Dominican Republic would like to echo the Secretary- General's call for a worldwide ceasefire to allow a full response to the threat of the coronavirus disease pandemic. In these very difficult times, we continue to see a situation that is far from settled. Although we have seen in various reports that there has been close coordination between the Israeli and Palestinian health authorities, which is unprecedented and must be commended, we must not ignore the underlying issues that still prevail. Having pointed out the above, we must insist that the Security Council ensures that the situation between Israel and Palestine be resolved within the framework of the recognition of and respect for mutual rights. We favour a two-State solution, where two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace within secure and recognized borders. We support continuing collaboration between Israel and the Palestinian people, especially during these challenging times. It is important to put in place facilities for the orderly return and testing of workers coming from Israel and to provide assistance to families who are financially affected by the virus. Israel should consider allowing access for humanitarian personnel and the needed medical supplies to Gaza. We reiterate that the only way forward is through a political dialogue and positive leadership that ultimately lead the parties back to the negotiating table. The Dominican Republic welcomes Prime Minister Shtayyeh's publication of an emergency budget aimed at keeping public spending to a minimum. Indeed, the budget should focus on health-related priorities to support vulnerable Palestinians. The Palestinian Government is still very much in need of external support. We encourage donor countries to continue their contributions, which would make it possible to meet the deep basic needs of the Palestinian population and to work towards laying the foundations for development to alleviate them. Finally, we recognize that an intra-Palestinian reconciliation process that allows the necessary national consolidation to advance the legitimate aspirations of the nation and leads to a process of political renewal, based on free and inclusive elections, must be initiated.
