Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Due to the lateness of
the hour, I will try to be very brief. Mr. President, we
thank you for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to join my colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Kassem for the presentation of the report
of the Panel of Experts.

We would like to welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda and Zimbabwe, the Deputy Foreign
Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Adviser to the President of Rwanda. We regard today's
meeting as an important opportunity for the Council to
have a substantive interaction with regional States and
United Nations membership on this crucial subject.

My delegation appreciates the work done by the
Kassem Panel in its investigation in fulfilment of the
Security Council mandate. The recent addendum
provides the latest appraisal of the situation on the
plundering of the resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, carried out in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country, in
disrespect for the ongoing peace efforts in that country
and, more importantly, at the expense of its people. We
note with interest the Panel's analysis, which explains
to what degree the exploitation of natural resources
constitutes the motivation behind the activities of
specific actors in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to what extent the exploitation provides the
means for sustaining the conflict.

It is of great concern to my country that,
according to the report, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is continuing for the benefit of the powerful few
at the expense of the miserable many. We attach great
importance to ending illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which prolongs the conflict in the country. We
therefore call upon all parties concerned to take
immediate steps to put an end to such activities and to
ensure full compliance by the individuals and
corporations with legally acceptable standards of
business.

We take note of the conclusions and
recommendations of the addendum to the report and
believe that they merit careful consideration within and
outside the Council.

Sll'V.4437

 

At this stage, I would like to express my
delegation's support for the recommendation on the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism to make
progress reports on the subject. This recommendation,
in our View, might be considered in the context of the
proposal submitted in the Council on the extension of
the mandate of the Panel of Experts, and, at a later
stage, in a broader context, of the similar
recommendations made by other panels, specifically
with regard to the establishment of a permanent
monitoring mechanism within the United Nations
Secretariat.

In our View, increased international assistance to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to rebuild State institutions, restore
infrastructure and establish effective control over its
territory is critically important. In this context, we
welcome the initiative of convening an international
conference on peace and development in the Great
Lakes region.

We have continually noted that the issue of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources should be
considered in the larger context of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its key
aspects: full implementation by the parties of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and relevant Security
Council resolutions; disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration; the
withdrawal of foreign forces; and, of course, the Inter-
Congolese dialogue.

We see the report and the addendum as one of the
elements of the international efforts to achieve peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
It should serve as an essential impetus to the full
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and relevant
Security Council resolutions, and should encourage the
efforts for national reconciliation and dialogue in order
to achieve lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This is what all of us participating in this
meeting are striving for.

