Mr. Kim Sock (Republic of Korea): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing on the recent
developments in the Libyan situation, which the
Security Council has referred to it.

Many tasks still lie ahead in Libya's nation-building
process. Security must be improved, widely scattered
weapons should be collected, and militia groups should
be immobilized and reintegrated. The creation of a
constitution is a very complex and sensitive process of
social contracts.

Nevertheless, the Libyan people have made
significant progress and have already overcome
a number of challenges. National elections were
successfully held for the first time in more than four
decades. A new Government was formed, and the second
anniversary of the revolution was celebrated without
serious disturbances. With the successful completion
of the ongoing transition, Libya will achieve sustained
peace and a stable democracy.

The Prosecutor has raised four issues.

First, on the issue of cooperation between the
ICC and Libya, in order for the ICC successfully to
discharge the mandate that the Council has given it,
close cooperation between the ICC and Libya is of
pivotal importance. We urge Libya to continue to
adhere to its international obligations, including those
under resolution 1970 (2011), and to further enhance its
cooperation with the ICC.

We welcome the contacts that the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Government continue to
maintain, and their ongoing efforts to ensure that a
good level of cooperation is preserved. Such contacts
should be regularized, as exemplified by the recent
visit to the ICC by the new Libyan Prosecutor-General.

Secondly, with respect to the admissibility of the
case against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, we have taken note of the challenges
initiated by Libya before the Court. It is a prerequisite
for Libya to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to
materialize such admissibility challenges. We are
pleased that Libya and the ICC are continuing to
engage constructively on issues relating to the ICC
proceedings. Given the challenges that Libya is facing
in this transitional post-conflict stage, it should be
afforded reasonable time to prepare additional material.
However, the ultimate decision on the matter should be
made by the ICC Pre-Trial Chamber, which is judicially
independent.

Thirdly, concerning the ongoing investigation by
the Office of the Prosecutor, we appreciate its effort
to investigate the allegations of crimes committed by
pro-Al-Qadhafi officials outside of Libya and by rebel
forces. After its ongoing investigations, the Office of
the Prosecutor might open a second case. We hope
that the investigations can corroborate the allegations
of crimes and lead to justice being delivered to any
victims of such serious crimes.

Fourthly, with respect to Libya's capacity to deal
with past crimes and to promote the rule of law, we
appreciate the important role played by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). As
resolution 2095 (2013) articulates, we encourage
UNSMIL to continue to support Libyan efforts to
promote the rule of law, in accordance with Libya's
international legal obligations.

In the case ofthe ICC, as a part ofits implementation
of the policy of positive complementarity the Prosecutor
should assist Libyan authorities in prosecutions, using
various methods to encourage Libya to prosecute
cases domestically, whenever possible. The policy of
positive complementarity and Libya's admissibility
challenges could then be mutually pertinent. Libya's
early formulation and adoption of an all-encompassing
strategy to address past crimes and to end impunity
will surely demonstrate that the principles of justice
and accountability remain pillars of Libya's transition
and key to ensuring lasting peace.

In conclusion, we welcome Libya's cooperation
with the ICC, as evidenced by its recent admissibility
challenge of 2 April. We look forward to a full
investigation of all allegations of serious crimes
committed in Libya, and we encourage the Prosecutor
to continue her investigative efforts, in cooperation
with the Libyan authorities. We stress the need for
the Libyan Government to formulate, make public
and implement a comprehensive strategy to address
such crimes. The Korean Government stands ready
to strongly support the ICC and its activities. We also
believe that the Security Council should continue to
closely monitor the Libyan situation that it has referred.

