Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and Mr. Said
Djinnit's briefing. We acknowledge his significant
efforts to promote peace and generate synergies in
the Great Lakes region. We wish him every success
in future.

Peru is closely following developments in the
region and is concerned about the continuing cycles
of violence, which create a fragile and volatile
environment that poses a serious risk to the civilian
population. In that precarious context, we reiterate the
relevance of the Framework for Peace, Security and
Cooperation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We also underscore its importance in
defusing current tensions and ultimately promoting the
achievement of sustainable peace. We believe that the
regional approach it provides is essential and that, by
identifying common trends, it promotes complementary
and joint action alternatives in the political and social
spheres, while helping boost economic integration and
cooperation, particularly in cross-border regions.

We welcome the engagement of the Framework
countries in recent political processes, such as
elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the promotion of the inter-Burundian dialogue. Those
forums for joint dialogue, starting with the meetings
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, go hand in hand
with establishing confidence-building measures aimed
at overcoming potential conflicts and taking decisions
to increase economic integration and strengthen
institutions. Regional coordination and cooperation
should also be bolstered to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law and combat impunity in
the face ofreports ofrecurring human rights violations.

The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also of great concern. The statistics are
alarming, with 22.7 million people in need of food
assistance and more than 11 million internally displaced
persons and refugees, who are exposed to serious
shortages and risks. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made to allow for the repatriation of combatants
of the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda.
We hope that the international community, in particular
those countries committed to peace and stability in the
region, will continue to provide stable and predictable
funding for the relevant humanitarian response plans.
We would also like to stress the importance of adopting
a regional approach to the Ebola virus crisis in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is now the second outbreak ever recorded.

Peru reaffirms its commitment to achieving
sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region, including by
taking firm action against armed groups and the illegal
exploitation of resources, ending the humanitarian
crisis, promoting stability and guaranteeing inclusive
political processes in which women and young people
are duly represented. That should all be based on
coordinated action among the various components
of the United Nations system, in particular the
regional development group aimed at advancing the
implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
organizations, humanitarian agencies and civil society.

