Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Ambassador Fatima Mohammed and Ambassador
Lauber for their informative briefings on the current
situation in Burundi.

The Dominican Republic notes with concern the
ongoing humanitarian situation in Burundi. Despite
positive news, such as improvements in malnutrition
levels, millions of people, including 3 million children,
continue to suffer from food insecurity. Likewise, the
outbreak of cholera in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo puts Burundi at high risk of an epidemic, with
more than 140 cases already having been reported since
December 2018. It is important that we not lose sight of
the situation. We believe that the outbreak must be dealt
with aggressively in its early stages, with the support of
the relevant sectors, so as to prevent its further spread.

Although the number of refugees and persons
seeking asylum has decreased, the International
Organization for Migration estimates that
approximately 300,000 Burundian refugees, most of
whom were displaced by natural disasters, continue to
live in shelters, which demonstrates the need to address
the causes of those flows of people and their possible
solutions, while duly and systematically considering
the terrible impact of climate-related disasters. In so
doing, we would contribute to building not only lasting
peace in Burundi, but the foundations necessary for
development, based on resilience and sustainability,
that would lead to the return of those people to their
homes and the restoration of their livelihoods. As the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
urged, it is also imperative to ramp up investment in
host countries with a view to prioritizing the protection
of the environment and economic development.

The human rights situation in Burundi remains
a matter of concern, especially in the light of alleged
cases of intimidation of members of the opposition and
the continued restriction of civil liberties, such as the
freedoms of expression, association and movement.
In that regard, the recent suspension of international
non-governmental organizations, which has created
gaps in the aid received by Burundi's most disadvantaged
and vulnerable people, is particularly troubling.

We welcome the allocation of $7.1 million by the
Peacebuilding Fund in September 2018 to expand
political space and strengthen the new Government,
with two projects aimed at, inter alia, empowering
women mediators, women's groups and young
people as key actors in establishing social cohesion,
community security and political processes, as well
as strengthening the rule of law and good governance.
We are convinced that the meaningful participation
of women and young people is critical to achieving
stability and peace in Burundi. We therefore urge the
Government of Burundi to continue to move forward
in preparations of the 2020 electoral process, while
prioritizing the creation of the conditions necessary for
the holding of free and fair elections and respecting the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement.

Burundi can and must take advantage of the
current democratic transition process to move
towards the stability that its citizens deserve. In that
regard, we encourage the resumption of the internal
political dialogue.

