The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

For nearly a decade, the United Nations has been
engaged in the establishment of peace in Angola, a
country which was afflicted with conflict in the context of
the cold-war confrontation. The United Nations launched
its first peacekeeping operation in Angola, the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission, in 1989. Since then,
we have witnessed many vicissitudes in the process of
consolidating peace and stability in that country. More
recently, however, the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation (GURN) and the Uniao Nacional para a

 

Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) have been
pursuing the path towards national reconciliation under the
Lusaka Protocol to our satisfaction, on the whole.

Having said that, looking at the situation from this
broad perspective, Japan cannot help entertaining serious
concern about the recent reports of repeated attacks against
several towns and villages in Angola by well-organized and
well-equipped militias. We in the Council strongly condemn
these attacks. They could destroy the confidence that has
been so painstakingly created through the efforts of GURN
and UNITA, and, if left unchecked, they could lead to a
resumption of the conflict. Such acts of violence are also a
challenge to the efforts of the international community to
secure peace throughout the country and to lay the
foundation for a brighter future for the Angolan people.

In the View of the Government of Japan, the Angolan
peace process has now reached its final, crucial stage. The
next step that the United Nations will take is going to be
critical to the consolidation of durable peace in Angola, as
it will be the capstone of the nine previous years of United
Nations effort. But before the international community can
finally declare that national reconciliation and lasting peace
have been achieved in Angola, there remain a number of
political issues that must be resolved. It is essential that
Mr. Savimbi move his headquarters to Luanda and that he
and President Dos Santos pledge their cooperation for a
new nation-building endeavour through a face-to-face
meeting. The Government and UNITA must work together
to build a new environment of mutual confidence and
cooperation in order to promote genuine national
reconciliation. Only when these two parties translate their
declared political will into action can we be certain that the
conflict has been overcome once and for all.

The fact that the draft resolution before us would
extend the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Angola (MONUA) for a two-month period, instead of
the usual three-month period, is a clear indication of the
Council's understanding that the peace process in Angola
is entering its final phase. It is also a reflection of the
Council's determination to consolidate the peace process
once and for all. I should like to call upon the GURN and
especially UNITA to endeavour with renewed resolve to
finalize the process of reconciliation, for the responsibility
of building and consolidating peace and stability in the
country after MONUA has completed its mission will be
theirs.

Given the critical stage of the peace process in
Angola, and in View of the crucial role that MONUA is
playing at this juncture, I wish to call upon UNITA to
refrain from any acts of violence against MONUA, as
well as against the Angolan police and the civilian
population, and to call upon the Government of Angola to
refrain from an excessive use of force. It is incumbent
upon both parties to focus their efforts on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to cooperate
in good faith for national peace and reconciliation.

For all these reasons that I have outlined, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

In closing, I wish to express the abiding appreciation
of my delegation to the Secretary-General, to his Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and to all the
personnel of MONUA, as well as to the three observer
States for their valuable efforts on behalf of the peace and
stability of Angola.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/349.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1164 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.

