Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (Spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank the Azerbaijani delegation, and you in
particular, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
which has facilitated the Council's consideration, for
the first time, of the issue of cooperation between the
two institutions in terms of the Council's work. I thank
the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
of the OIC for their respective briefings. I especially
congratulate Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, whose
mandate will soon expire, for his leading role as head
ofthe OIC in promoting Islamic principles of solidarity,
tolerance and moderation. Similarly, I congratulate
Mr. Iyad Madani on his election as Secretary-General
of the OIC. We are confident that under his leadership
the organization will continue to make a valuable
contribution to building a more peaceful and prosperous
world.

Today's world is witnessing political upheavals in
Africa and the Middle East taking place within and
around the Muslim world that call for intensified efforts
among regional organizations and the United Nations,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Togo welcomes the OIC's active role in
speaking on behalf of the Muslim world in international
efforts, including United Nations efforts to resolve such
conflicts and crises. In that respect, we especially recall
OIC initiatives including the appointment of a special
envoy for Mali and the Sahel, mediation efforts to
facilitate negotiations among the armed movements in
Darfur and the Sudan, the OIC's support for the high-
level efforts on inter-Afghan relations and its support
for a political solution to the Syrian crisis. With respect
to those conflicts, the OIC has participated as a strategic
partner of the United Nations in seeking solutions and
ensuring support for humanitarian issues.

My country urges the OIC to further its constructive
role through greater investment in conflict-prevention
efforts. In that respect, it is crucial that the OIC further
strengthen internal unity and solidarity to end the
rivalries between some of its member States, which
threaten the achievement of negotiated solutions
to conflicts in those countries. In the same vein, we
welcome the establishment, on 20 March, of a peace,
security and mediation unit under the auspices of
the OIC Secretary-General in Jeddah, as well as the
close cooperation established with the United Nations
Mediation Support Unit. We believe that the unit's
establishment will strengthen the OIC's role and
capacity in using mediation as a tool in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts.

Moreover, while welcoming the establishment in
2011 of the OIC Independent Permanent Commission
on Human Rights, Togo calls on the OIC to urge its
States members to rapidly implement its 10-year
programme of action, in particular as it pertains to
good governance and the promotion of human rights in
the Muslim world, especially the rights of women and
children. Those measures will contribute to reducing
factors leading to crises within the Muslim world and
its individual States.

Increasing intolerance and discrimination due
to religious belief or conviction today seriously
threaten global peace and security. In that context,
Togo urges the United Nations, the OIC and the entire
international community to pursue, through consensus
rather than confrontation, efforts under way to
facilitate the coexistence of principles valued by our
States - freedom of expression and combating all
forms of religious discrimination and intolerance. In
that context, Togo particularly welcomes the work of
the Istanbul Process as well as the interfaith dialogue
and cooperation efforts of the General Assembly.

Nevertheless, the evolution in recent years within
States members of the OIC - particularly African
States - of the terrorism phenomenon remains a source
of great concern. Criminal groups are threatening
the stability in Africa in the name of religion and are
expanding their areas of operations to sow further
terror. In that regard, further strengthening and
support of the dynamic cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC in the fight against that scourge
is crucial in order to ensure strengthened capabilities
of OIC member States to face the threat. However, it
is important that the response to the phenomenon not
remain confined to the area of security alone, but that
it takes into account the development dimension in
affected areas and ensure good governance and respect
for human rights.

Many areas of cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC require development and further
strengthening commensurate with the significant
challenges to international peace and security. The
facilitation of a political process capable of ending
conflicts, especially in Syria, should become a priority.
We therefore urge both institutions to continue to
interact and share their experiences. In that regard, it is
my delegation's belief that progressive implementation
of the framework adopted in Geneva in 2012, and
identifying the areas of cooperation planned between
the United Nations and the OIC, should become the
priority approach of focused efforts.

