Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would also like to thank
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for her excellent
work. We thank her for her briefing and would have
been interested to receive an even longer and more
detailed report. We also regret that it was not possible
to reach consensus on this important document.

We are also especially interested in the briefing
that Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten gave. Germany is very concerned about sexual
violence in the Sudan. We also agree with the Permanent
Representative of Peru, who has suggested considering
sexual violence as a listing criterion for sanctions in this
context. Sanctions need to be rigorously implemented.
For the time being, we see a necessity to uphold the
sanctions regime and maintain the very important work
of the Panel of Experts, which we commend.

On a more general note on Darfur, let me say
that Germany is very engaged in peacebuilding in
Darfur - that is very important to us. We support
mediation efforts and the political dialogue, which
is absolutely necessary, as it is the only way to come
up with a lasting solution for the Sudan and Darfur.
We obviously welcome the signing of the Darfur
pre-negotiation agreement in Berlin. We stand ready to
further support the peace process.

However, while we acknowledge that there are
some improvements in the security situation in Darfur,
we also have to take into account the remaining
challenges. That includes security challenges, as many
colleagues have mentioned. We are also very concerned
that the unilateral ceasefire has not yet been prolonged
by the Government of the Sudan. We would also like to
express our concern that the current internal situation
in the Sudan may also lead to the loss of the recent
momentum achieved in the peace process.

On the situation and developments in the Sudan in
general, I would like to point out that we follow them
with concern; obviously, there have been nationwide
protests in the country since December. People were
killed during those protests and others were wounded.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed
concern about credible reports on the use of excessive
force. The Government of the Sudan should respond to
the legitimate grievances of the Sudanese people, and
diverging views should be tolerated and not restrained
with excessive force. All those responses should be
based on the principle of proportionality.

Against that overall background and those
developments in the Sudan in general, and Darfur in
particular, we feel that the unity of the Security Council
remains of the utmost importance and that the rigorous
implementation of the sanctions regime remains
very crucial.

