Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate Peru on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I also congratulate Kuwait on a superb job during
its presidency in June. Let me add my warm welcome
back to New York to Ambassador Nicolas de Riviere.
It is truly excellent to have him with us in the Council
and we wish him every success during his time in New
York. Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu's distinguished service
at the United Nations, his partnership and constructive
approach on so many issues and his important voice
on the Council will all be missed. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours. Let me thank today's
briefers and move on to my remarks.

Terrorists and organized criminal groups interact
and cooperate in various ways. They sometimes coexist
in the same territory. They develop ad hoc alliances
based on common interests or even cooperate and merge
as entities. But most interactions between terrorists and
organized criminal groups are ad hoc and opportunistic.
Criminal relationships of convenience define those ties
much more frequently than shared ideologies.

As we have heard, conditions in some parts of
the world, including ungoverned and undergoverned
territories and areas near porous borders, combined
with weak law enforcement, provide opportunities for
terrorists and transnational criminal groups to work
together. As Ms. Makarenko said, it is there that they
collude, collide and conspire. Collectively, we have
a number of tools to strengthen border security and
counter such activity.

Strong border security can prevent such groups
from taking advantage of trafficking routes, human
flows and networks in regions with underpoliced
or porous borders. Cooperation, coordination and
intelligence-sharing among border security agencies
is essential. That is one reason that it is important to
collect and analyse advance passenger information
(API) and passenger name records (PNRs). API and
PNR data can help investigators to identify connections
between individuals associated with terrorists and
organized criminal groups.

Our existing treaties, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and international counter-terrorism instruments and
protocols, provide a useful framework to facilitate
law enforcement cooperation. In the United States
we have used the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime as a legal basis more
than 650 times since 2005 to provide or request
mutual legal assistance, extradition and other forms
of international legal cooperation with 99 countries,
including for crimes that could directly or indirectly
support terrorism, such as migrant smuggling and
money-laundering.

Linkages between terrorists and organized criminal
groups vary by region, as we heard from a number of
other speakers. Revenues generated through various
forms ofillicit trafficking, including of arms, have been
used for terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS), for example, has benefited from the illicit
and unregulated purchase of arms. Groups such as
Al-Qaida also engage in a variety of crimes to finance
their activities, ranging from narcotics trafficking to
credit card theft. Kidnapping for ransom and extortion
are also profitable sources of funds for terrorist groups,
including ISIS. In Afghanistan the Taliban profit from
narcotics trafficking and extortion - illicit activities
that support the Taliban insurgency and prolong the
suffering of the Afghan people.

In addition to law enforcement efforts to counter
criminal and terrorist linkages, it is equally important
to engage local communities and non-government
actors, including youth, cultural and educational
leaders, to concurrently address the underlying
conditions conducive to the spread of violent extremism
or transnational organized crime.

We should also develop comprehensive and
integrated strategies to counter potential linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. The United
Nations can strengthen its role in addressing evolving
challenges by enhancing its cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, as well as international
forums such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum
(GCTF). The GCTF is leading several efforts to
address the linkages between transnational organized
crime and terrorism and to bridge the gap between
traditional criminal investigators and those who
handle terrorism cases. That is especially important,
as many home-grown terrorists tend to have prior
criminal backgrounds.

The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with the United Nations, organizations such as
the Financial Action Task Force, the Group of Seven
and the GCTF, and the European Union and partner
countries around the world to address both transnational
organized crime and terrorism.

