Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), l have the honour to update the Council on the
implementation of resolution 2341 (2017) concerning
the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks as requested therein.

I wish to begin by thanking the Kuwaiti presidency
for including this topic on the Council's agenda.

(spoke in English)

As recognized by the Council, it is increasingly
important to ensure the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks for the benefit of
the national security, public safety and economy of
States concerned, as well as the well-being and welfare
of their people. Resolution 2341 (2017) therefore calls
on Member States to consider developing or further
improving their strategies for reducing risks to critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. That includes,
inter alia, assessing and raising awareness ofthe relevant
risks, taking preparedness measures, including effective
responses to such attacks, promoting interoperability in
security and consequence management, and facilitating
the effective interaction of all stakeholders involved.
The resolution also encourages all States to make
concerted and coordinated efforts, including through
international cooperation, to improve preparedness for
attacks against critical infrastructure. International
cooperation is particularly relevant to effectively
addressing security concerns arising from threats
and vulnerabilities related to increasing cross-border
interdependencies of critical infrastructure among
countries and sectors.

The CTC, with the support of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
plays a key role in promoting international cooperation
and identifying related gaps, vulnerabilities, trends and
existing good practices. Its work includes assessment
and analysis, including on trends in the area aimed
at assisting the efforts of all States. In that regard, I
commend CTED for its proactive engagement in that
area since the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017),
in particular on identifying a number of excellent
initiatives, including, inter alia: the European
Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection; the
Declaration on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure
from Emerging Threats, issued by the States members of
the Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States; the Commonwealth
of Independent States Anti-Terrorism Center and the
assistance provided to their respective member States
by the Collective Security Treaty Organization and
the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has also published the Good Practices Guide on
Non-Nuclear Critical Energy Infrastructure Protection
from TerroristAttacks Focusing on Threats Emanating
from Cyberspace. The Global Counterterrorism Forum
has also developed a set of good practices concerning
the protection of soft targets in the context of counter-
terrorism. CTED is developing an initiative aimed at
raising awareness of the requirements under resolution
2341 (2017), and accordingly enhancing States'
capacities within the framework of the Working Group
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force with
a view to developing a comprehensive compendium
of good practices concerning the protection of critical
infrastructure. CTED has also engaged with the private
sector on the issue. It notably co-chaired the related
work of the World Economic Forum and promoted the
need to protect critical infrastructure both in Davos
and in the context of the work of the CTED-Asia
Information and Communication Technology Counter-
Terrorism Dialogue.

There is a need to further encourage all States to
identify what constitutes critical infrastructure in their
respective national contexts. States should also develop
national strategies for reducing risks and incorporate
those strategies into their national counter-terrorism
plans. There is a need to enhance overall international
cooperation through the exchange of information,
knowledge and good practices, and of ideas and
research concerning critical-infrastructure protection.
States bear the responsibility for the protection of
critical infrastructure, but private owners of such
infrastructure and soft targets must also address their
security needs and reduce vulnerabilities. It is also
vital that Government and the private sector share
information on threats, vulnerability and measures to
mitigate risks. There is a need to initiate and strengthen
joint training and exercises for law enforcement aimed
at strengthening their preparedness and enhancing
response capacity, communication networks and early-
warning mechanisms.

I should stress the importance of including
other relevant Security Council resolutions, such as
resolution 2309 (2016), on civil aviation, and resolution
2322 (2016), on international judicial cooperation, in
our work to protect critical infrastructure. Many States
continue to face significant challenges in their efforts
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2341 (2017). It is therefore
important that our recommendations be taken up by our
implementation partners and integrated into their work
and technical assistance programmes.

The Committee and CTED will continue to assess
States' implementation of resolution 2341 (2017) so as
to support their work to prevent such attacks and to
cooperate closely with their key partners through the
regular exchange of information.

