The President (spoke in French): I should like to
recall that at its 5070th meeting, on 4 November 2004,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1571 (2004),
by which it decided that the election to fill the vacancy
in the International Court of Justice should take place
on 15 February 2005 at a meeting of the Security
Council and at a meeting of the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session.

This morning, the Security Council and the
General Assembly will proceed independently with the
election, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Statute of the Court, for the purpose of filling the
vacancy which occurred on 11 February 2005 owing to
the resignation of Judge and former President of the
Court, Mr. Gilbert Guillaume of France.

The Security Council has before it the following
documents: S/2005/50, which contains the nomination
of a candidate by national groups of States parties to
the Statute of the International Court of Justice; and
S/2005/52, which contains the curriculum vitae of the
candidate.

I should like to inform the Council that, after the
expiration of the deadline for submission of
nominations, the Secretariat has been informed that the
German, Honduran, Italian, Polish, Romanian, Swiss
and Uruguayan national groups nominated Mr. Ronny
Abraham as a candidate.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2005/51, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under article
10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."
The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.
Article 15 of the Statute of the Court provides
that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired
shall hold office for the remainder of his
predecessor's term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the remainder
of the term left vacant by the resignation of Judge
Gilbert Guillaume will serve until 5 February 2009.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot paper containing the name of the
candidate. No withdrawal will be accepted once the
ballot papers have been distributed. However, it would
be possible to withdraw between ballots. Members of
the Council will be requested to place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they
wish to vote. Votes may be cast only for a candidate
whose name appears on the ballot paper.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 15
of the Secretary-General's memorandum (S/2005/51),
which specifies that "Each elector may vote for only
one candidate". Any ballot paper containing votes for
more than one name will be considered invalid. When
a candidate has obtained the required majority of votes,
I shall communicate the result to the President of the
General Assembly, and I shall request the Council to
remain in session, pending the receipt from the
President of the General Assembly of the result of the
voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations, excluding Benin, which
presides in February, to serve as tellers.

>.'<>l<>l<

The President (spoke in French): The names of
the delegations of Denmark and Romania have been
drawn. I request them to appoint one of their members
to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christensen
(Denmark) and Mr. Onisii (Romania) acted as
tellers.


The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Council is now ready to proceed with the
election of a member for the International Court of
Justice?

It is so decided.
I request the conference officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the candidate for whom
they wish to vote.

>l<>l<>k


The President (spoke in French): Now that all
members of the Council have voted, I ask the
conference officer to collect the ballot papers.

>k>l<*


The President (spoke in French): All the ballot
papers have been collected. I should like to remind the
members of the Council that, as we agreed during our
consultations, the ballots will not be counted until it
has been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending receipt of that information.

>l<>k*


The President (spoke in French): I have now
been informed that the ballot papers have been
collected in the General Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultation, there will be two
independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller.

>l<>k*


The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Ronny Abraham 15

Accordingly, Mr. Ronny Abraham has obtained
the required majority of votes in the Security Council.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have just
received from the President of the General Assembly a
letter, which reads, in part, as follows:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
81st plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing one
member of the International Court of Justice, Mr.
Ronny Abraham obtained an absolute majority of
votes in the General Assembly."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the candidate, the
distinguished jurist Mr. Ronny Abraham has been
elected as a member of the International Court of
Justice for the remainder of the term of office of Judge
Guillaume, that is, until 5 February 2009.

I should like to congratulate him and to wish him
every success in the high office to which he has been
elected.

I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

