Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also listened
carefully to the statement delivered by Ms. Hary.

China is deeply concerned about the recent
protracted turbulence in the Palestinian-Israeli
situation. Military actions have been escalating, causing
heavy civilian casualties. Settlement activities continue
unabated, and there has even been evidence of rhetoric
attempting to justify those settlement activities. The
prospects for the two-State solution are being severely
undermined. I would like to emphasize the following
points today.

First, it is imperative to cease all rhetoric and
actions that contradict the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international consensus and to adhere
to the overarching goal of the two-State solution. The
two-State solution and the principle of land for peace
constitute the bottom line of international justice.
There should be no retreat from those objectives,
not even by half a step. Independent statehood is an
inalienable national right of the Palestinian people - it
is not something that can be traded. Resolution 2334
(2016) clearly indicates that settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, run contrary to international law. Given
the severity of the Palestinian-Israeli situation, all
parties must be committed to playing a constructive
role, refraining from irresponsible rhetoric, preventing
the exacerbation of tensions and confrontation
and refraining from adding new complexities to
the Palestinian question. The parties concerned
must immediately cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
demolition of Palestinian houses and confiscation of
their property.

Secondly, it is important to seek solutions through
political and diplomatic means and refrain from any
actions that might escalate tensions. Following the
recent turmoil in southern Israel and the Gaza Strip, the
international community has been closely monitoring
the situation and is deeply concerned. China commends
Special Coordinator Mladenov, Egypt and others for
deploying their good offices with a view to reaching
a ceasefire agreement. China has also been making
efforts to alleviate tensions. The Chinese Government's
Special Envoy on the Middle East Issue, Mr. Zhai Jun,
has been in close contact with the parties concerned.
China calls on all parties to remain calm, exercise
restraint and remain committed to rebuilding and
building up mutual trust so as to create sound conditions
for the relaunching of peace talks. The international
community should continue to work on the basis of
the two-State solution, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, inter alia. We continue to urge the
parties to re-engage in peace talks as soon as possible
with a View to establishing an independent State of
Palestine with full sovereignty and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, based on the 1967 borders.

Thirdly, it is necessary to closely monitor and
improve the economic and humanitarian situation in
Palestine, adopt comprehensive measures and promote
peace through development. The economic and
humanitarian situation remains grave in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has done much work to improve the
humanitarian situation of Palestinian refugees. The
Agency is a success story of multilateralism and the
role of the United Nations. On 15 November, the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventy-
fourth session adopted with an overwhelming majority
a draft resolution renewing the mandate of UNRWA,
thereby demonstrating the international support for,
and recognition of, UNRWA's work. China supports the
continuing important role of UNRWA.

Fostering development is an important step towards
resolving the question of Palestine. China calls on the
parties concerned to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions in full and to lift the blockade of
Gaza as soon as possible. China stands ready to continue
its cooperation with Palestine in economic, financial,
cultural, educational and health-care sectors, among
others, and to take concrete actions in order to promote
national stability and development in Palestine.

