Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. By the same token, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and the presentation
of his report (S/2013/133). I would also like to thank
Special Representative Jan Kubis for the hard work
that he and his Mission have delivered on the ground
in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his comprehensive remarks today. My
delegation also aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Afghanistan has made great progress in recent
years, and it is important that that momentum not be
lost as it goes through one of the most pivotal periods
in the country's history. It is vital that the international
community remain strongly engaged in endorsing
Afghanistan's efforts during the transition phase, as
well as after 2014. I can assure the Council that Estonia
will stay committed to supporting Afghanistan after
the completion of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) mission.

Estonia has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan.
There is no other country in the world where our
engagement is as strong as in Afghanistan. Estonia is
one of the highest per capita contributors to the ISAF
mission. Our troops are in Helmand province together
with British troops. The contingent is expected to be
withdrawn in mid-2014. By keeping our company in
Afghanistan until the end of the election period, we
aim to make a contribution to safeguarding the future
of Afghanistan. We are also looking at financially
supporting the post-2014 mission and the sustainability
of the Afghan National Security Forces. Estonia is also
contributing to the European Union Police Mission and
the NATO training mission.

We do not believe that there can be a sustainable
solution in Afghanistan that involves only a military
contribution. In order to target the causes of the
problems that Afghanistan is facing, we must continue
our efforts with development cooperation after 2014.

Estonia's development assistance is focused on
four sectors, namely, security, education, health care
and the rule of law. In addition to supporting the
central Government through our annual contributions
to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, we
are carrying out bilateral projects to help Afghanistan
with our knowledge and experience. For instance,
Kabul University is currently establishing a master's
programme in information technology with the support
of Tallinn University, and we continue to invite Afghan
civil servants to training courses in Tallinn.

I would also like to draw attention to the human
rights situation. There have been gains in the protection
of human rights in Afghanistan, although action is
needed to improve the situation.

In our development projects, Estonia pays extra
attention to promoting women's rights and the well-being
of children, as they are the most vulnerable groups. We
believe that traditions or beliefs should never be used as
a pretext for gender inequality and non-recognition of
women's rights. At the recent session ofthe Commission
on the Status of Women, the Estonian Foreign Minister,
Mr. Urmas Paet, strongly condemned all kinds of
violence against women and girls. We hope that the
adoption of the agreed conclusions of the Commission
will give further impetus to combating violence against
women and girls in Afghanistan. Estonia calls for the
effective and swift implementation of the action plan
for the prevention of underage recruitment and its
annexes on killing and maiming and sexual violence
against children.

There are still many challenges ahead on
Afghanistan's path to becoming a stable, secure,
democratic and prosperous country, namely, the
transition of security and civilian responsibility, the
reconciliation process, the elections next year and last
but not least, the economic transition.

We are pleased to note that the transition of security
to Afghan forces is on track and that the Afghan
Government has announced that the Afghan forces are
set to take over responsibility for the security of nearly
90 per cent of the country's population.

The implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework is fundamental for long-
term stability and future successes in Afghanistan,
and we recognize the significant progress made in the
process.
Free, transparent and fair elections in 2014 and
2015 are paramount in improving the legitimacy of the
political transition and in consolidating democracy in
Afghanistan. We underline the urgency of adopting
a legal and institutional framework with an adequate
system of checks and balances for the proper conduct
of elections. With the help of coalition forces, a secure
environment for the elections should be provided.
We emphasize the importance of establishing an
effective electoral administration and fraud-prevention
mechanisms. The United Nations role remains essential
in preparations for the elections through technical and
financial assistance.

The reconciliation process in the country should of
course be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. However, in
our view, the strong support from the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the
High Peace Council in building confidence and trust
has been indispensable.

With regard to Afghan economic development and
transition, we encourage the Government to implement
necessary reforms, give all the necessary support to
the private sector, ensure a secure and stable business
environment and improve measures for fighting
corruption. Investing in people's education and skills is
also important to further economic growth.

Strengthening regional cooperation with
neighbouring South and Central Asian countries is
key for achieving a durable security environment in
Afghanistan. In addition, close regional cooperation
creates opportunities for economic development.
Therefore, Estonia supports the Istanbul Process and
the implementation of confidence-building measures.

The United Nations and UNAMA have been
taking an important lead in civil-military coordination,
international development aid cooperation, the
protection of human rights, the monitoring of the
humanitarian situation, counter-narcotics efforts, and,
as mentioned, in facilitating the reconciliation process
and assistance for elections. For that reason, it is hard
to underestimate the role that the United Nations and its
bodies have played in Afghanistan. After the departure

of the foreign military forces, that role is only likely to
increase.

As the United Nations commitment and assistance
are substantial in the transition period in Afghanistan,
we fully support the extension of UNAMA's mandate
for another year.

