Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
On the fifth anniversary ofthe end ofthe war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Council's consideration of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is of special
significance. In the past five years, with the assistance
of the international community, and with the joint
efforts of the three sides in Bosnia, the Peace
Agreement is being implemented well.

Three elections have been conducted smoothly.
Agencies at various levels have been operating
normally. The functions of a unified State have been
enhanced. Economic rehabilitation and reconstruction
have made considerable progress. The Chinese
delegation welcomes all these positive developments.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report and
the Special Representative, Mr. Klein, for his very
detailed briefing. It is praiseworthy that good progress
continues to be made in police reform and restructuring
and in judicial reform. With the assistance of the local
police and the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
the elections of 11 November were conducted
smoothly. We are very pleased to see that the practices
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and of the IPTF have
produced very precious experience for peacekeeping
operations undertaken by the United Nations.

Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina was hard won.
It is even more difficult to consolidate peace there.
Five years after the achievement of peace in that
country, it must be seen that progress in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement has been
slow- slower than the international community had
expected, especially in the return of refugees. As stated
in the report, the ability of refugees and displaced
persons to return is the litmus test of the Peace
Agreement.

Furthermore, there is still a lot of work to be done
in the areas of enhancing self-governance capacity,
national accord and reconciliation and post-war
reconstruction. In this regard, I would like to
underscore two points. First, achieving national accord
and reconciliation between Muslims, Croats and Serbs,
along with the restoration of confidence and common
development, are fundamental prerequisites to
achieving durable peace in Bosnia. We sincerely hope
that the leaders of the three groups will put aside their
past grievances and engage in genuine cooperation to
rebuild the economy, reconstruct a unified country, and
facilitate the return of refugees, minority refugees in
particular. It is only by strengthening the economy and
achieving social development that peace can be truly
consolidated. This brings me to my second point,
namely, that the international community should
continue to provide assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina while focussing its action on helping local
people achieve self-governance.

Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Klein and his
team for their contributions. China will continue to
support the work of UNMIBH and the IPTF. As Mr.
Klein has stated, the Chinese delegation has decided to
provide police officers and a diplomat to the Mission.

I also wish to thank Senator Biden for the
statement he has just made. I take particular note of his
having reiterated the importance attached by the United
States to the role of the United Nations. I have also
noted his expression of the willingness of his country
to strengthen its relations with the Organization, as
well as his remarks regarding strengthening
peacekeeping operations. It should be pointed out that
the United Nations and the Security Council have
achieved some common understanding with regard to
peacekeeping.

Senator Biden also spoke of the two scales of
assessment. This is, of course, not the subject under
discussion today, but, because the Senator has come all
the way from Washington, I would like to make a very
brief comment about what he has just said. The
majority of Member States believe that some
adjustment should be made to the two scales of
assessment. The key is how to make that adjustment.
Most Member States also have a basic common
understanding that both scales should reflect the
capacity-to-pay principle. Many States are also of the
view that this principle should be adhered to by all
Member States of the United Nations. An ultimate
decision on the two scales should be based on
consultations by the members ofthe United Nations.

My colleague Ambassador Holbrooke has been
exerting tireless efforts to that end, a fact well known
throughout the Organization. I have full sympathy for
the very difficult task that has been entrusted to him by
the United States Congress. Despite all his efforts,
many difficulties remain. I believe Ambassador
Holbrooke needs the support and assistance of the
Congress to overcome those difficulties.

S/PV.4245

 

I have also taken note of the views expressed by
Ambassador Levitte. Achieving consensus requires that
all sides demonstrate flexibility. I agree with
Ambassador Levitte's view.

The next two weeks will therefore be a very
crucial period. The Chinese delegation is willing to
work with other delegations. It is regrettable that,
regardless of what happens, Ambassador Holbrooke
will one day leave the United Nations. Of course, I
hope he will do so in a very happy mood and with a
smile on his face.

