Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Assistant
Secretary-General Gilmour for their detailed and
informative presentations.

Allow me now to share our thoughts with the
Council - first, on the situation in Sudan in general,
and secondly, on Darfur.

Poland strongly condemns latest use of violence
by the Sudanese security forces against demonstrators
in Khartoum, which led to deaths and injuries.
There is no justification for the use of force against
peaceful protesters. All violence against the Sudanese
people - including extrajudicial, arbitrary and
summary killings, beatings and sexual and gender-
based violence, arrests and disappearances - must
stop.

We believe that all human rights violations and
abusescommittedmustbeinvestigatedinanindependent
and transparent manner and that perpetrators should
be held accountable for their actions. It should be
emphasized that the Transitional Military Council is
currently the body accountable for ensuring security
and rule of law in the country.

Consensus that enables transfer of power to a
civilian-led authority remains a matter of priority. We
expect the Transitional Military Council to respect
the aspirations of Sudanese society and provide for
freedom of expression and assembly and freedom of the
media, civic space and access to the Internet, without
any threat or use of violence. We support the position of
the African Union in that regard.

When it comes to the situation in Darfur, we
note with regret that violations of human rights, in
particular sexual and gender-based violence, continue
to occur across the region. We strongly condemn
the targeting - including by Government security
personnel and the Rapid Support Forces - of the civilian
population, especially those who are most vulnerable,
namely, women, children and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). We believe that the authorities should
spare no effort in holding the perpetrators accountable
and do their utmost to fight impunity in Darfur.

A lot remains to be done in addressing the root
causes of the conflict and instability, including
building effective rule-of-law institutions and creating
the conditions for millions of Darfuri IDPs to return to
their homes. The question of land ownership remains
one of most pressing issues in that regard.

We reiterate our position that there can be no other
solution to the conflict in Darfur than a political one.
We regret that the latest internal situation in Sudan has
led to a loss of momentum in the peace process, but we
believe it can be resumed in the near future.

At the same time, we follow with concern the
activities of the Darfuri rebel groups in neighbouring
countries. As Chair of both the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, and, together
with Germany, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
we intend to hold a joint meeting of the three Sanctions
Committees next week in order to provide the Security
Council with the space to discuss this issue in depth.

Let me conclude by addressing the issue of the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Poland looks
forward to the discussions on the new resolution. We
are willing to engage in the negotiations, but while
doing so we will be closely following the developments
in Khartoum, which in our opinion have a direct effect
on Darfur and its future.

