Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I should like to
thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative
and Coordinator of United Nations Operations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his very articulate
briefing and update to the report of the Secretary-
General on developments there.

We had occasion to hear from Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
on 9 May. We supported his prioritization of the
requirements of Bosnia for economic revitalization,
return of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
consolidation of common institutions. It is encouraging
to note from the Secretary-General's report that there
are visible and encouraging signs that peace is taking
root in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which
has the onerous responsibility of implementing the
Dayton Peace Accord, is playing a significant role in
achieving these priorities.

We would like in this statement to focus on three
main points.

First, UNMIBH has made good progress in its
mandated area within the past year. This includes
establishment of the State Border Service, a very
important undertaking; registration under the Law
Enforcement Personnel Registry programme;
recruitment and redeployment of minority police
personnel; and building ofthe police institution.

Secondly, the establishment of court police
services is still in its initial stages, particularly in the
Republika Srpska. This initiative requires further
emphasis. Not only is it a constitutional requirement,
but the independence and effectiveness of work of the
judicial institutions are dependent on these services.
Thirdly, an essential component of the
International Police Task Force is the assessment of the
judicial system over a period of two years, which is
due to be completed by the end of this year. The
findings so far have not been unexpected: the judiciary
has been found to be dysfunctional, to a varying extent,
politically, professionally and structurally. The work of
UNMIBH in the judicial area, which includes its
assessment, recommendations and advisory role, has
been playing a crucial role in building the judicial
system. We believe that UNMIBH should continue to
retain the necessary expertise in this area.

It is a matter of satisfaction to note that some
positive developments have occurred following the
statement made on 22 March during the Bangladesh
presidency of the Security Council. The recent
breakthrough in the Herzegovina-Neretva canton,
which allowed Bosniacs, for the first time since the
war, to work in Croat-dominated Mostar, is a good
example. The willingness of Croat leaders to make a
constructive contribution to the peace process is
commendable.

We also appreciate the contributions by Member
States to the Trust Funds administered by UNMIBH.
Additional funds, however, are necessary to support the
operations of the State Border Service and police
restructuring, and to improve their efficiency and
minority recruitment. We hope that the international
community will come forward with generous
contributions in these efforts of the Mission.

In conclusion, while supporting strongly the
extension of UNMIBH's mandate by another year -
that is, until 21 June 2001 - we would like to
underscore that the key role of UNMIBH is in the area
of police restructuring and of the consolidation of the
judicial system. Although some important initiatives
have been launched and gains achieved, much of the
progress will depend on overcoming factors causing
obstruction and delays. We hope that, with the
willingness and commitment of all parties concerned,
such cooperation will increase and considerable
headway in the efforts of UNMIBH will be possible.

