Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Sweden fully agrees with the
statement just made by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

It is now four years since the genocide in Rwanda,
four years since that cruel wave of killings of up to 1
million people. In his recent report on Africa, the Secretary-
General highlighted the failure of the international
community to prevent the genocide. We agree with him
when he states,

"The horrifying suffering of the Rwandan people
sends the clear and unmistakable message that the
international community must never again tolerate
such inaction." [S/1998/318, para. 32]

The genocide in Rwanda showed us the imperative of
action to see to it that those responsible are brought to
justice and to do everything possible to prevent the
atrocities of 1994 from recurring.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda was in itself an important step, as
evidence of the willingness of the international community
to deal with the aftermath of genocide. Rendering justice is
crucial to ending impunity and to achieving reconciliation
and peace within Rwanda and in the region.

In this context, it is also important that the national
judicial system of Rwanda be strengthened in parallel with
the continued work of the Tribunal.

Today, three and a half years after its establishment,
the Tribunal faces a heavy workload, with 25 suspects
currently in the custody of the Tribunal. The cause of
justice requires that those indicted be tried without undue
delay.

These are the main reasons why Sweden strongly felt
the need for an initiative in the Council to strengthen the
Tribunal for Rwanda by adding a third Trial Chamber. It
gives us great satisfaction that the Council is able to
respond positively to the request from the International
Tribunal for three additional judges. It is our hope that
this decision will be a concrete contribution to peace,
justice and stability in Rwanda.

We hope that the establishment of a third Trial
Chamber will also be matched by continued efforts by all
organs of the Tribunal to improve the efficiency of their
work. In particular, it is necessary for the third Chamber
to be given the resources it needs to function effectively.
Members of the Council look forward to being kept
informed of progress in this regard, and we trust that the
various organs will comply with the recommendations of
the latest report from the Office of Internal Oversight
Services.

The International Tribunal for Rwanda needs our full
cooperation and support to be able to carry out its
mandate. We welcome the cooperation which has already
been extended to the Tribunal, and we hope all States will
continue to cooperate fully with it.

In conclusion, I would like to place on record the
warm appreciation of my delegation to members of the
Council, to the Secretariat and to the Tribunal itself for
the constructive atmosphere and spirit of cooperation
which have guided the negotiations on the draft resolution
before us. We feel that today's decision is an important
one for the Tribunal and for Rwanda. Its adoption by
consensus will be a clear sign of the continued unanimous
support of the Council for the International Tribunal for
Rwanda.

