Mr. President. The Institute's publication Zoom In:
Palestinian Refugees of 1948, Remembrances portrays
the striking differences in which Palestinian and
Israeli youth views photographs from the 1948 Nakbah.
The publication demonstrates the need for greater
understanding and a common history of the incident,
the consequences of which resound to this very day.

We recognize that there is no one-size-fits-all
formula to achieving permanent peace. We also observe
that, at present, there may be insufficient quantitative
evidence to assess the risks ofdeprioritizing the need for
a reconciliatory narrative. However, there is a growing
awareness that preventing a relapse into conflict is
one of the more difficult aspects of addressing post-
conflict situations. Within the United Nations system,
that may manifest itself through challenges ranging
from funding gaps to a lack of institutional support.
In spite of that, it is perhaps within the United Nations
system itself that the potential for permanent peace can
be found and, in our view, it can be found through the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Malaysia continues to believe that the Security
Council has benefited tremendously from its increased
interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission,
particularly given the linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The building of State institutions
during the peacekeeping period will have a significant
impact on a successful transition into the peacebuilding
stage. As we have argued, the failure to work closely
and effectively with national Governments and local
stakeholders in ensuring a sustainable institutional
architecture could possibly bring back instability to the
country concerned. It is perhaps in that connection that
the Peacebuilding Commission could play an enhanced
role, inter alia, in generating a shared historical
understanding between parties to the conflict.

In that regard, Malaysia welcomes greater
connectivity and interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council to enhance
further work in the development of practical
peacebuilding policies. My delegation underscores
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission
as an intergovernmental advisory body entrusted
to coordinate and integrate approaches on post-
conflict peacebuilding measures, to help countries
from relapsing into conflict. As such, the principal
organs of the United Nations should be enhanced
and strengthened, in particular the Peacebuilding
Commission's advisory role on peacebuilding matters
with the Security Council.

In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its position that
the silent majority should speak out so as to drown out
the extreme voices ofhate, fear and ignorance. A shared
historical narrative is one of several ways for moderates
to overcome the control of extremists over the political
discourse of a conflict. We should, at the same time,
continue to support existing United Nations organs that
can play an important role in maintaining a permanent
peace, in particular, the Peacebuilding Commission.
To that end, I wish to assure you, Sir, of Malaysia's
continued support for international efforts to achieve
peace and nation rebuilding initiatives in post-conflict
situations.

