Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would very much like to thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable briefing today. We share
his concern about the fact that the Middle East is
experiencing crises and challenges that unquestionably
represent threats to international peace and security.
The situation will undoubtedly deteriorate if the
Security Council resolutions are not implemented by
the relevant parties.

The question of Palestine, the practices of the
Israeli occupation there and its continued violations of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant Security Council resolutions
are testament to that. The most recent is its repression
of peaceful protests in Gaza and the use of excessive
force. That led to the deaths of dozens of civilians and
injuries to hundreds as they exercised their legitimate
right to demonstrate peacefully in support of the March
of Return. Kuwait condemns those Israeli practices in
the strongest terms. We regret that the Security Council
has not taken action to condemn such acts of repression
or to call on the Israeli occupation forces to end them.
The Israeli occupying Power should not be an exception.
Everyone should respect and abide by international
law and the Charter of the United Nations and should
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
with the aim of achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace that can fulfil the Palestinian people's
legitimate political right to establish their own State on
their own land, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

We have had a number of meetings over the past
few days. Today's meeting would not have taken place
if we had been able to agree on a new mechanism to
investigate the allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. This disagreement has led to deep
divisions among the members of the Security Council.
We must step up our efforts to advance the stalled
political process in Syria. We have been concerned
about escalating tensions among all parties since
the beginning of the year. Through the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), which primarily calls for a
cessation of hostilities throughout Syria for at least 30
days, we tried to improve the humanitarian situation.
Unfortunately, however, it has not been implemented
and has in fact been violated in flagrant disregard for
the will of the international community.

We share the concern and disappointment of the
Secretary-General about the deteriorating situation in
Syria and the ongoing allegations of the use of chemical
weapons, and support his call for an agreement on a new
mechanism to ensure accountability and end impunity
in Syria. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to establish the facts
surrounding the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma, in eastern Ghouta, and emphasize that there
must be accountability for the perpetrators of those
crimes, if they are confirmed.
In view of our responsibility as members of
the Council, we should do our utmost and not lose
hope, and we should continue our efforts to agree on
the establishment of an independent, impartial and
professional mechanism for attributing responsibility
and ensuring accountability. The continued violations
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2118 (2013), by the warring parties
in Syria further convince us that, in the case of grave
violations of human rights or crimes that amount to
war crimes or crimes against humanity, there should
be a moratorium on the use of the veto as a procedural
matter, so that such tragedies for innocent civilians are
not repeated.

The State of Kuwait takes a principled and firm
position, in line with that of the League of Arab
States. We call for preserving the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria, as well as for a cessation
of the violence and hostilities in order to put an end
to bloodshed, protect the Syrian people and achieve
a peaceful settlement. This would be done under the
auspices of the United Nations and through the efforts of
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy to Syria, based
on the Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015), with the aim of achieving
a political transition agreed on by all sectors of Syrian
society and of meeting their legitimate aspirations.

