Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to once again address the Security
Council on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the activities of the Mechanism
for International Criminal Tribunals in Arusha and The
Hague. I would like to briefly report to the Council
first about Mechanism activities, and then turn to
the final report of the ICTY Office of the Prosecutor
(S/2017/1001, annex 11).

But let me first take this opportunity to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic', President of
the Republic of Croatia, and Her Excellency Ms. Nela
Kuburovic', Minister of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia. We thank them for being with us, and we are
honoured by their presence.

The Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor
continues to focus on expeditiously completing the
limited number of trials and appeals transferred from
the ICTY. During the reporting period, my Office
commenced the presentation of its evidence in the
Stanisic' and Simatovic' case. In order to reduce the
length of this trial, last week we filed a motion to
increase the number of trial days and hours per week.
My Office also continued its work on the two pending
appeal cases. We will present our oral appeal arguments
in the Seselj case next week.

Locating and arresting the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) remains our second priority. During
the reporting period, my Office continued its efforts to
reform and strengthen our fugitive-tracking activities.
We completed the restructuring of our Fugitives and
Investigations Unit, and a new tracking team leader has
been appointed. Our activities at present are focused
on pursuing a number of new leads, while we are
also reviewing and following up leads that had been
generated in the past but not processed.

Finally, we continue to provide assistance to
national jurisdictions investigating and prosecuting
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
In relation to the crimes committed in Rwanda, my
Office is focused on improving access to our evidence
collection. In addition to making more of our evidence
available to national judiciaries, we are working with
our Rwandan partners to establish more direct lines of
communication to expedite mutual legal assistance.

In relation to the former Yugoslavia, my Office
focused its activities on ensuring continuity following
the closure of the ICTY. During my missions to
Belgrade and Sarajevo last month, national war crimes
prosecutors expressed their commitment to continuing
and strengthening cooperation with my Office in
future. They further requested that we provide greater
support for their efforts to achieve their national war
crimes strategic goals. My Office will also continue
working with our national colleagues to improve
regional judicial cooperation, as there are currently
many deficiencies in that respect.

The ICTY will close its doors at the end ofthis month.
For twenty-four years, my Office has endeavoured to
fulfil the mandate that the Council entrusted to us: to
bring to justice those most responsible for the horrific
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We will leave
a rich and complex legacy. Thanks to the Council, so
many victims and survivors received some measure of
justice for the immense wrongs they suffered.

My last report reviews the Office ofthe Prosecutor's
work in implementing the completion strategy in more
detail. We identify not only our successes and lessons
learned, but also areas where results did not meet the
victims' expectations. We believe that our results are
credible, and we hope that the Council will judge our
efforts to be important contributions to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

I would like to highlight today three of those
lessons.

My Office considers that the completion strategy
represented a successful exercise of the Council's
executive authority. By combining the policy direction
to focus on those most responsible for the crimes
with a deadline for the filing of new indictments, the
Council promoted effective and expeditious activity
by my Office. For example, the so-called mega-trials
that my Office undertook in the implementation of
the completion strategy clearly realized significant
efficiency gains while also achieving meaningful
justice. The completion strategy further ensured
appropriate accountability while safeguarding our
prosecutorial independence in individual cases.

In turn, the completion strategy's legitimacy was
further strengthened because it foresaw the transition
of our responsibilities to national justice sectors.
The Council decided that the Tribunal would close
not because our work was done, but because it was
convinced that further justice could be achieved by
domestic judiciaries, in accordance with international
obligations. This was critical because the investigations
conducted by my Office identified hundreds of
suspects, only a small number of whom we would
prosecute as bearing the greatest responsibility. The
presumption that national courts would continue the
accountability process addressed concerns that the end
of the Tribunal's work would lead to impunity.

While the ICTY initially followed the path of
primacy, under the impetus of the completion strategy
and as directed by the Council, my Office pursued the
development of an effective system of complementarity
and partnership with national judiciaries. The crucial
lesson is that in future, where possible there should be
an integrated approach that embraces both international
and national justice mechanisms.

Finally, in relation to cooperation, as my Office
regularly reported to the Council, the countries of
the former Yugoslavia often failed to adhere to their
international obligations, particularly in terms of the
arrest of fugitives and access to documents. Yet we
succeeded in accounting for all fugitives, at a time
when the non-arrest of fugitives is a major challenge for
internationaljustice. This was possible only because of
the strong support from the Council, the United States,
the United Nations and its Member States. While a
number of factors played a role, ultimately one measure
was of decisive impact: the conditionality policies
applied by the European Union, the United States and
other States Members of the United Nations.

Our results show that if there is a clear political
agenda in favour of accountability, and if the
international community speaks with one voice, those
most responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law can be held accountable for their
crimes.

It has been said that the Tribunal has not achieved
reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia. It is hard to
disagree. As we have seen over the past two weeks,
the crimes have left wounds that still have not healed.
Convicted war criminals continue to be seen by many
as heroes, while victims and survivors are ignored and
dismissed. Difficult facts continue to meet outright
denial or rebuttals pointing to the crimes of others.

So the question is why reconciliation remains a
significant challenge today. The reality is that there is
still no true will within the region to accept the immense
wrongdoings of the past and move forward, sadly, most
of all among the political leadership. Unfortunately, too
many listen to war criminals who hide behind claims of
collective responsibility. War criminals insist that it is
not they who are on trial, but their people. They insist
that ifthey are judged to be guilty, then so is their entire
community. In contrast, we have always insisted on the
principle of individual criminal responsibility. The fact
is that the crimes were not committed by nations or
peoples but by individuals, and most of all by senior
political and military leaders.

So let me be crystal-clear on this point once again:
no community bears responsibility for what these
men did. The guilt is theirs and theirs alone. Justice
should relieve a society of the weight of collective
responsibility, paving the way for acceptance and
understanding. That is why although justice alone will
not achieve reconciliation, it is an essential condition.

It is clear that much more remains to be done. Many
Victims, from all communities, are still waiting for
justice. The countries ofthe region need support as much
as ever before. They will not be able to achieve justice
and reconciliation alone. Partners can help mediate so
that progress can be achieved on a shared agreement on
the recent past. For our national colleagues to succeed,
they will need the same support that my Office has
always received from the Council, the United Nations
and its Member States.

It has been a privilege to serve as Chief Prosecutor
of the for the past 10 years. I thank the Council for
having provided the support needed to secure the
arrests of all fugitives and to bring the Tribunal's final
cases to a successful conclusion. As Chief Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, I am committed to continuing the
implementation of the completion strategy and assisting
the countries of the former Yugoslavia to move forward.
Our national counterparts now have the primary
responsibility of achieving greater justice, while our
more limited role is in support of their efforts. That
support comes through providing them with access
to our evidence, sharing our expertise, passing along
lessons learned and promoting accountability and the
search for missing persons. We are grateful for the
continued support of the Council.

