The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Germany and Italy, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
'of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reichel
(Germany) and Mr. Fulci (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General prepared pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998), document 8/1998/712.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document 8/1998/675, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 July 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Austria to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of a
statement by the President of the European Union.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has «considered the
report of the Secretary-General of 5 August 1998
(5/1998/712) submitted pursuant to its resolution
1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998.

"The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the recent intense fighting in
Kosovo which has had a devastating impact on the.
civilian population and has greatly increased the
numbers of refugees and displaced persons.

"The Security Council shares the concern of
the Secretary-General that the continuation or
further escalation of the conflict in Kosovo has
dangerous implications for the stability of the
region. In particular, the Council is gravely
concerned that given the increasing numbers of
displaced persons, coupled with the approaching
winter, the situation in Kosovo has the potential to
become an even greater humanitarian disaster. The
Council affirms the right of all refugees and
displaced persons to' return to their homes. In
particular, the Council emphasizes the importance of
unhindered and continuous access of humanitarian
organizations to the affected population. The
Council is concerned over reports of increasing
violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council calls for an immediate
ceasefire. The Council emphasizes that the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Kosovo Albanians must achieve a political
solution to the issue of Kosovo and that all violence
and acts of terrorism from whatever quarter are
unacceptable, and reiterates the importance of the
implementation of its resolution 1160 (1998). The
Council reaffirms the commitment of all Member
States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and urges the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Kosovo Albanian leadership to enter
immediately into a meaningful dialogue leading to
an end to the violence and a negotiated political
solution to the issue of Kosovo. It supports in this
context the efforts of the Contact Group, including
its initiatives to engage the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian
Security Council 39181h meeting
Fifiy-third year 24 August 1998

leadership in discussions on the future status of
Kosovo.

"In this regard, the Security Council welcomes
the announcement by Dr. Ibrahim Rugova, the leader
of the Kosovo Albanian community, of the formation
of a negotiating team to represent the interests of the
Kosovo Albanian community. The formation of the
Kosovo Albanian negotiating team should lead to the
early conunencement of a substantial dialogue with
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
with the aim of ending the violence and achieving a
peaceful settlement, including the safe and permanent
return of all internally displaced persons and refugees
to their homes.

" It remains essential that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo
Albanians accept responsibility for ending the
violence in Kosovo, for allowing the people of
Kosovo to resume their normal lives and for moving
the political process forward.

"The Security Council will continue to follow
the situation in Kosovo closely and will remain
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.

