Mrs. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, and for presiding over this
important debate. We are also grateful to Mr. Jan
Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for his valuable briefing on the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My Government believes it important that
multilateralism should strengthen States, not weaken
them. It is only with strong States that multilateralism
can take on life. Under other conditions, it becomes a
system for only a few, and the benefits of a multilateral
organization that represents the interests and positions
of all its members are lost.

The United Nations, its main organs and its
Member States have to work together to strengthen
States and their institutions and support governmental
programmes to meet the needs of their populations, in
particular during conflict situations. That is the only
way to achieve the sustainable economic, social and
political development of nations.

In that regard, there are several concepts -
among them, humanitarian intervention and the
responsibility to protect - that should be managed
carefully and responsibly. Humanitarian assistance
efforts must be undertaken with the full cooperation,
coordination and consent of the Government as that is
the only way such efforts will be efficient and
productive, and able to ensure the protection of the
civilian population and humanitarian personnel.

Colombia reiterates once more its steadfast
commitment to promote, respect and protect the
civilian population, in accordance with its conviction,
protected by the law, that the State is responsible for
the protection of its population.

In accordance with this national commitment, the
Government of President Alvaro Uribe is working
tirelessly, and concrete achievements are starting to
appear. The rate of internal displacement has declined
by 48 per cent and the attention accorded to the
displaced population is becoming more efficient every
day. The resources devoted to the care of the
vulnerable population have been multiplied by eight.
The budget of the Social Solidarity Network, the
institution in charge of providing this care, has grown
from $14 million in 2002 to $120 million for 2005.
More than 70,000 people have benefited from
voluntary return, and we are working to consolidate
peace in the regions to achieve further substantial and
voluntary returns.

As part of its National Plan of Assistance to
Displaced Populations, the Government is working on
a humanitarian plan that will be implemented with the
United Nations system and the donor community.
Colombia has already appropriated resources for that
Plan, which is the first involving the active
participation of the United Nations. Therefore, we have
an enormous responsibility to create a constructive and
effective plan, since it sets a precedent for other
Member States of the Organization.

The 1.55 million internally displaced persons is a
number that alarms the Government, since we believe
that there should not be even one displaced person.
That is why we are taking measures and promoting
policies to benefit the displaced population. The
Government is responding to that challenge within its
national capacity and welcomes the international
community's joining in that effort. In that regard, we
express our gratitude to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its work and for
its efforts to find additional resources to support our
plan.

Colombia hopes for a generous response from the
donor community and the United Nations system to
help support the projects set up by common agreement
with civil society and the local and regional authorities
in an open-ended and transparent consultation process
that took place during the year.

Colombians know very well the suffering and the
effects of conflicts and terrorist threats on the civilian
population. Our knowledge of the situation has
prompted us to take concrete action to improve and
normalize the lives of the civilian population.

In addition, Colombia welcomes the generous
actions of non-governmental organizations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the United Nations system to ease and improve the
situation of the civilian population including the
displaced and ex-combatants. The demobilized
population - individually and collectively - of the
illegal armed groups totalled 7,601 ex-combatants as of
November 2004. In December there will be an
additional 3,000 demobilized persons. That population
also requires special assistance, and the international
community can contribute towards their effective
transition to civil life. Their economic reintegration
and education are some of the main challenges to
assuring a sustainable demobilization process.

In Colombia, the ICRC has essential work to do
and has unimpeded and secure access to the civilian
population. The United Nations system is present
throughout the country under secure conditions -
including in zones where military strategies are being
developed - and is able to undertake its activities in
accordance with its respective mandates. Colombia
promotes that unimpeded access, the sole objective of
which is to assist the affected population. Such
assistance is given with respect for the basic principles
governing humanitarian assistance.

As much as we favour access to the population to
help meet its needs, we reject any condition that links
humanitarian access with dialogue with the illegal
armed groups. We do not believe that to achieve
effective humanitarian assistance, dialogue with such
groups is required. Negotiations under the umbrella of
a humanitarian cause can be used for political and
destabilizing goals, the very objectives of the illegal
armed groups. That would mean the end of humane,
impartial and neutral humanitarian assistance. That is
why the national Government, in the exercise of its full
sovereignty, is the sole entity with the authority to
enter into negotiations with illegal armed groups.
Furthermore, the Government is entitled to request
facilitators when it believes that their work can
strengthen the quest for peace.

Colombia is a strong State with solid democratic
institutions and an active, organized civil society. The
entire nation is determined to deal with the perpetrators
of violent acts, and the Government is responding to
that clear mandate from the people. Thus, in
accordance with international humanitarian law,
humanitarian assistance must respect the dynamics of
the State in overcoming violence and restoring peace in
the region. We believe that it is important to
acknowledge the specific characteristics of each
situation. Generalizations, cookie-cutter mechanisms
and one-size-fits-all solutions should not be applied to
these types of situations.

We also believe that humanitarian assistance must
be provided in consonance with its own principles. We
believe that international humanitarian law cannot be
reinterpreted in a way that would deviate from its spirit
and letter; nor should it be mixed with other judicial
structures.
Allow me to conclude by calling for unity among
concerned States, donor countries, the United Nations
system, humanitarian organizations and civil society,
so that they can work together on the important task of
delivering humanitarian assistance in a concerted and
coordinated manner. We all share a firm commitment
to protect and assist civilians affected by conflicts,
terrorism and violence. We understand the concerns of
all stakeholders working in the field of humanitarian
assistance to bring timely and efficient assistance and
protection to civilians. The Government of Colombia,
more than any other stakeholder, is devoted to finding
a solution to the situation of civilian populations
affected by violence.

