Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Uruguayan
presidency and Minister for Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Rodolfo Nin Novoa, for putting the
spotlight on the protection of health care in armed
conflict and the Secretary-General for his insightful
recommendations. We also express warm appreciation
to Ms. Beerli, of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Mr. Ugarte, of Human Rights Watch,
for their comprehensive briefings.

Statistics prove that about 75 per cent of all war
victims are civilians, due to hostilities and the excessive
use of explosives in urban areas. Those fatalities and
gross violations of human rights are accompanied by
large-scale forced displacements, which have led to a
global protection crisis. The survival of injured victims
is dependent on fully operational medical facilities
and medical and humanitarian personnel. Therefore
the destruction of those facilities might be used by
armed groups as a new weapon of war. At the same
time, we must acknowledge that health facilities are
also frequently demolished as collateral damage in our
attempts to fight terrorism and armed groups.

Last year Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolution
2286 (2016), whose unanimous adoption reflected the
Council's unity in commitment to humanity in wartime.
However, health-care personnel and facilities remain
under fire in a number of conflicts. The effective
implementation of this resolution becomes even more
necessary. In that light, my delegation would like to
make the following observations for consideration by
the Council.

First, the United Nations and the Council should
send a strong signal to all conflicting parties by
implementing the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General's latest report, of May (S/2017/414),
such as enhancing respect for international law,
providing impartial medical care and unimpeded access
to humanitarian action, prioritizing the protection
of civilians in United Nations peace operations and
finding durable solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Second, accountability is critical. Perpetrators
must be brought to justice in order to end all forms
of impunity. All parties to armed conflict that are
responsible for attacks on schools and hospitals must
be precisely, without exception, listed in the annexes to
Secretary General's annual report on children in armed
conflict. The United Nations should engage with the
listed parties to secure action plans to hold accountable
those responsible for such attacks.

Third, the protection of civilians is primarily for
the host country. Governments need to strengthen
national mechanisms for independent investigations
of such violations, together with the introduction of
comprehensive security sector reform, rule of law
and good governance. They should be supported by
the United Nations system, regional organizations,
peacekeepers, donors and the international community.

Fourth, the support of the international actors
should focus primarily on tackling the root causes of
conflict through conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development measures.

Fifth, we must actively use non-military protection
tools, including strong political advocacy, vigilant
reporting and monitoring. The need for the education
and training of all stakeholders in the larger framework
of international law is therefore absolutely essential.
We also need to promote improved data collection
by monitoring and analyzing data regarding attacks
on health care facilities in armed conflict and to
act accordingly.

Sixth, we underscore the importance of
implementing the recommendations of the Secretary-
General's June 2015 report (S/2015/453) and the
relevant recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which
proposed that mandates to protect civilians need to be
coherent, with a comprehensive political strategy. We
also need operational clarity on the formulation and
implementation ofmandates, which has not always been
possible due to differing perceptions and geopolitical
positions in the Council. Lines become further blurred
by parties to the conflict and players on the ground,
including the role of non-State actors and foreign
fighters, as a new phenomenon.

Seventh, attacks on health-care facilities and
personnel have a devastating impact on women,
children and persons with disabilities. All humanitarian
responses must therefore address the rights and needs
of vulnerable groups, including access to essential
medical care. The full participation of women in
decision-making will help ensure that those rights are
respected. Victims of land mines and other munitions
and the indirect effects of armed conflict, such as
disease, malnutrition and famine, also require special
medical care and specialized services. All of those
problems can be effectively addressed only by bringing
together international, regional and local stakeholders
and civil society.

Finally, Kazakhstan pays tribute to the noble work
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the humanitarian and human rights organizations.
My delegation attaches the utmost importance to
the security of civilians and is fully committed to
implementing resolution 2286 (2016).

In conclusion, I cannot but agree with the
passionate call of His Excellency the Foreign Minister
of Uruguay that the dream will save the world. The
Secretary-General has a dream and a vision, and all of
us, collectively, need to help him in its realization.

