Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We meet today on a
historic occasion to celebrate the remarkable and
successful outcome of the Southern Sudan referendum.
We are pleased to be joined by His Excellency
Mr. Deng Alor Kuol, Minister of Regional Cooperation
of the Government of Southern Sudan, as well as
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, who is here on behalf of his Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ali Ahmed Karti. Allow me also to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary General
Haile Menkerios, former President Benjamin Mkapa
and His Excellency Ambassador Kane, on behalf of the
High-Level Panel on the Sudan, for their encouraging
briefings to the Council today.
At the outset, South Africa wishes to join in
congratulating the people and Government of the
Sudan on the conclusion and announcement of the
results of the Southern Sudan referendum. In that
regard, we wish to reiterate the sentiments expressed
by President Jacob Zuma in which he "lauded the
efforts of both President Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Salva Kiir on delivering a peaceful and
credible referendum for the people of Southern Sudan".

During its recent Summit in Addis Ababa, the
leadership of the African Union adopted a solemn
declaration on the Sudan in which it recalled that, as a
result of the exceptional challenge inherited from its
colonial past and the unique nature of its national
question, in 2005 Sudanese leaders resolved to grant
the right of self-determination to the people of Southern
Sudan. The results announced by the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission on 7 February 2011 therefore
bear testimony to the collective desire of the people of
Southern Sudan to exercise their inalienable right to
self-determination in accordance with the provisions of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), thus
expressing their commitment to turn their back on war
and to embrace a future path of peace, dignity,
democracy and development.

On behalf of the people and Government of South
Africa, President Jacob Zuma welcomed

"the immediate acceptance of the results of the
referendum by the Government of the Sudan and
its expression of willingness to support and
conclude all necessary procedures to ensure the
establishment of an independent, viable State of
South Sudan".

He further said that the acceptance of the results
by President Al-Bashir demonstrated the strong
political will for peace that exists among the leaders in
the Sudan and set the foundation for harmonious
coexistence between the people of North and South
Sudan.

The African Union Summit also hailed

"the courage, vision and steadfastness of the
Government of the Sudan, under the leadership of
President Omer Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President and President of the Government of
Southern Sudan Salva Kiir Mayardit, which has
made possible this momentous achievement".

The Summit also pledged Africa's support as they
fulfil their historic responsibility.

We must also congratulate the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau which, in four months and with
little resources, achieved such astonishing success by
competently facilitating a timely referendum process.
We also pay tribute to the thousands of volunteers who
worked under trying circumstances, sometimes without
food or water, to ensure the historic success of the
referendum.

The successful referendum in the Sudan has
demonstrated that national ownership accompanied by
the support of the international community is critical in
ensuring the full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. My delegation therefore pays tribute
to the work of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, under the leadership of Mr. Menkerios; the
African Union and its High Level Implementation
Panel on the Sudan, chaired by former President
Mbeki; the Chairperson of the Secretary-General's
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, former President
Benjamin Mkapa; and the countless bilateral and
regional partners that contributed to the success of the
referendum.

The success of this referendum constitutes an
important and critical contribution towards the full
implementation of the CPA. The journey ahead will be
challenging. However, South Africa is encouraged by
the commitment of the parties to the CPA to
speedily deal with all outstanding issues, such as the
status of Abyei, as well as post-referendum issues -
which include border demarcation, natural resources
and economic issues, citizenship, security and other
issues - as they have promised. In that regard, South
Africa is in full support of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, led by former President
Thabo Mbeki, in its work of facilitating the
negotiations between the parties on post-referendum
issues.

My delegation remains concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in Darfur and its
devastating humanitarian impact on the region. We
reiterate the call on the armed movements by the
Security Council and the African Union (AU) to
immediately cease all hostilities. We welcome the joint
communique signed by the Justice and Equality
Movement and the Liberation and Justice Movement
on 29 January, in which the parties demonstrate a
common commitment to peace and justice. It is vital
that those commitments translate into the signing of a
peace agreement and an end to the violence and
hostilities in Darfur.
South Africa calls on those outside the process,
especially the Abdul Wahid al-Nur faction of the Sudan
Liberation Movement, to join peace negotiations in
Doha, as there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur. We look forward to an early
conclusion of the Doha process so as to lay a strong
foundation for the equally important, all-inclusive
constituency negotiations based on the Darfur political
process as mandated by the African Union.

As we look to the parties in the Sudan to fully
implement their commitments under the CPA, we are
again reminded of the AU solemn declaration on the
Sudan, in which the AU renewed Africa's solidarity
with the entire Sudanese people and welcomed equally
North and South Sudan and the emerging post-
referendum situation as building blocks for the ongoing
project of African integration. Having achieved peace,
the Sudanese people are now able to fully participate as
effective actors and beneficiaries in the common
African endeavour of shared prosperity and continental
unity.

We call on the international community to ensure
that we live up to the expectations of North and South
Sudan alike in making their continued journey
mutually rewarding. South Africa, for its part, will
continue with the projects that it has launched in the
Sudan since the signing of the CPA and will support,
where necessary, ongoing peace and good
neighbourliness between North Sudan and South
Sudan.

