Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to extend our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I also thank the
Permanent Representatives of the group of five small
nations - the S-5 - for having requested this timely
meeting.

Fourteen long years have elapsed since the
Council last addressed this issue. That is indeed an
indication of the fact that the reform of the Security
Council, which is of paramount importance for the
overwhelming majority of the Members of the United
Nations, has not been accorded due attention, in
particular as a result of reluctance on the part of some
permanent members of the Council. We hope that open
debates such as this one will be convened on a more
regular and frequent basis to highlight the importance
of the issue under discussion.
08-49242

The note by the President of the Security Council
and its annex, which are contained in document
S/2006/507, is an important, although modest, step in
the right direction. It reflects certain measures agreed
upon among Council members in order to enhance the
efficiency and transparency of the Council's work, as
well as its interaction and dialogue with non-members
of the Council. However, that document is not
inclusive and its provisions have not been adequately
implemented in the past two years. Despite the
emphasis that the overwhelming majority of Member
States have all along placed on the necessity of
bringing transparency and openness to the Council's
working methods and its decision-making processes, to
date, apart from isolated steps taken in that regard, the
working methods of the Council have in reality not
undergone major improvements.

The manner in which the Security Council
functions at present and its failure to adequately
improve its working methods and decision-making
processes have brought about a situation where we are
witnessing a decline in trust in this important organ in
international public opinion. In turn, that trend has led
to the loss of standing and credibility in the Council in
the eyes of the general membership. In accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council should act on behalf of all
Member States; but in reality, if there is one thing
missing in the exercise of many of the Council's
functions and the taking of its decisions, it is that very
principle.

Not only do the Council's decisions decreasingly
reflect the wishes and views of the overwhelming
majority of the Member States of the Organization, in
many cases they do not even represent the genuine
opinion of the whole of its own membership. Despite
the requirement contained in paragraph 42 of the
President's note calling for consultation by the Council
with the broader United Nations membership - in
particular, interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or specifically affected -
when drafting, inter alia, resolutions, presidential
statements and press statements, in many cases the
general membership and even the countries concerned
are kept totally uninformed of the negotiations on draft
resolutions or statements directly affecting them, let
alone being asked their views on the Council's
outcome documents. That is also the case with regard
to non-permanent members, which frequently face
11
situations of secretive negotiation between a few
permanent members on important issues.

A legitimate question therefore arises: whether
the outcome of such non-transparent, exclusive and
political procedures can represent the points of view of
the entire membership. How can one expect Member
States to implement decisions that are made without
even minimal engagement on their part, or even
without their knowledge?

There are numerous other instances in which the
Council has failed to honour its responsibility as
regards the rights of non-Council members. They
include, inter alia, the Council's refusal to allow non-
members of the Council to participate in discussions on
matters affecting them and their interests, in total
disregard of Article 31 of the Charter; its denial of
concerned countries' right to brief it on their positions
on issues having a direct effect on their national
interests; its continuation of a trend of selective
notification as to the holding of its meetings; its failure
to convene regular daily briefings; and its denial of the
right of reply to countries against which allegations are
raised under certain meeting formats of the Council.

It is indeed noteworthy that some Council
members are adamant in their reluctance to implement
the decisions on the working methods of the Security
Council that they have agreed to, as contained in
document S/2006/507. In that context, for instance,
although paragraph 29 of the annex to that document
stipulates that "when non-members are invited to speak
to the Council, those who have a direct interest in the
outcome of the matter under consideration may speak
prior to Council members", on many occasions the
Council has denied an opportunity to countries
concerned to speak before a vote is taken, instead
allowing them to speak only after the Council had
taken a decision and is members had made their
statements.

Hasty and unnecessary resort to Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and the threat or use
of sanctions in cases where no actions have even been
necessary, are other disturbing facts that have
undermined the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council's decisions. More alarming are the various
cases in which certain permanent members of the
Security Council have attempted to exploit this body as
a vehicle to pursue their own national agendas.

Undoubtedly, impartiality, transparency and
fairness are key premises on which the Security

Council should base its approach in discharging its
Charter-mandated responsibilities. To increase the
transparency of its work and improve its working
methods, the Council should seriously take into
consideration the relevant provisions of the Charter, as
well as the resolutions that clarify its relationship with
the General Assembly and other organs of the United
Nations.

The Security Council's norm-setting and law-
making are also part of another increasing trend that
runs counter to the letter and the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations. In accordance with the Charter, the
General Assembly, as the chief deliberative, policy-
making and representative organ of the United Nations,
is primarily entrusted with the task of the progressive
development and codification of international law. As
stated by the representative of Cuba in her statement on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to which we
subscribe, the Security Council's increasing
encroachment on the prerogatives of other main organs
of the United Nations - in particular those of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council and their subsidiary bodies, as well as such
technical bodies as the International Atomic Energy
Agency - is also of particular concern to Member
States.

A case in point is the imposition of the
consideration by the Security Council of the peaceful
nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. In
the past 30 months, in a politically motivated move
orchestrated by a few of its permanent members, the
Security Council has taken unlawful, unnecessary and
unjustifiable actions in adopting resolutions against the
Islamic Republic of Iran in connection with its
peaceful nuclear programme, which presents no threat
whatsoever to international or regional peace and
security. Those actions have been taken against our
nation only because we have decided to exercise our
inalienable right to peaceful uses of nuclear
technology, as enshrined in and permitted by the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

I wish to conclude by briefly addressing issues
pertaining to the enlargement of the Security Council.
Clearly, despite the extensive debates in the General
Assembly's Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters Related to the Security Council over the past
15 years, no significant progress has been made on the
substantive aspects of Council reform, such as its size
and composition and the veto power. We concur with
the view that the composition of the Council does not
represent the realities of the international community
today and that this issue should be thoroughly
addressed and resolved in any meaningful reform of
the United Nations. In our view, meaningful reform of
the Council will be possible only through creating a
situation where the question of under-representation of
developing countries in the Council is seriously dealt
with and where the question of the representation of
nearly 1.5 billion Muslims is adequately and
satisfactorily addressed. Every effort should be made
to render the Council more democratic, representative
and accountable. Iran stands ready to contribute to the
achievement of that goal.

