Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; and the countries of the
Stabilization and Association process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia
and Montenegro; and the EFTA country Iceland,
member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

As this is my first intervention before the
Security Council this year, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency, and to extend my warm congratulations to
the representatives of the new members of the Council:
Algeria, Benin, Brazil, Philippines and Romania.

The European Union is grateful for the highly
constructive report provided this morning by the
Chairman of the 1267 sanctions Committee. The
challenges facing the Committee remain formidable
and many. Ambassador Munoz is therefore to be
commended for his able stewardship of its activities, in
particular the responsive and pro-active manner in
which the complex and sensitive issues facing the
Committee are addressed.

Close dialogue with the wider United Nations
membership remains essential. In this regard, we
welcome the Committee's intention to maintain a pro-
active approach in its work that will be marked by
transparency and responsiveness. The European Union
is keen to establish closer contacts with the Committee,
as suggested on the occasion of the meeting
Ambassador Mufioz and a delegation of the Committee
itself had with the competent working group of the
Council of the European Union in Brussels on 2
December 2003. The holding of periodic open briefings
on the work of the Committee for all States is also a
pragmatic and welcome proposal.

We agree as to the importance of regularly
updating and reviewing the guidelines and the working
procedures of the Committee. The European Union is
encouraged, therefore, to hear that the Committee will
continue to strive to enhance these guidelines and
procedures.

Ambassador Munoz has commented upon his
recent extensive outreach activities on behalf of the
Committee and his successful visit to Europe, among
other relevant destinations. Our exchanges, during
Ambassador Mufioz's visit to Europe, were detailed
and fruitful. We considered carefully the definition and
freezing of non-financial and other economic
resources, the challenges arising from the
implementation of the travel ban and other concerns
relating to the Committee's consolidated list, including,
very importantly, human rights and due process. The
combat against terrorism should be conducted with
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

With regard to the latter subject, we would like to
recall the workshop sponsored by Sweden and
Germany under the auspices of the European Union on
24 November last year, which brought together over
sixty sanctions experts. Some concrete proposals were
put forward, among them the following: the relevant
resolutions, i.e. the legal basis for the restrictions,
should contain clear criteria and definitions for the
listings as well as for their scope; individuals entered
into the consolidated sanctions list should, to the extent
possible, be informed about the listing as well as its
reasons and consequences; and the right of listed
individuals to be heard should be further developed.
We hope that the proposals discussed at the workshop
will be reflected in the new resolution now under
consideration.

In the four years since it was established, the
1267 Committee has proved a tenacious force in the
fight against the major threat to international peace and
security posed by the terrorist acts of Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. Its ability to adapt and to adjust in a timely
fashion to changing circumstances deserves special
mention. We welcome that a new resolution is under
active consideration, as it reflects the general need -
not confined to this Committee - to keep sanctions
regimes under review within specified time
frameworks. As the situation on the ground evolves,
for better or for worse, so too must the measures that
the Council has imposed. The Council must be, and
must be seen to be, responsive to these changes.

The recently published second report of the
Monitoring Group established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1363 (2001) is an interesting and
comprehensive document. Its findings and
recommendations warrant careful consideration. In the
meantime, we stress the need for greater transparency
in the working methods of the Group and in the
elaboration and publication of its reports. We
recommend that the Monitoring Group thoroughly
check with the Member States mentioned in its reports,
and in advance, relevant information and data.

The European Union, however, fully shares the
concerns expressed by the Monitoring Group about the
low turn-out of the implementation reports called for in
resolution 1455 (2003) and about the indications that
the measures introduced in that resolution, as well as in
earlier resolutions - in particular 1267 (1999) and
1390 (2002) - have been insufficiently implemented.
Having been adopted under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, resolution 1455 (2003) is mandatory
and obligates all Member States to implement the
measures set forth therein. The EU once again calls for
the effective implementation of the resolution and
reiterates its determination to cooperate fully with the
Committee and the Monitoring Group in this respect.

The Monitoring Group continues to play an
indispensable role in monitoring the implementation of
the sanctions regime, and the European Union wishes
to express its appreciation to the Group for this latest
report. The report speaks of several areas where scope
for improvement remains vis-a-vis implementation of
the measures contained in the relevant resolutions. The
EU takes particular note of the Group's conclusion:
without a tougher and more comprehensive
resolution- a resolution which obligates States to
take the mandated measures - the role played by the
United Nations in this important battle risks becoming
marginalized.

Therefore, the European Union very much looks
forward to the early adoption of the new resolution. In
that connection, the Security Council may be assured
that the European Union and its Member States stand
ready to implement all further measures introduced
under the resolution.

