I brief the Security Council today three days after a new coalition Government was sworn into office in Israel following a year of political uncertainty. I look forward to working with the new ministers on the challenges that lie ahead. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is not behind us. Managing its socioeconomic impact affects both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, and it will remain a serious challenge. Beyond the health aspects of the crisis, we need to ensure that cooperation among all sides continues in the interest of peace. To this end, the United Nations will work with the leaders of Israel and Palestine, as well as with our regional and international partners, to create the conditions for returning to meaningful Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Our unfaltering commitment to achieving a negotiated two-State solution remains resolute. The Secretary-General has warned on many occasions of the danger of unilateral action. The continuing threat of annexation by Israel of parts of the West Bank would constitute a most serious violation of international law, deal a devastating blow to the two-State solution, close the door to a renewal of negotiations and threaten efforts to advance regional peace and our broader efforts aimed at maintaining international peace and security. Recent polls show that the Israeli public is divided on the issue. However, countries of the region and many in the international community have clearly stated their positions regarding annexation. The Palestinian leadership announced yesterday evening that it sees itself absolved "as of today, of all the agreements and understandings with the American and Israeli Governments and of all the obligations based on these understandings and agreements, including the security ones" and calls on Israel to assume its obligations as the occupying Power. This statement by President Mahmoud Abbas further calls for negotiations under international auspices, including by the Quartet, to advance a negotiated two-State solution. Tomorrow, I will be meeting with the Palestinian Prime Minister in order to better understand the practical side of the decision by the leadership and its implications on the ground. If there is one concern we all share, it is that everyone needs to work together to prevent escalation and radicalization. However, if I may speak openly and very frankly on the issue, whatever our individual assessments of the Palestinian reaction to the Israeli threat of annexation may be, that reaction is certainly one thing - it is a desperate cry for help. It is a call for immediate action and a cry for help from a generation of leadership that has invested its life over a quarter of a century in building institutions and preparing for statehood. The Palestinian leadership is not making threats. It is calling for urgent action to preserve the prospects for peace, and it is doing so at a time where a new, younger generation, with its own aspirations for the future, is stepping forward. Many of these young people feel betrayed and increasingly cynical. This new generation, born in the aftermath of the Oslo Accords, is disillusioned from a quarter of a century of efforts that have not led to statehood. We do not know what future they will carve out for themselves, but whatever future young Palestinians and Israelis do decide to build, we have an obligation to prevent violence and protect the chances for peace. I therefore ask the Security Council today to join the Secretary-General in his call in opposition to unilateral steps that will hinder current diplomatic efforts to create the conditions for bringing Israelis and Palestinians back to the table. We owe this to all the young Palestinians and Israelis out there. I also call on my colleagues in the Middle East Quartet - the United States, the Russian Federation and the European Union - to work with the United Nations and quickly come forward with a proposal that will enable the Quartet to take up its mediation role and work jointly with countries of the region to advance the prospects for peace. Israel must abandon its annexation threats, and the Palestinian leadership must re-engage with all members of the Quartet. Everyone must do their part. Returning to the situation on the ground, let me note that it continues to be dominated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite growing political tensions, Palestinian and Israeli authorities have continued their notable coordination around efforts to limit the spread of the virus and are taking careful steps to reopen their economies and lift virus-related restrictions. Relatively successful prevention efforts in the occupied Palestinian territory have thus far ensured that the limited capacity of the health system has not been overwhelmed. However, there remain considerable concerns regarding the ability of the Palestinian health sector to cope with a potential surge in cases, especially in Gaza. In particular, there are continuing shortages of critical supplies, including testing materials, personal protective equipment, ventilators and essential intensive care unit equipment, owing to funding gaps and a shortage in global supply. The United Nations and its partners have continued to work to address these gaps and their ramifications. Thus far, over 50 per cent of the amount requested in the COVID-19 inter-agency response plan - some $23 million - has been raised. Including resources outside the response plan, some $39.5 million have been mobilized to support COVID-19-related activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. Pursuant to an agreement between the Palestinian and Israeli authorities, over 10,000 Palestinian labourers crossed into Israel from the West Bank on 3 May. They are part of an estimated 40,000 who were granted permits to stay in Israel until the end of Ramadan. On 4 May, Israel approved new regulations obligating employers in Israel to provide medical insurance and appropriate accommodation for Palestinian workers. In Gaza, the health system continues to face immense challenges despite the low number of positive COVID-19 cases. As of the end of April, 44 per cent of essential medicines and 30 per cent of essential medical supplies in the Strip had less than a month's stock remaining. The Rafah crossing with Egypt opened in one direction for three days between 12 and 14 May to allow for the return of 1,168 people to Gaza. Travel through the Erez crossing has been limited largely to urgent medical cases and those persons' companions, as well as to staff of international organizations and returning Gaza residents. Approximately 460 people have been allowed to return to Gaza and some 225 others to exit through that crossing. As elsewhere around the world, the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19 on Palestinians have been immense. Tens of thousands of Palestinians have lost their jobs, small and medium enterprises are unable to operate, children cannot attend school in person and violence against women and children has increased. As always, the most vulnerable are at the greatest risk of suffering. Recent gains in Gaza relating to water, sanitation, electricity and livelihoods are at extreme risk of being fully reversed. COVID-19 has damaged Gaza's economy across sectors: around 13,000 industrial workers have temporarily lost their jobs and virtually all restaurants and hotels have ceased operations, leading to the release of over 10,000 workers, while perhaps half of all employees in the information and communications technologies sector have also been laid off. The Palestinian people are experiencing the same shock and uncertainty as the rest of humankind; however, their Government is unable to respond to the socioeconomic effects with the same agency as an independent sovereign State. It cannot avail itself of the conventional monetary and fiscal tools that sovereign countries ordinarily use in times of economic distress. It cannot influence interest rates, print money, devalue its currency or access international capital markets to finance the deficit spending needed to compensate those who have lost jobs and support businesses to stay afloat. The vulnerable fiscal position of the Palestinian Authority has been further damaged by the COVID-19 pandemic. Its revenues are down sharply owing to restrictions on movement and business operations and to lower demand for goods. Given the additional spending required to respond to and recover from the pandemic, estimates are that the Palestinian Authority's fiscal deficit could exceed $2 billion this year. Israel has announced a soft loan of $233 million for a period of four months against future Palestinian clearance revenues. It will provide a critical fiscal lifeline for the Palestinian Authority. However, unless combined with a long-term response and reform strategy, including a resolution of the outstanding fiscal issues, that lifeline only postpones difficult fiscal decisions. Working with its international partners, the Palestinian Authority must also adopt emergency budget measures to address the pandemic along the lines recently laid out by the World Bank. An additional complicating factor, as of 9 May, is an amendment to an Israeli military order that purportedly holds Palestinian commercial banks liable for processing payments from the Palestinian Authority to Palestinian security prisoners, their families or the families of those killed in attacks. This development injects more uncertainty into the already vulnerable Palestinian financial system. On 24 April, the Jerusalem District Court issued a decision ordering the temporary confiscation of some $128 million from the Palestinian Authority as compensation to families of victims of attacks against Israelis during the second intifada. The Court ruled that the sum would, at least in part, be collected from Palestinian Authority clearance revenues withheld since March 2019 under Israeli legislation concerning payments by the Palestinian Authority to security prisoners or families of Palestinians killed in attacks. Clashes between the Israeli security forces and Palestinians continued during the reporting period. Overall, in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, two Palestinians, including a teenager, and an Israeli soldier were killed. Sixty-five Palestinians, including six children, and two Israelis, one child and one soldier, were injured in various incidents. On 28 April, a Palestinian man stabbed a 62-year-old Israeli woman in the Israeli city of Kfar Saba, moderately wounding her; he was arrested. On 12 May, an Israeli soldier was killed by a stone thrown at his head during an arrest operation by Israeli security forces in the village of Ya'bed near Jenin. Later that day, a Palestinian man was shot and wounded by Israeli security forces at the Kalandia checkpoint after reportedly attempting a stabbing attack against those forces. On the following day, a Palestinian teenager was shot dead by Israeli security forces during clashes in the Fawwar refugee camp, near Hebron, during an arrest operation. On 14 May, a 19-year-old Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli security forces after carrying out a suspected ramming attack near Hebron; an Israeli soldier was wounded in the incident. In Gaza, the calm that has prevailed in recent months continued. On 6 May, a rocket was fired from Gaza towards Israel. In response, Israeli forces targeted Hamas facilities in the Strip. No injuries were reported in either incident. On several occasions, Israeli forces opened fire, injuring four Palestinians. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, concerns remain over the situation of Palestinian children in Israeli custody. On 11 May, Jamie McGoldrick, the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, UNICEF and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a joint statement calling on Israeli and Palestinian authorities to immediately release children in detention and emphasizing that the best way to uphold the rights of detained children amid a dangerous pandemic in any country is to release them and to put a moratorium on new admissions to detention facilities. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded 20 incidents in which Israeli settlers injured Palestinians or reportedly damaged their property, with a high concentration of incidents reported in Nablus and Ramallah governorates. In the same period, there were reports of 23 incidents of stone and Molotov cocktail-throwing in which Palestinians injured Israeli civilians in the West Bank or reportedly damaged their property. On 18 May, Israel's District Court in Lod convicted an Israeli man of the horrific murder of three members of the Palestinian Dawabsheh family, including a toddler, who were killed as they slept when their family home in the West Bank village of Duma was burned down in 2015. As the Secretary-General noted in his policy brief last month, "falcross every sphere, from health to the economy, security to social protection, the impacts of COVID-19 are exacerbated for women and girls simply by virtue of their sex." According to recent reporting by UN-Women, Palestinian women and girls are disproportionately affected by the pandemic, which is creating and exacerbating pre-existing gender-specific risks and vulnerabilities and is expected to widen inequalities, especially in the economic sphere. In that context, I remain concerned by the increase in incidents of gender-based violence, especially in situations where families are confined to small living spaces and exposed to increased socioeconomic pressures. Non-governmental organizations in the West Bank and Gaza have reported a rise in cases of life-threatening incidents of gender-based violence and have raised concerns about the ongoing lack of protection, shelters and referral services. In early May, the Israeli Ministry of Defence approved the seizure of municipal planning authority from the Hebron municipality in relation to the Al- Ibrahimi Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs. The move was justified by the goal of making the site accessible to persons with disabilities, while stating that the project would not change prayer arrangements or the status quo. The order was issued on 12 May, allowing 60 days for objections. The Palestinian leadership, the Hebron municipality, the Waqf and Islamic authorities, among others, have condemned the move, with some arguing that it violates the 1997 Hebron Protocol. Any change to the delicate balance at holy sites not agreed by the stakeholders threatens stability and must not be made unilaterally. Meanwhile, the Israeli authorities demolished 32 Palestinian-owned structures owing to lack of Israeli-issued building permits. Consequently, 16 people, including 10 children, were displaced and another 170 were otherwise affected. Of the structures demolished by Israeli authorities during the reporting period, all 32 were in Area C of the West Bank. While there has been an overall decline in demolitions and displacement, any such steps are contrary to Israel's obligations under international law and must stop. Turning to the region, in the occupied Golan, the overall security situation remains stable despite continued violations by both parties, including breaches of the ceasefire line and the presence of unauthorized personnel and equipment in the areas of separation and limitation. On 30 April, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) observed three missiles fired from the Alpha side impacting the Bravo side, a helicopter on the Alpha side firing a missile across the ceasefire line, as well as a rocket exploding in the area of separation. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had conducted a strike on the Bravo side. On 3 May, UNDOF observed one aircraft flying from the Alpha side and crossing the ceasefire line, followed on 4 May by two drones from the Alpha side crossing the ceasefire line and hovering over the area of separation. These developments have the potential to escalate the situation between Israel and Syria. The parties have an obligation to respect the terms of the Disengagement Agreement. In Lebanon, the Government began formal discussions with the International Monetary Fund on 13 May, following the adoption of a national financial recovery plan. Amid an uptick in new COVID-19 cases, the Government reimposed a total lockdown on 13 May for four days, with the exception of essential services, to allow for enhanced contact tracing and testing and to inform the next steps for containment. The situation in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations, including along the Blue Line, remained mostly stable. UNIFIL convened a tripartite meeting with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces under COVID-19 restrictions on 14 May to urge the parties to avoid provocative actions and fully utilize UNIFIL's liaison and coordination arrangements to preserve the cessation of hostilities. In conclusion, let me return to my initial words. I firmly believe that the time has come for all sides to do their part in the coming weeks and months in order to preserve the prospect of a negotiated two-State resolution to the conflict in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements. Those efforts must begin immediately; there is no time to lose. The fate of the Palestinian and Israeli people must not be determined by destructive unilateral actions that cement divisions and may put peace beyond our reach in our lifetime.
