Ms. Lopes D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the Security
Council table and for giving me floor. I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August 2016.

On behalf of Ambassador Joao Soares da Gama,
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the
United Nations, and on behalf of my entire delegation,
allow me to thank Mr. Modibo Toure, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-
Bissau, for the briefingjust presented and for his steadfast
diligence on the political situation in my country since
his arrival in Bissau. His efforts to bring all the relevant
parties together for a common understanding as to the
way forward in resolving the present crisis are very
much appreciated. We also extend our gratitude to His

Excellency Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations and Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his briefing
and for his personal engagement, through PBC, for the
cause of peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. I would like
also to thank the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Uruguay, in his capacity as the representative of the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), for his briefing on
the status of the sanctions regime in Guinea-Bissau.
And I would like to thank the representative of Timor-
Leste, who will speak in his capacity as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
for his statement and for all the support by the CPLP to
Guinea-Bissau.

After the very comprehensive report and everything
that has been said about the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
I do not have much to add, but to request all the members
of the Security Council to continue their support to our
country and its people. The latest developments in the
country in the past few days show that, finally, the main
actors from the two major parties are engaged in an
open dialogue towards reaching the needed consensus
to restore the normal functioning of the national
Parliament, which is an essential step to passing the
national budget and to move the country ahead.

The latest visit by the Council to Guinea-Bissau, the
visit of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
the recent diplomatic efforts led by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and
other international organizations in the country have
served to reassure Bissau-Guineans that they are not
forgotten and that the international community remains
engaged in helping us to bring peace and stability to
our country.

Our people are aware that the major work towards
peace and stability remains the primary responsibility
of Bissau-Guineans. However, as the political crises
persists and the socioeconomic situation in the country
can no longer be sustained, the Council's presence,
input and concrete actions vis-a-vis the people are
urgently needed. We know that the full realization
of the results and the pledges made at the Brussels
round table conference on Guinea-Bissau, on which
Bissau Guineans count so much, counting, are still
pending - perhaps waiting for an enabling political
environment in the country - but the suffering
population cannot wait.

The renewal of the mandate of the Economic
Community ofWest African States (ECOWAS) Mission
in Guinea-Bissau for one more year, with the support of
our partners to ECOWAS, is very much appreciated.
However, we are very concerned about the news that
after this year the Mission will be leaving Bissau. We
hope that by then the country will find a way to walk by
itself in terms of securing peace and that the military,
which at the moment is out of the political scene in the
country, will remain the same. Their attitude so far has
been very professional, and we commend them for it.
The international community's financial support to
alleviate the immediate socioeconomic difficulties on
the population is very important and much-needed at
this moment.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to our immediate neighbours, specially
Senegal, which is a member of the Council, for their
engagement through ECOWAS, as well as all partners
and friends of Guinea-Bissau, for the continued support
and assistance for peace and stability in our country.

