The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.

I want to join other Council members in expressing
thanks to Special Representative Haile Menkerios for
his comprehensive briefing on the annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/744) on strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations office
to the African Union.

Strengthening the United Nations-AU partnership
is indeed a matter of priority for us, and we are very
pleased that this discussion is taking place during
our presidency of the Council and a few days before
the start of the high-level week of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly.

Let me highlight the following three points in
relation to our discussion on the United Nations-AU
partnership today.

First, it is indeed fitting that this meeting is taking
place immediately after the successful conclusion of
the 11th joint annual consultation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council.

I wish to thank once again both Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios and Commissioner Chergui for all their
support and cooperation and for making all the
arrangements necessary for the smooth conduct of the
meeting. The frank exchange ofviews between members
of the two Councils demonstrated the significant
importance that they attach to the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU in the area of peace
and security.
Secondly, this annual briefing is also taking
place against the backdrop of leadership change in
both organizations and a renewed commitment to
elevating the United Nations-AU partnership to a
new, higher level. That is reflected in the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat on 19 April. The implementation of
the framework will certainly go a long way in further
strengthening and deepening the partnership between
the two organizations in the areas of conflict prevention
and mediation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-
conflict recovery.

Thirdly, and last but not least, this meeting is
being held after both the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
presented their report on options for financing AU-
mandated peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council on a case-by-case basis in accordance
with resolution 2320 (2016). It is also happening just
before the high-level open debate on the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, scheduled
to take place on 20 September, where the issue of
partnership with the AU in the area of peacekeeping
will form one of the important pillars of the discussion.

We are pleased with the progress in terms of United
Nations-AU cooperation and collaboration on a range
of issues. Our discussion today will certainly build
momentum in that regard. We express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his commitment to
enhancing the United Nations-AU strategic partnership
and for his readiness to work closely with the African
Union on a range on issues based on Africa's needs
and priorities. We cannot agree more with him on the
need to build African capacity, in particular in the area
of peacekeeping. We hope we will be able to make
progress in terms of ensuring predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing for AU~led peace support

operations authorized by the Security Council. That

is not only fair and appropriate, it is also in the best
interests of our collective security.

[new resume my functions as President of the Council.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
