Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by thanking the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her, as
always, comprehensive briefing to the Security Council.
Let me also take this opportunity to reiterate, as stated
by our Foreign Minister, Ms. Margot Wallstrom, our
condemnation of the attack on 2 May against the Libyan
High National Electoral Commission. We repeat our
firm support for the United Nations-facilitated political
process in Libya and for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Salame.

There have been positive developments on the
issue since the previous briefing by the Prosecutor in
November 2017 (see S/PV.8091). That includes a visit
by the Office of the Prosecutor to Libya in March. We
appreciate the support provided to the Office of the
Prosecutor by the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and Special Representative Salame', as well as
the Libyan General Prosecutor's Office. The ongoing
cooperation to support further investigative activities
in Libya is essential and should be continued.

We deeply regret that all arrest warrants issued by
the ICC in relation to Libya remain outstanding and that
none of the suspects have been handed over to the Court
since our previous briefing six months ago. We note
that INTERPOL has now issued a red notice regarding
Mahmoud Al-Werfalli. We support the Court's call on
Libya to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
to immediately arrest and hand over the suspects. It is
imperative that further crimes be prevented. Ensuring
accountability for perpetrators would underscore that
impunity for crimes in Libya will not be tolerated.

Cooperation with the Libyan General Prosecutor's
Office, the Libyan authorities, States parties to the
Rome Statute, States Members of the United Nations
and all other relevant entities is crucial in order to
assist the Office of the Prosecutor in fulfilling its
mandate. Libya and all States parties are under an
obligation to cooperate with the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor.

The efforts that have been made by the Prosecutor
to integrate a gender perspective throughout the
Office of the Prosecutor's investigations and reports is
welcome. We note that the gender perspective was not
included in the most recent report. We wish to stress
the importance of it being considered in future reports.

We welcome the Office's efforts to investigate the
ongoing situations and cases and to monitor closely the
ongoing situation throughout Libya. That work is crucial
and necessary, since the situation remains volatile
and insecure. Reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights must be investigated and those responsible must
be brought to justice. We remain concerned about the
continued reports of grave human rights violations,
including with regard to the situation of migrants. As

the Prosecutor notes, there are continuing worrying
reports of slave auctions in Libya. Those reports must
be fully investigated. We support the efforts of the
Libyan General-Prosecutor's Office to combat impunity
for crimes related to migrants, as well as the active
engagement, in the spirit of complementarity, of the
Office of the Prosecutor with the national authorities
in relation to crimes committed. We also support the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

In order to successfully carry out its functions,
including those asked of it by the Security Council, the
Office of the Prosecutor needs our full support - both
political and financial. In that regard, we repeat our call
for sufficient financial funding for the Office's work on
the Libya situation.

In conclusion, we reiterate our sincere appreciation
for the valuable work and tireless efforts of the Court and
its officials in all organs. The work of the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to make a significant contribution
to accountability for the perpetrators and to justice for
the victims of serious crimes of international concern.

Ms. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish) My delegation welcomes the report
presented by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and we firmly
support the important work that she and her team are
doing. We also greatly appreciate the work that the
International Criminal Court has been doing since 2011
pursuant to the referral in resolution 1970 (2011). We
reiterate that its effective implementation depends on
the full cooperation of all actors on Libyan territory
and the international community in general. In that
regard, we call on the Libyan Government of National
Accord, the parties involved, the countries of the
region and regional organizations to make every effort
to cooperate so that the Office of the Prosecutor can
carry out its investigative work. We also reiterate that,
in order to avoid impunity, all States, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute, have primary
responsibility for taking action and helping to facilitate
the Court's investigations.

We take due note of the report and the activities
of the Office of the Prosecutor during the reporting
period. We are extremely concerned about the
incidents and irregularities surrounding the case of
Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, who is the subject of an arrest
warrant issued by the International Criminal Court on
15 August 2017, and who, according to reports from
the Libyan National Army, was arrested and placed
under investigation by a military prosecutor. However,
the Prosecutor's report indicates that Mr. Al-Werfalli
has continued to serve as a commander in the Libyan
National Army's Al-Saiqa Brigade and was involved
in new summary executions at the beginning of this
year in Benghazi. We also continue to be disturbed by
reports of extrajudicial executions, murders, arbitrary
detentions and armed clashes during the reporting
period, especially as more than 240 people were killed
in the first two months of this year in crossfire and
more than 3,600 displaced from areas where fighting
has intensified.

We again note with concern repeated reports of
sexual violence and harassment used as a tactic of
warfare between the parties and against innocent
civilians, as well as reports of violations of migrants'
rights. Investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor
can not only determine who is responsible but in
the case of crimes against humanity can also invoke
the jurisdiction of the Court to try them. The attack
allegedly perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant on the Libyan High Commission for
National Elections on 2 May is a clear signal that the
investigations by the Prosecutor's Office should be
expanded to include such criminal acts. Considering all
ofthis, we strongly urge the parties involved to seriously
commit to the work of the Court and cooperate with it
so as to prevent continued impunity. We reiterate that
all incidents contrary to international criminal law are
subject to investigation in order to identify and punish
those responsible.

My delegation would like to highlight the
collaboration and assistance provided by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya to the Office of
the Prosecutor, which after five years has now been
able to conduct on-site investigations, and we take
this opportunity to encourage the Mission to actively
continue that cooperation. We also reaffirm that the
International Criminal Court is a global undertaking,
in the interest of all States, and its mission is intrinsic
to strengthening international criminal justice, peace
and security, respect for human rights and guarantees
of due process.

Accordingly, as we celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute this year, we should
take this opportunity to reflect on the Court's
effectiveness and whether the model, as conceived,
meets expectations of cooperation and universality.
As we have said before, the Security Council and the
membership of the United Nations in general should
cover the costs incurred by the International Criminal
Court in conducting the investigations and prosecutions
within its jurisdiction, especially since several States,
including permanent members of the Security Council,
are not party to the Statute and do not contribute to
those investigations.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its concern about
the public complaints about the performance of former
authorities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, which are specifically
related to the ongoing investigations in Libya. With that
in mind, and in view of the integrity and transparency
that international tribunals must have, we believe that
it is time that the Office of the Prosecutor gave a public
account of the scope and reliability of those statements
in its next report, since the integrity of the Court is
essential to ensuring its credibility and effectiveness
before the international community.

