Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
other delegations, I would like to begin by welcoming
your presence here, Mr. President, and express our
gratitude for your country's initiative in organizing this
open debate on a subject that is of utmost importance
to this Organization, namely, peacebuilding and,
particularly, in adopting a comprehensive global and
strategic approach. I would also like to greet and thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Ministers Zalmai
Rassoul, Alfred Palo Conteh, Lucia Maria Lobato and
Dr. Okonjo-Iweala for their illuminating statements
and thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bosnia
Herzegovina for his presence.

Today's session affords us a fine opportunity to
consider the importance of avoiding relapses into
conflict in post-conflict situations. We firmly believe in
post-conflict prevention and reconstruction and in the
importance of strengthening the link between security
and development in the transition to peace from a
conflict situation, taking into account the key elements
established by the countries themselves. A positive
advance in this regard, is the recognition by the
Security Council that it is necessary to incorporate
coherence and integration into the establishment of
peace, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and
development in order to ensure a prompt and efficient
response to post-conflict situations and avoid a relapse.
We support peacebuilding measures that will be
incorporated in a timely fashion in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
The peaceful settlement of a conflict does not, in
itself, guarantee that the risk of a resumption of
violence will be eliminated. It is essential to establish
the necessary conditions to guarantee lasting stability
and security. It is as important to initiate peace, as it is
to maintain it and ensure that it is sustainable.

Security sector reform is an important priority,
since it allows for the prevention of new outbursts of
instability and relapses in violent conflicts and makes
it possible to strengthen the human rights framework,
which, in turn, contributes to economic and social
development. For my country, peace and justice are
inextricably linked in an integral solution to conflict.
Therefore, no crime should go unpunished, and
mechanisms should be established to investigate and
clarify possible violations of international law by any
of the parties involved in conflicts. This is an essential
component in achieving national reconciliation and
durable peace.

Security and justice, however, should be built on
a political foundation. We recognize that the holding of
elections is an important aspect of conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and establishing permanent peace. This
certainty has been reflected in our participation in
Lebanon, Timor-Leste, Haiti, Iraq and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with an effort to back the efforts of the
Governments of these countries to strengthen their
electoral institutions. If we fail to acknowledge that the
structural factors of a conflict, such as poverty, social
and economic inequality, are severe obstacles to
achieving sustainable development, then we loose sight
of important tools for achieving lasting peace,
eliminating poverty and promoting development and
equal opportunity. It is also necessary to incorporate
into early action attention to basic needs, such as
housing, education, health, food and jobs as part of the
tools of peacebuilding.

We consider it essential that all these aspects be
based on the understanding that the primary
responsibility pertains to the country involved.
Therefore, it is important that any strategy be aligned
with the national priorities of each country. The
international community has a crucial role to play in
the first post-conflict stages, but it is necessary that the
application of these principles be adapted to the
existing realities in each case, in particular, the
political, economic, institutional, social and cultural
conditions that prevail in the country in question.
We have frequently underscored the importance
of establishing national peacebuilding strategies
formulated through a broad-based advisory process

involving all national, regional and international
stakeholders, both within and outside the United
Nations system, including donor countries and
financial organizations, in order to ensure greater
consistency in peacebuilding efforts.

However, the coordinated implementation of
these efforts has been somewhat neglected, despite its
great importance in guaranteeing a lasting peace. In
this context, a body like the Peacebuilding Commission
has enormous potential. With a View to contributing to
these matters, my delegation, together with our
colleagues from Ireland and South Africa, will
facilitate the 2010 review of the Peacebuilding
Commission - an exercise which we hope will have a
positive impact on peacebuilding processes.

In conclusion, I express the support of my
delegation for the draft presidential statement that we
will adopt at the end of this meeting.

