Mr. Hamachi (Japan): Japan highly appreciates the
French initiative to afford us this opportunity to discuss
this topic frankly at an open debate of the Security
Council. My appreciation also goes out to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Peter Maurer and Mr. Faustin
Archange Touadera for their insightful briefings.

The protection of civilians is now one of the
most important mandates given to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. However, there is a persistent
gap between the mandates conferred by the Security
Council and their implementation in the field. Japan
commends the various efforts by the United Nations
to address that issue. They include the development
of guidelines and training programmes aimed at
enhancing the implementation of mandates on the
ground by promoting a common understanding on
concrete actions in the field.

The protection of civilians should be undertaken by
the entire mission, including not only military but also
police and civilian personnel. On the one hand, physical
protection with the use of force is necessary when the
need for protection is most imminent. On the other
hand, preventive efforts against attacks on civilians
are equally important. In addition, improving access
to humanitarian aid and creating safe environments
for refugees and internally displaced persons are also
important components of the protection of civilians.
For example, Japan's engineering unit deployed in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan contributes to
the implementation of its mandate through engineering
activities, such as setting up protection-of-civilians
sites and undertaking road maintenance and repair.

Japan shares the recognition that capacity-
building for personnel is essential for the effective
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate.
To that end, Japan has provided financial support
to the United Nations training-the-trainers course
on the protection of civilians, in which Japanese
trainers also participate. Furthermore, Japan assists
in the development of training materials for women's
protection advisers in missions, who play a critical
role in protecting women. Finally, Japan also supports
the development of an e-learning programme on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse that targets
all categories of field personnel, including military,
police and civilian.

I would like to recall that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians rests with the host country.
In addition, harassment against civilians by the host
country is unacceptable. Against that backdrop, it is
crucial to clarify and promote understanding among
local communities of what the United Nations can
and cannot do. With a view to achieving the future
departure of a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
it is imperative to foster ownership on the part of the
host country and to support its capacity-building. In
that regard, institution-building, including security-
sector reform, is essential. An open debate will be held
next month under the Japanese presidency on the topic
of peacebuilding in Africa, with a particular focus on
institution-building. We hope to carry over the results
of today's fruitful debate to our open debate in July.

The international community is watching closely
to see whether peacekeeping operations can effectively
implement the protection of civilians, as well as what
the Security Council can do in that regard. I would
like to conclude my remarks by promising the Security
Council that Japan will continue to apply its expertise
and capacities to contribute to the protection of
civilians, both here in the Council and on the ground.

