Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We too thank
Ambassador Grauls for his report and welcome him to
his new responsibilities as Chairperson of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). The delegation of the United Kingdom will
give him its full support.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the significant work undertaken in the
Committee since the Council last met, including: first,
the updating of the Committee's guidelines to take into
3
account its responsibilities under resolution 1803
(2008); secondly, the preparation of the single
document bringing together in one place the
individuals and entities listed under the three
resolutions; and, thirdly, in response to the ideas raised
in this Chamber by Ambassador Kafando the last time
we met, the preparation of the informal guidance paper
on reporting to the Committee.

We consider resolution 1803 (2008) to be the
continuation of the Council's incremental and
proportionate approach to the Iranian nuclear issue,
gradually increasing the pressure on Iran to address
widely shared concerns about its nuclear programme.
That resolution once again reiterates our wish to
achieve a negotiated solution.

Three steps are required of Iran. The first is that
Iran suspend all its enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities. Iran continues to flout the
legally binding Security Council requirement for such
a suspension. The second is that Iran implement fully
the additional protocol and the additional measures that
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
requested. Without that, the IAEA continues to be
unable to provide assurances about the absence of
undeclared nuclear materials and activities in Iran; nor
can it determine whether the nature of Iran's
programme is exclusively peaceful. The third is that
Iran resolve outstanding issues of concern to the IAEA
by delivering fully on all the issues that remain
outstanding under the work plan agreed between it and
the Agency.

Mr. ElBaradei's most recent report demonstrated
that Iran has failed to make any progress on those three
issues. It also set out the information it had about
activities with a possible military dimension, including
activities associated with the design of a nuclear
warhead. The report noted that these activities were a
matter of serious concern and that it was critical that
Iran clarify them in order to assess the nature of its
programme.

It is worth recalling that Iran has received a
generous and far-reaching offer in return for taking
these steps. On 3 March of this year, the Governments
of the United Kingdom, France, Germany, China, the
Russian Federation and the United States reiterated
their offer of dialogue and engagement. In that
statement, the six Governments said,
"We call upon Iran to heed the requirements
of the United Nations Security Council and the
IAEA, including the suspension of its
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities.

"We remain committed to an early
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
and reaffirm our commitment to a dual-track
approach. We reconfirm the proposals we
presented to Iran in June 2006 and are prepared to
further develop them. Our proposals will offer
substantial opportunities for political, security
and economic benefits to Iran and to the region".
(see S/PV.5848)

We remain committed to that approach. This
weekend, as our French colleague has noted, Mr. Javier
Solana, the European Union's High Representative for
Common Foreign and Security Policy, will be in
Tehran with concrete proposals in that sense. We very
much hope that the Government of Iran will meet the
requirements of the IAEA Board of Governors and this
Council and will take up the offer carried by
Mr. Solana.

