Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence here this morning and for the initiative he
took in proposing that we work on this resolution. I
think that today's Security Council vote modifying the
oil for food programme marks an important step which
the United States has favoured from the moment that
United Nations personnel were withdrawn and the
programme was suspended. We join others in
welcoming the strong show of support by Council
members for this resolution, which helps address the
immediate needs of the people of Iraq.

We also thank the German delegation, led by
Ambassador Pleuger, for the leadership they have
shown in the negotiations over the past week which
lead to the achievement of this resolution. Last, but
certainly not least, we have benefited immensely from
the advice and counsel of Mr. Benon Sevan, the
Executive Director of the Office of the Iraq
Programme, who has been with us throughout this
process. We thank him very much.

We have full confidence that the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Office of the Iraq
Programme will effectively carry out the important task
of resuming the programme in the weeks ahead. For its
part, the United States will facilitate the necessary
coordination on the ground in Iraq between coalition
authorities and the United Nations and associated relief
agency staff, as oil for food supplies and other
humanitarian assistance arrive and are distributed as
circumstances on the ground permit.

The resumption of the oil for food programme
complements extensive United States efforts to address
the humanitarian needs of the people of Iraq.
Humanitarian aid from a variety of sources is already
beginning to arrive. The International Committee of the
Red Cross and the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies are on the ground
providing humanitarian assistance. Our own bilateral
humanitarian aid commitments will remain robust and
long-term. We urge all governments and donors to
contribute generously in this effort.

The United States is gratified that the Council has
been able come together to take this step to meet the
immediate humanitarian needs of the people of Iraq.
Today's vote will translate into concrete results on the
ground. We welcome that. The people of Iraq have
suffered too long under circumstances not of their own
choosing and under a regime whose days are
numbered.

