Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Francois Lounceny Fall and Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their respective briefings.

Recently, progress has been made in the political
processes in the countries of the Central African
region. The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) held a joint summit
of their Heads of State and Government and adopted
the Lome Declaration on Peace, Security, Stability and
the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism
to strengthen subregional cooperation in the fields of
peace and security. China commends and welcomes
those developments.

On the other hand, the Lord's Resistance Army,
Boko Haram and other armed groups and terrorist
organizations continue to pose serious threats to
the countries of Central Africa. The international
community should pay greater attention to this and
support countries of the region in their efforts to
respond. The settlement of regional issues requires
the cooperation of all parties. To achieve collective
security and common development in Central Africa
the joint effort of all countries is needed. The United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
can play an active role in this regard. China would like
to emphasize the following three points.

First, respect for the leadership of Africa is a
precondition for resolving regional issues. In recent
years, the African Union (AU), the ECCAS and other
regional and subregional organizations have committed
to finding strength in unity and solving African issues
in an African way. Many efforts have been made
to promote regional peace and development. When
assisting Central Africa in solving its issues, the
international community should fully heed and respect
the views of the countries concerned and maintain
close communication with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU, help them strengthen
capacity-building and enhance their capacity to solve
their problems independently.

Secondly, achieving security and stability is the
foundation for the region's long-term development.
China appreciates and supports UNOCA in exercising
its good offices and its role in mediation and preventive
diplomacy, while continuing to promote political
dialogue in the Central African Republic and other
countries of the region. The international community
should provide further support to such cooperation
efforts among countries in Central Africa, for example,
in combating cross-border arms smuggling, drug
trafficking, terrorism and organized crime with the
aim of achieving regional peace and stability as soon
as possible.

Thirdly, promoting economic development is a
guarantee for the long-term stability and security of
the region. ECCAS, ECOWAS, and other subregional
organizations play an important role in promoting
regional integration and development in Central
Africa. The international community should support
UNOCA and Special Representative Fall to strengthen
coordination with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, promote cooperation in the economic
and social fields and help countries in Central Africa
achieve development and eliminate the root causes
of conflicts. China stands ready to continue working
to strengthen cooperation with Central African
countries and to support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNOCA
so as to play a constructive role in helping the countries
in Central Africa maintain security and stability,
cope with economic difficulties and improve the
humanitarian situation.

