Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Security Council for inviting
the Haitian delegation to comment on the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2016/225) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I
have the honour to convey to the Council the greetings
of the interim President of the Republic of Haiti,
Mr. Jocelerme Privert, who was elected on 14 February
by the National Assembly and whose key mandate,
as he himself defined it in his inauguration address,
is to see the electoral process completed according to
the timetable prescribed in the 5 February agreement.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for their unwavering
commitment to consolidating the rule of law and
democracy in Haiti and their leadership in implementing
MINUSTAH's mandate.

We have carefully reviewed the report submitted
to the Security Council and taken note of its
recommendations. We commend the Secretary-General
for the report's precision, objectivity and balance,
which covers the full extent of the political crisis
that led to the interruption of the electoral process in
December and January, while highlighting its economic
and financial repercussions and its implications for the
country's security and development.

While the report states that in the past few years Haiti
has unquestionably made progress towards establishing
the rule of law, it nevertheless lists its weaknesses and
structural deficiencies and the obstacles in the way of
the people's full realization of their human rights, as
well as the setbacks and delays we have experienced
in establishing and sustaining democracy and
implementing some essential legal reforms. Above all,
the Secretary-General emphasizes how important it is
that all of Haiti's stakeholders work to end the electoral
uncertainty and overcome the current political crisis by

completing the elections, whose success will be a clear
indication of the country's progress in terms ofpolitical
stability and the entrenchment of a democratic culture.

The next elections, scheduled for this spring, will
undoubtedly function as a test of democracy in Haiti
and its long-term stability and development. Mr. Privert,
the interim Head of State, is well aware of his historical
responsibility in that regard for organizing the free
and transparent elections that are essential to ensuring
the renewal of our institutions and consolidating the
democracy, the rule of law and stability that will be
so vital to our country's modernization. In that regard,
the Haitian authorities reiterate to the Council and the
international community as a whole their commitment
to ensuring that the outcome of the electoral process
reflects the Haitian people's expression of their will at
the polls.

For that reason, from the moment the interim
President took office, he has worked systematically to
conduct a dialogue with the country's political class
and consult with the representatives of the full range
of parties and political opinions in order to tackle the
immediate principal challenge, which is re-starting the
presidential, parliamentary, municipal and local election
process begun in August 2015, in accordance with the
agreement's stipulations, which since 7 February have
enabled us to circumvent the institutional vacuum and
maintain social peace and public order. The main goal
is to ensure the transfer of power to a president elected
democratically and in a transparent manner by 14 May.

The conditions crucial to ensuring that the electoral
process gets under way are coming together. Since he
took up highest office on 14 February, the President
of the Republic, following broad consultations with
all political stakeholders and civil society, sought to
appoint a new Prime Minister, Mr. Fritz Alphonse
Jean, on 25 February, in line with the amended Haitian
Constitution. A consensus Government was established
and the names of all members of the new ministerial
Cabinet were made public. The appointed Prime Minister
submitted his credentials to the Haitian Parliament on
1 March so that it could rule on his eligibility. He then
submitted his general policy statement to the Chamber
of Deputies on Monday, 14 March. The Prime Minister
is currently waiting for his general policy statement to
be ratified by Parliament.

In the context of consultations, the interim
President wrote to different sectors of national life that
had appointed members to the previous Provisional
Electoral Council to ask them to propose eminent
persons who could join that electoral body. Responses
were received from all sectors. On 9 March, the names of
nine members of the Provisional Electoral Council were
made public. Their aim is to re-establish confidence
in the electoral process and to organize exemplary
elections throughout the country. They are to be sworn
into office before the Council of Ministers. To that end,
Parliament must validate the general policy statement
of the Prime Minister and the new Government needs
to take charge of the management of the State.

It is therefore important and extremely judicious
to underscore that the agreement of 5 February for
institutional continuity was signed by the executive
and legislative branches. It is the fruit of constructive,
consensual political dialogue among Haitians. The
agreement enabled a governance vacuum to be avoided,
with all its potential consequences for stability. To that
end, it should be noted that the agreement makes both
signatory parties co-responsible for its application and
implementation. President Privert is working on a daily
basis, in the context of his work and mandate as Head
of State, to respect the agreement and ensure that it is
respected, hoping that nothing will slow down or go
against efforts for the normalization of political life.

Nobody should underestimate the scale of the
task of managing a very complex electoral process
in a relatively short period of time. However, Haitian
institutions have already demonstrated their ability to
assume responsibility for and to conduct the process.
Haitian authorities are convinced that they will be able
to meet the challenge and their mission. Whatever the
case may be, the solidarity and the cooperation of all
of Haiti's partners, particularly in terms of logistics,
financial and operational issues, will be crucial and
fundamental to assisting the Haitian public authorities
and the Electoral Council, which are firmly resolved to
ensure that the process is successfully concluded.

The support of MINUSTAH for the Haitian
National Police with a view to improving the security
environment is crucial to the success of the process.
The recent street demonstrations that took place in
Port-au-Prince and various provincial towns during the
post-electoral crisis expressed the commitment of the
Haitian people to democracy. They also reflected the
desire and the demands of the people to see through to
the end an electoral process that takes into consideration
in full transparency all votes expressed through the
ballot box.

While the success of the forthcoming election is
undoubtedly at the heart of all our concerns, we cannot
fail to mention a number of other large-scale challenges
currently facing Haiti, particularly in the economic,
humanitarian and development sectors. Food insecurity
in particular is already affecting more than 3.5 million
people. It doubled over a six-month period and, in the
light of the ongoing drought, we fear that it may turn
into a disaster if appropriate measures and necessary
assistance are not quick in coming. It is also a matter of
national urgency, to which the Haitian authorities are
responding by turning to the mechanisms of solidarity
and bilateral and multilateral cooperation.

In addition, there is a significant deterioration
in the sanitation and health situation, in particular
following an upsurge in the cholera epidemic and
the emergency of the Zika virus, as underscored in
the report. In that regard, my delegation cannot but
be very concerned about the significant decrease in
influx of official development assistance, as well as
the draconian reduction in humanitarian aid, which, as
the Secretary-General has underscored, plummeted to
from $155 million in 2014 $55 million in 2015. That
has resulted in a significant reduction in the ability of
the Haitian Government to intervene among the most
destitute and affected Haitians while the country faces
serious economic and financial difficulties and a very
delicate political situation. All social appeasement
measures and all efforts required to respond to and
meet the urgent needs of the population are critical. The
Haitian Government therefore invites its international
partners to assess the scale of the challenges and to
assist it by providing rapid and specific responses that
are commensurate with the urgency of the situation.

The report also addresses the question of the
progressive disengagement of MINUSTAH and the
necessary evolution of the Mission after almost 12
years in Haiti. The Haitian authorities support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and his
proposal to undertake a strategic assessment review
following the elections regarding the future role of the
Mission. The authorities assure the Security Council
of their willingness to contribute to this review.
In the meantime, we believe it useful to recall the
fundamental position of Haiti on the outline of the
planned reconfiguration for MINUSTAH.

The profile of the future Mission must take fully
into consideration the evolution of the situation on
the ground. To that end, the smooth running of the
forthcoming elections must be a key indicator in terms
of assessing our medium- and long-term needs and
the future support of Haiti's partners. As the Haitian
authorities have always underscored, what is key is to
ensure the sustainability ofthe achievements ofthe past
12 years of the MINUSTAH presence, particularly in
terms of security, and to allow the Haitian institutions
to gradually and effectively assume the functions that
to date have been borne by the Mission.
In any event, with the new proposed configuration,
the Haitian Government is in favour of maintaining and
strengthening the support components of the National
Police and judicial system. It is in favour of continued
support for prison administration and the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security in order to substantially
reduce the number of detainees in prolonged detention
and, at the same time, to improve the conditions of
detention centres in our prisons.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express its gratitude to all friendly
countries, all of Haiti's cooperation partners and the
United Nations - in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, United Nations Office
for Project Services and MINUSTAH - for their
unwavering commitment alongside national institutions
in the recent electoral process. At this crossroads, the
Haitian authorities would like to be able to count on
their continued support to enable the new Provisional
Electoral Council to quickly get up to speed and carry
out its substantial and pressing mission efficiently
and effectively. The Haitian authorities reiterate to all
partners in the international community their assurance
that they will spare no effort to ensure the success of
the upcoming elections, the credibility, transparency
and integrity of which will guarantee the peaceful
transition and the sustainable stability that the Haitian
people have consistently called for.

