Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for what has been a
most useful, comprehensive and informative briefing.

I think, if I may say so, that the process of reporting
on East Timor and the interaction between the Council and
the Secretariat as the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is proceeding is
set fair to become a model of the kind of exchanges that I
think the Council should be having with the Secretariat, in
terms of what - as Ambassador Holbrooke has said - is
becoming a large, complex and, I hope, ultimately effective
operation. It is clearly extremely important that both sides
of the Council/Secretariat equation get this right.

Ambassador Holbrooke has, rightly, drawn our
attention to the potential dangers of a deterioration in the
security situation in East Timor, and in particular to the
concerns that I am sure we all have about continuing
Indonesian armed forces (TNI) involvement with the
militias in West Timor. As you know, we and other
delegations were extremely concerned about this a month
or so ago. We took steps - and I know others did as
well - to make that concern clear to the Government of
Indonesia at the highest level. It is encouraging to note the
distinct improvement in the security situation in West
Timor, including in the camps. Clearly, we must all hope
this will continue. It is clearly also imperative that TNI
collaboration with the militias cease. But against the
background of the improvement that has occurred, I want
to assure you that we of the United Kingdom will be
keeping a close eye on developments and doing what we
can to ensure that there is no repeat of the unfortunate
incidents that occurred some weeks ago.

We also welcome the efforts that have been made -
and Mr. Annabi has mentioned several of them - to
improve the lot of the remaining refugees in the camps in
West Timor and to encourage them to return to East Timor.
It is clearly important that the Government of Indonesia
should take urgent steps to resolve some of the outstanding
issues - for example, the question of pensions - in order
to allow all those who wish to return to do so swiftly and
safely, and to resettle those wishing to remain in Indonesia.
Again, like so many things, there are two sides to this coin.
And we must make sure that when the refugees do return
to East Timor, they can do so in a way that is both safe and
sensible. But those considerations should not be allowed
to hold up the process beyond the bare minimum.

Mr. Annabi went into some detail about the debate
that has been going on within East T imor about the
question of East Timor's future defense needs. This has
clearly become an issue, and it is right that it should be
addressed - but addressed in a measured, sensible and
well-thought-through way. I would like to let the Council
know that the United Kingdom, in consultation with the
Special Representative, has reoffered to fund an
independent expert study to assess future requirements
and options, in the hope that this will at least bring some
clarity to the debate and allow the discussion to be taken
forward on an informed basis.

I was also encouraged to hear the stress that Mr.
Annabi laid on the question of benchmarks. The list that
he gave us during the briefing was, to my mind,
extremely useful because it sets out the parameters of the
task. It is clearly important that all those points should be
addressed, and addressed properly, if we are to have the
success and the launch of the new, independent East
Timor that we would all like to see. Here I am sure that
Ambassador Holbrooke has got it exactly right: we must
not hurry, but we must not allow unnecessary delay
either. If we are to get ourselves into a position where we
can smoothly carry out the process, it is important that
the underpinning should be in place. There are many
facets to this, too.

I would be interested to have an update from Mr.
Annabi on progress in releasing funds from both the
United Nations and the World Bank trust funds. We
understand that some progress has been made in this area,
but we would urge strengthened coordination between the
United Nations and the World Bank to ensure that
disbursements are as swift and as effective as possible.

That said, I have to report that we, as the United
Kingdom, are becoming increasingly concerned about
some bureaucratic delays that seem to be occurring in the
context of getting things going in East Timor. Two recent
examples that have affected us directly have been long
delays in processing United Kingdom nominations for
forensic investigators to help in UNTAET's work - and
I should add here that I was encouraged to hear from Mr.
Annabi of the memorandum of understanding that has
been signed with Indonesia on this question - and in
obtaining the necessary paperwork to allow the release of
a second tranche of the United Kingdom contribution to
the United Nations trust fund.

 

Delays such as these, as well as causing missed
opportunities, can have serious effects. Not only do they
delay assistance reaching the mission, but they also cause
frustration among donors, both actual and potential. More
seriously, perhaps, frustration among the local population
will increase if UNTAET is not seen to be delivering
quickly enough. I think Mr. Annabi's remarks about
expectations are something that we should all bear in mind
here. We hope that both the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNTAET will conspire between them to
eliminate unnecessary and time-consuming bureaucracy and
improve coordination, both between the mission
headquarters and internally in the Secretariat.

I would not wish to end my statement on a sour note.
What I have just said is not meant to be criticism, it is
meant to help. We should not disguise the considerable
achievements that have been made by both Sergio Vieira de
Mello and his team and by those in New York who are
backstopping the operation here. We all owe a great debt to
them, and particularly the East Timorese people owe a
similar debt. We hope that they will continue to take the
operation forward in the inspired way that they have done
up to now. We continue to wish them the greatest success,
and I want to assure you that they can be assured of our
full support.

