I thank the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Stephanie Williams, for her briefing. We welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to this meeting. We commend the positive developments unfolding in Libya. They are a testament to the fact that the only possible solution to the conflict is through an all-inclusive inter-Libyan political process that avoids threats of violence or the use of force. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes in particular the signing on 23 October of a permanent ceasefire agreement. We look forward to its implementation and to receiving the Secretary-General's interim report by the end of the year on the options for monitoring the ceasefire. It has been and will always be our bedrock conviction that dialogue and diplomacy are the only means of achieving durable peace, stability and prosperity for all Libyans. The progress that we are witnessing in Libya is the result of the resolve, willingness and determination of the Libyan people, who yearn for a better future. That progress has been facilitated by the complementary role of the international community, specifically under the auspices ofthe United Nations three-point plan. The international community must support the Libyan people in meeting their challenges head-on, while respecting the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that regard, we applaud the work of Acting Special Representative Williams and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to advance the political dialogue, and we reiterate the need to appoint a Special Representative of the Secretary-General in order to consolidate the meaningful gains achieved so far. We also commend Libya's neighbouring countries for their constructive efforts, of which the most recent was the in-person Libyan Political Dialogue Forum held in Tunisia. We noted with satisfaction the participation of women and youth in the Forum and emphasize their critical importance to Libya's rebuilding process. We look forward to the implementation of the Forum's outcomes and reiterate our support for the upcoming dialogue processes and other positive initiatives, including the Libyan national reconciliation conference. Reversing the gains and losing the current momentum would be debilitating. We therefore urge all parties to fulfil their obligations and fully adhere to international law, including by strictly complying with the arms embargo. We encourage the countries involved to act responsibly and guard against undermining the political process in Libya. We also recognize the dire humanitarian challenges facing Libya, which have been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that context, we stress the importance of abiding by international humanitarian and human rights law. There can be no impunity in Libya for the atrocities committed over the years. In in that regard, we reiterate our support for the Human Rights Council's International Fact-Finding Mission on Libya in investigating atrocity crimes and ensuring accountability. Likewise, we urge the Libyan authorities to facilitate safe humanitarian access in order to address the difficulties facing refugees and migrants, especially those in detention centres. In keeping with the Secretary-General's previous observations that Libya remains an unsafe port for the return of migrants and refugees, we emphasize that their safety and dignity should be the top priority at all points of interception, rescue, disembarkation and beyond. Amid the most difficult and challenging times, Libyans are providing hope and optimism for the future of the country through the dialogue process. We therefore encourage all Libyans to stay the course and all stakeholders to the peace process to intensify their efforts in order to assist Libya in meeting its challenges. The difficulties facing Libya at this juncture are tremendous but not insurmountable. In conjunction with the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union and neighbouring countries, Libya has the support necessary to overcome the impediments to the ennobling of its people. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains in solidarity with the Libyan people.
