Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing on her visit and the latest developments on the
ground. I will focus my remarks today on three issues:
the situation in Darfur, the transition and the broader
situation in the Sudan.

First, on the situation in Darfur, the United
Kingdom welcomes the extension, until 8 May, of
the unilateral cessation of hostilities by the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi faction, the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Transitional Council and the
Justice and Equality Movement. We also welcome
the open-ended cessation of hostilities announced by
the Government of the Sudan. Despite that, however,
we are concerned about ongoing violence in the Jebel
Marra region between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction,
including reports of retaliatory attacks on civilians,
the destruction of property and the displacement of
significant numbers of civilians. As we have stated
many times before in the Chamber, we also continue to
be deeply concerned by ongoing intercommunal conflict
and widespread human rights abuses and violations,
in particular the prevalence of conflict-related sexual
violence. In that regard, we urge the Government
of the Sudan to ensure justice and accountability for
survivors and to engage constructively with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

Secondly, turning to the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding and development, we welcome the
progress made to date with the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). If Darfur is to transition successfully and
sustainably away from peacekeeping, not only does
armed conflict need to cease, but the root causes of the
conflict must also be addressed. As Assistant Secretary-
General Keita has just mentioned, the benchmarks,
as set out in presidential statement S/PRST/2018/l9,
issued in December 2018, are crucial in that regard.
The United Kingdom calls upon the Government of
the Sudan to commit itself fully to making progress
towards the achievement of those benchmarks so as to
demonstrate its commitment to addressing root causes
in Darfur and to laying a foundation for sustainable
peacebuilding and development.

Given the substantial peacebuilding and development
needs, as well as the ongoing humanitarian need in
Darfur, it is also extremely important that the Council
have a clear and accurate account of the situation on
the ground. We therefore encourage the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate with the relevant United
Nations entities on the ground to ensure an accurate
depiction of the situation in Darfur in order to ensure
that peacebuilding, development and humanitarian
efforts are adequately resourced.

Third and finally, given recent developments, I
would like to touch on the broader current situation in
the Sudan. The United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about President Al-Bashir's announcement of a state
of emergency on Friday, which gives sweeping new
powers to the security services and goes against the
recommendations of the previous national dialogue.
The protests that have been taking place across the
Sudan are peaceful and demonstrate the expression
of legitimate grievances. Individuals have a right to
set out their views. Additionally, several opposition
political leaders, activists and journalists remain in
prison - some for over two months now. They should
be released immediately.

The proposals made by President Al-Bashir in
his speech on Friday will not help bring about the
political consensus needed to stabilize the country. In
the current environment, it is difficult to see how the
proposed national dialogue can therefore be a success.

The political instability in the Sudan and the
declaration of a state of emergency naturally affect
the situation in Darfur. The United Kingdom has
been deeply concerned by the violations committed
by Government security services during the recent
protests. Those are the very services that UNAMID is
supposed to be handing over security and protection
responsibilities to in Darfur. Not only will President
Al-Bashir's announcements and the conduct of the
security services further delay the agreement of a
sustainable peace deal, but they also call into question
the Government's commitment to delivering progress
on human rights, the rule of law and security sector
reform, which are so I desperately needed in Darfur.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom will continue
to closely monitor the situation in Darfur and the
wider Sudan. We continue to urge the Government of
the Sudan to embark upon the political and economic
reforms necessary to deliver true stability, and we will
continue to work with the members of the Council to
ensure the necessary support to the people of the Sudan.

