Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I would like to join my
colleagues in thanking the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his
statement. We are also grateful for the presentations of the
Permanent Representatives of Sierra Leone and Nigeria.

My delegation was shocked by the figures and facts to
which Mr. Otunnu referred on the magnitude of the
violence and internal displacement affecting the lives of
children in Sierra Leone. The expression he used -
"diabolical atrocities" - is sad testimony to the levels of
irrationality and violence human nature sometimes reaches.
Mr. Otunnu has again voiced an eloquent and compelling
warning to us. We think that the core of his message is
quite simple: The international community has to pay
persistent and consistent attention to the plight of children
in all parts of the world, without exception or
discrimination.

There is hope again in Sierra Leone. My delegation
wishes to congratulate the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) members on their efforts to
uphold the peace process in that country. We also commend
the role played by the Contact Group to promote political
dialogue and national reconciliation. Brazil hopes that the
people of Sierra Leone - who are, after all, the only ones
responsible for the democratic renewal of the country -
will sustain the peace process.

Brazil fully supports the terms of the draft resolution
the Council is about to adopt today and the establishment
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. My
delegation also wants to thank the leadership of the British
delegation in the process leading to the adoption of this
draft resolution. We look forward to fast progress in the
implementation of the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the rebel forces, which
is essential to ensuring stability and lasting peace in that
country.

In our View, at this critical juncture in the conflict in
Sierra Leone, there is need to place emphasis on the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country. The
international community, through the coordinated efforts of
the United Nations system, must develop a long-term
strategy for Sierra Leone that includes security, political,
economic, social and humanitarian aspects, as well as
support for regional actors and organizations.

Taking into account the need to address the violations
of human rights perpetrated during the civil war, the peace
process should also focus its attention on the promotion and
protection of human rights, particularly through the
investigation of massacres that have taken place in the
recent past. The prompt establishment and effective
functioning of the truth and reconciliation and human
rights commissions are crucial for the consolidation of
peace and national reconciliation in Sierra Leone.

We expect that the necessary political conditions will
be put in place so as to allow a vigorous peacekeeping
involvement of the United Nations in other conflicts in
Africa to also materialize soon. The draft resolution to be
adopted today augurs well in this respect.

