The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the following Member States:
Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Morocco, Norway, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
the United Arab Emirates and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representative of Israel took a seat at the Council
table; the other aforementioned representatives to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 April
2004 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, to be issued as document S/2004/305,
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
today, Monday, 19 April 2004, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
Council's rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the Permanent
Observer of Palestine took a seat at the Council
table.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 April
2004 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request you to
authorize His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani,
Ambassador, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, to be
allowed to address the Council in the course of
the open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, to be
held on 19 April 2004."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2004/306.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Mahmassani took the seat reservedfor him at
the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: I should now like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 April
2004 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the lnalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the lnalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
lnalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Paul Badji
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to the request contained
in a letter dated 19 April 2004 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, which will be issued as
document S/2004/303. I should like to draw attention
to a letter dated 19 April 2004 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, which will be issued as
document S/2004/304.

I shall now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of Palestine.


