The President: The Security Council will now proceed to the election of five members of the International Court of Justice, in accordance with the Statute of the International Court of Justice, to fill the five seats that will become vacant upon the expiry of the terms of the following Judges on 5 February 2021: Judge Giorgio Gaja (Italy), Judge Yuji Iwasawa (Japan), Judge Julia Sebutinde (Uganda) Judge Peter Tomka (Slovakia) and Judge Xue Hanqin (China). The nominated candidates are as follows: Taoheed Olufemi Elias (Nigeria), Yuji Iwasawa (Japan), Georg Nolte (Germany), Julia Sebutinde (Uganda), Maja SerSi¢ (Croatia), Peter Tomka (Slovakia), Emmanuel Ugirashebuja (Rwanda) and Xue Hangin (China). The list of candidates, indicating the national groups by which each candidate was nominated, is contained in document S/2020/615. I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter addressed to me by the Legal Counsel, dated 9 November 2020, informing me, on behalf of the Secretary-General, that after the established deadline for nominating candidates, namely, 24 June 2020, a national group submitted a nomination to the Secretariat. I should like to draw the Council's attention to the fact that the additional nomination relates to a candidate already nominated by other national groups and whose name therefore already appears in document S/2020/615. The Legal Counselrecommended that, inaccordance with established practice, I inform Council members orally on the day of the election about the decision of the aforementioned national group. I am also informed that the Legal Counsel made a similar recommendation to the President of the General Assembly. The nomination of the aforementioned national group is as follows: for Georg Nolte, Luxembourg. The Security Council has before it a memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in document S/2020/618, describing the present composition of the Court and setting out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the election. I should like to remind the Council that under Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, "Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council shall be considered as elected." The required majority in the Security Council is eight votes. If, in the first ballot, the number of candidates obtaining an absolute majority is fewer than five, then pursuant to rule 61 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the Council will proceed to a second ballot on the remaining vacancies, to be held at 11 a.m. on 12 November 2020. Balloting will continue in the same manner until five candidates have obtained the required majority of votes. If, on the other hand, more than five candidates obtain the required majority, according to the established practice and as set forth in paragraph 15 of the Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote will be held on all the candidates. This rule will also apply to any subsequent ballots if the number of candidates obtaining the absolute majority is fewer or greater than the number of vacancies remaining. Only when five candidates, not more or fewer, have obtained the required majority in the Security Council will the President of the Council notify the President of the General Assembly of the names of the five candidates. If, upon comparison of the respective lists of candidates who have obtained an absolute majority in the Security Council and the General Assembly, fewer than five candidates have been thus elected, the Council and the Assembly will proceed, again independently of one another, at a second meeting and, if necessary, a third meeting, to elect candidates by further ballots for the seats remaining vacant, pursuant to Article 11 of the Statute, the results again being compared after the required number of candidates have obtained an absolute majority in each organ. The voting will be held by secret ballot. Members of the Council should have already received a ballot containing the names of all the candidates. No withdrawal will be accepted once the Council has commenced the voting process. However, it will be possible to withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will be requested to place an "X" in the box next to the names of the candidates for whom they wish to vote. Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot are eligible for election. If a ballot paper contains any notation other than votes in favour of specific candidates, those notations will be disregarded. I should like to remind members of paragraph 11 of the Secretary-General's memorandum (S/2020/618), which specifies that "[e]Jach elector may vote for not more than five candidates on the first ballot". Any ballot paper containing votes for more than five names will be considered invalid. I should like to inform Council members that, in accordance with established practice, the ballot papers in the Security Council will not be counted until it has been verified that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have also been collected. Finally, as stated in the joint letter dated 4 November 2020 from the Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security Council, in view of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the way in which the secret ballots will be held in the two organs will have to be adjusted in order to safeguard public health, and the note annexed to the letter outlines the adjusted modalities for the elections. In that regard, I would like to refer to paragraph 17 of the annex, which states that, "Talfter the members of the General Assembly and the members of the Security Council have cast their ballots, the President of the General Assembly will announce the suspension of the plenary meeting and the President of the Security Council will announce the suspension of the meeting simultaneously." However, in view of the fact that the casting of ballots will be completed in the Security Council much earlier than in the General Assembly, the advice received from a medical point of view is that it would not be advisable for the members of the Security Council to remain in the Security Council Chamber until the General Assembly has completed the casting of ballots. Therefore, the Security Council will suspend its meeting as soon as the casting of ballots has been completed so that members can leave the Council Chamber. The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select two delegations to serve as tellers. The delegations of China and Germany will not be considered to serve as a teller because candidates of their nationalities have been nominated. The names of the delegations of France and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have been drawn. I request each of them to appoint one of their members to serve as teller. At the invitation of the President, Ms. Servat (France) and Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ) acted as tellers.
