Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I welcome this
opportunity to review the Council's subsidiary bodies
on counter-terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and
the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
I thank our briefers for the comprehensive overview
they have just given and the hard work they do on
our behalf alongside their day jobs representing their
countries on the Council.

As so many recent terrorist atrocities have shown,
we now face threats to international peace and security
that our predecessors would scarcely have imagined
when writing the Charter of the United Nations,
70 years ago. Attacks like the one attempted against
tourists in Egypt just last week showed that our citizens
can now be targeted wherever they are in the world.
Such threats destroy lives and fundamentally challenge
our collective efforts to preserve stability and further
development across the globe. The work of the three
Committees forms a vital part of the global response.
Together, we can stop dangerous individuals from
travelling abroad to perpetrate those heinous acts.
We can freeze their assets and halt their financing of
terror, and we can help deny them access to an even
more dangerous arsenal of dirty bombs and chemical
weapons. The Committees and their United Nations
experts are therefore a crucial tool and a resource for the
Council. I reiterate the United Kingdom's full support
for their work. Let me now address each Committee in
turn.

First, with respect to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, chaired by Raimonda, we welcome the
recent reporting by the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate on foreign terrorist fighters and other
issues. Such analysis helps all Member States
understand the global risk we face and builds our
collective will for global action. As we heard in last
month's Council debate (see S/PV.7453), countering
extremists' narratives is a major challenge for us all.
We welcome the Committee's expanding focus on that
issue and trust that countering violent extremism will
remain a priority for the Committee in future. We look
forward to the Committee's adding to the plan of action
to prevent violent extremism recently announced by
the Secretary-General. We hope it will include clear
metrics for success and quick-win capacity-building
ideas.

Secondly, with respect to the Committee that
Gerard chairs, let me reiterate support for the work
of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. That regime
remains a key tool for the Security Council to disrupt
the sickening activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida groups. But to do so, all States
need to fulfil their obligations under the terms of the
regime, and the list needs to remain agile to evolving
threats. We therefore commend the work of the Al-Qaida
Monitoring Team and the analysis it shared with the
Council, including its most recent in-depth report on
foreign terrorist fighters (S/2015/358). That report
gave the Council a valuable understanding of the sheer
scale of foreign terrorist flows: an estimated 25,000
fighters originating from over half the United Nations
Members. Fair and clear procedures for the sanctions
regime are also needed to keep the list effective and
current. We join the Chair in thanking Kimberly Prost
for her sterling service as Ombudsperson. Her work has
helped to maintain the legitimacy and effectiveness of
that important tool.

Thirdly, let me turn to non-proliferation and
resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee chaired by
Roman. The threat of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, acquiring weapons of mass destruction is a
nightmare scenario for us all. Today's complex conflicts
and rapidly evolving technology make effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) an imperative
if we are to reduce the chance of that ever happening.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 1540
Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs for their tireless work in helping
States comply with the resolution. But more needs to
be done. We urge all States to approach the Committee
to offer or request support for national implementation.
And to those 19 States that have yet to provide a
national implementation report, let us be clear in our
call to them to do so.

We also look forward to starting work on the
comprehensive work of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) under the leadership of Spain. We invite
all United Nations States Members to consider how
the Committee's work can be strengthened, including
through implementation, monitoring, assistance,
matchmaking and outreach.

I was pleased to hear today's briefing on the
growing cooperation among these three important
subsidiary bodies. When resources are limited, joint
activities such as country visits can save money and
add value. We welcome further innovations such as
those in future.

