Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are grateful to the
Italian presidency for convening this briefing upon
the request of the French delegation, and we wish to
thank them both. We also wish to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo
Grandi, and the Director General of the International
Organization for Migration, Mr. William Lacy Swing,
for their briefings.

The situation of African refugees and migrants
in Libya has indeed been a matter of serious concern
for quite some time. The Central Mediterranean route
through Libya continues to be used by migrants and
refugees, mainly from sub-Saharan Africa, to cross to
Europe. It has become a popular route for traffickers
and smugglers, who continue to exploit the current
situation and weak law enforcement institutions.

The recent media reports on the auctioning of
African migrants and refugees as slaves have caught
the attention of the entire world. The video clips
circulating on social media and the harrowing stories
of some of the African refugees and migrants who
described their suffering and pain in the detention
camps at the hands of human traffickers and smugglers
have sent shockwaves across the continent and beyond.

This inhumane and despicable act is not only
unacceptable but has no place in the twenty-first
century. It must be condemned in the strongest terms,
and we reiterate our support for the statements issued
by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of United Nations. We
believe that it is only appropriate that the Council adopt
a statement along the same lines, demonstrating the
seriousness with which it is following the matter. We
therefore believe what the United Kingdom and France
have suggested in this regard to be very proper. As
we stated during the briefing on Libya last week (see S/PV.8104), we believe that there are two important
approaches to handling this matter.

First, there is a need for urgent action to dismantle
the slavery camps and destroy the criminal networks
involved in this inhumane practice. All necessary
measures must also be taken to identify all those
responsible for that unspeakable and barbaric crime
and to bring them to justice. The Libyan Government
has already expressed its commitment to undertaking
the necessary investigation, and those efforts must
be supported. Strengthening the capacity of Libyan
institutions, law enforcement and judicial bodies is
very important in that regard.

We welcome the steps taken by the African Union
to urgently launch an investigation in support of the
measures announced by Libyan authorities and dispatch
an envoy to Libya for consultations with the Government
and other stakeholders to agree upon practical steps to
address the plight of African migrants in Libya. All
the relevant United Nations agencies must be actively
engaged in support of those efforts, and international
cooperation must also be enhanced to prevent and
combat trafficking in persons and to protect the rights
of victims, particularly women and children.

Secondly, it is absolutely imperative to tackle the
root causes of forced displacement, migration and
trafficking in persons in a comprehensive and holistic
manner. At the root of that is poverty and hopelessness.
Situations such as those should remind us to what extent
there is virtually no alternative to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, as we mentioned on a
previous occasion, hence the need to accelerate efforts
to address the multifaceted challenges that are forcing
young people to flee in search of a better future. We
therefore echo the call made by Mr. Smai'l Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, last week (see S/PV.8111), to move from words
to action, and ensure that we meet the goal set for 2030.

However, pending the implementation of sustainable
solutions to address the root causes of migration and
forced displacement, much more certainly needs to be
done to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance
for refugees and migrants, irrespective of their status.
States should also be encouraged to continue opening
up their borders to refugees in accordance with the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
to further strengthen international assistance based
on the principle of border-sharing and solidarity
with refugee-hosting countries. The expansion of
resettlement opportunities as a means of international
protection for refugees and the expansion of regular
channels for migration should be encouraged, as it
could significantly contribute to the prevention of
trafficking in persons and smuggling.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my
profound appreciation for the noble initiative taken by
the Government of Rwanda to receive 30,000 of those
facing the danger of modern slavery in Libya. That is

a demonstration of commitment put into practice for
which Rwanda should be lauded.
With regard to the situation in Libya in particular,
we understand the complexity and rapidly changing
humanitarian challenge that the country is facing
within a very difficult political environment. There is
an urgent need for the political situation to be sorted
out so that the rule of law might prevail throughout
the country under an authority whose legitimacy is
recognized by the Libyan people. We believe that
the United Nations action plan with its sequential
components provides a useful framework to end the
current political impasse and meet the legitimate
demands of all Libyans. We welcome the continued
efforts of the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to engage
all Libyans based on the United Nations action plan,
including in bringing together the main political
actors to mend the Libyan Political Agreement, which
remains the only viable framework in which to resolve
the Libyan crisis.

Lastly, auctioning migrants as slaves is an affront
to humankind, and we should do everything possible
to combat that scourge. We hope that the Council will
send the right message to demonstrate our collective
commitment to addressing the immediate and long-
term challenge through a comprehensive and holistic
approach, and a in a very robust manner, as the
representative of France just mentioned - through
effective global and regional partnerships.

