Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2015/151), Special Representative
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his remarks this morning.

There have been significant and positive
developments in Afghanistan since the Security
Council last met in this format (see S/PV.7347). The
International Security Assistance Force mission
concluded operations after 13 years, and the Resolute
Support Mission has now begun. That marks the end
of a period of transition and the start of a period of
transformation, with full Afghan ownership of its
national affairs. I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all of the servicemen and servicewomen,
international and Afghan alike, whose service and
sacrifice have made that progress possible.

I will focus my statement today on three key issues:
the support provided by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the Afghan
Government's reform agenda, support for a peace
process, and the current security challenges.

I welcome the extension of UNAMA's mandate
today. UNAMA plays a critical role in Afghanistan
and its continued presence is a strong sign of the
international community's enduring commitment
to Afghanistan and its people. I commend President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
on the steps they have taken since the formation of the
national unity Government. In the first months of this
year, we saw early action on tackling corruption, as
well as agreement on the 2015 budget. We support the
goals of President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
to deliver economic security by tackling corruption, to
enact political reform and to consolidate progress on
human rights and national security. Yet the economic
situation remains precarious. Government fiscal
discipline is vital, as is sustained donor support. The
swift confirmation ofthe final ministerial appointments
to the national unity Government will help to safeguard
the gains made, build confidence and aid the reform
process. UNAMA will play an essential role in support
of those reform priorities. It will do so in a manner that
is consistent with a sovereign Afghanistan. UNAMA's
provision of good offices will assist political reform,
aid in the preparations for parliamentary and provincial
council elections and protect the gains made on human
rights.

It will also promote more coherent donor support to
the Afghan Government's priorities as co-Chair of the
Joint Coordination and Management Board. In order to
fulfil its mandate, UNAMA must have the resources
it needs to maintain its presence in the provinces. Our
goal remains to ensure that Afghanistan remains on a
path towards a sustainable future for all, and the United
Kingdom is committed to supporting the Afghans to
achieve that.

Securing a sustainable peace in Afghanistan
through a political settlement remains the key to
Afghanistan's future. Reconciliation is vital to any
political settlement, and I welcome the efforts being
made to ensure an inclusive peace process. We urge
all parties to seize opportunities to make meaningful
progress, recognizing that the process will take time.
In that context, we welcome in particular the positive
dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
security remains volatile, and this year's fighting season
will be no exception. The continued attacks in Kabul
bring home to us the courage and perseverance of the
people and the security forces of Afghanistan, as well
as the members of the international community who
support them. But the increases in civilian casualties,
for which the Taliban are largely responsible, are
concerning. Avoiding such casualties must be a priority
for all parties. Through resolute support, we will help
the Afghan National Security Forces by providing
practical training, advice and assistance that aids their
efforts to combat the insurgency.

In conclusion, the coming months will be
challenging, but we must not lose sight of how far
Afghanistan has come in the past year - and even more
so in the past 13 years, as Ambassador Tanin pointed
out. In the past 12 months alone, there has been the first
peaceful democratic transfer of power, the formation of
a national unity Government and the assumption of full
Afghan responsibility for security. We now have a clear
path ahead. The Afghan Government's reform priorities
are the right ones. UNAMA, in close consultation
with the Afghan Government and the international
community, will continue to play a valuable role in
supporting Afghanistan and its goals.

