Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important vote
on a draft resolution (S/2016/1100) that well may well
be historic as a contribution to peace. Our country,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, together with
Malaysia, New Zealand and Senegal, decided to
co-sponsor and call for a vote on this draft resolution
on the peace process in the Middle East, especially on
the issue of the illegal Israeli settlements.

The decision to present this draft resolution to
the Council responds to the pressing, urgent need for
this body to speak out on the worrying situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories as a result of the
continued illegal expansion of Israeli settlements,
which today represent the most serious threat to the
possibility of the political solution of two States.

When we submitted this proposal, we were
motivated by the firm commitment to reverse this
dangerous trend in order to safeguard the interests of
the Palestinian people and the viability of their State
and to revitalize the peace process, which has been at a
standstill for more than 20 years. It is high time for the
Security Council to shoulder the great responsibility it
has in the origin and the continuation of this conflict.

I believe that the draft resolution is a balanced text
that reaffirms the right of both countries to coexist
peacefully within the internationally secure pre-l967
borders, pursuant to resolution 242 (1967) and the
norms of international law, and bearing in mind the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of9 July 2004 (see A/ES-lO/273).

At the same time, this proposal objectively addresses
with the problem of settlements and their destabilizing
effects on the region, and condemns the violence against
the civilian population, no matter who the perpetrators
might be and regardless of their motives.

Venezuela acknowledges the efforts made by the
Council to hold this meeting, especially on the part of
those countries that have called an for open, transparent
and frank discussion in this body and for action by the
Council that would revitalize the peace process, as well
as the countries that have presented initiatives aimed at
emerging from the stalemate.

Special mention must be made of the tireless
efforts of Egypt and the support of the Arab League
in achieving effective progress in dealing with the
Palestinian question. We also wish to thank and
acknowledge the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council for its continued availability to facilitate the
holding of this meeting, and New Zealand, for having
been the driving force that enabled this draft resolution
to be submitted before the end of the year.

The proposing countries represent diverse regions
of the world. We felt encouraged because of the
emerging consensus on the issue of settlements. All
member countries recognize that illegal settlements
are an obstacle to the peace process and a threat to
the two-State solution. Our actions are also a response
to the many calls of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General himself, the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, the Quartet, other
member States and prominent stakeholders, in the
framework of overcoming the obstacles facing the
Palestine-Israel peace process.
We are on the threshold of a historic decision,
which could represent the beginning of a new phase in
the peace process after almost four decades of failed
attempts. That is why the Council, as a representative
of the international community and the guarantor of
international peace and security, must act in a spirit of
unity, approving the text submitted today.

Today the world has its eyes on the Security
Council. It has placed its hopes in its members working
for peace, aware that history willjudge our actions with
gratitude if we can contribute, even in a small way, to
relaunch a political process. We are opening the path
for new generations of Israelis and Palestinians to have
the opportunity to build a peaceful world.

