Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Mr. President, let me first of
all say that my delegation finds it particularly fitting that
you, as Foreign Minister of Botswana, should be presiding
over this important meeting. We are sure that under the
presidency of Botswana this month the Council will be in
good hands.

The participation today of an Organization of African
Unity (OAU) ministerial delegation, headed by the Foreign
Minister of Malawi, is also a telling sign of the importance
of the occasion and of the support for and commitment of
the OAU and its member States to the successful
conclusion of what we hope will be the final step towards
a lasting peace in Angola. I was very pleased to see the
Foreign Minister of Angola among us, and my delegation
appreciated his interesting statement.

Since the time of Angola's independence, Sweden has
been actively engaged in development cooperation and
other forms of support for development and peace in
Angola.

The people of Angola have for too long already
suffered the plight of a devastating civil war. We therefore
greeted the signing of the first peace accord, as well as that
of the Lusaka Protocol of November last year, with special
relief and satisfaction. That Protocol and the subsequent
cease-fire provide the necessary basis for a process leading
to a lasting peace. However, the situation remains
uncertain. As has been proved on many occasions, formal
undertakings by parties involved in a conflict are not
necessarily enough. Agreements must be respected by all
concerned and they must be implemented. The events of
1992, when UNITA resorted to arms after defeat in the
general elections, must not be allowed to happen again.

A successful peace process requires strong
determination and mutual trust between the parties. If this
is not the case, no United Nations mission, no matter how
well planned and equipped, can succeed in its task.

It is a good sign that the military commanders of both
sides have met, but it seems not to be enough. Direct talks
between President dos Santos and the UNITA leader, Jonas
Savimbi, are necessary for any real process towards
national reconciliation. Sweden therefore calls on both
parties to do their utmost to ensure that the peace process
moves forward.

In this connection, we would like to express our
thanks and admiration to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye, for his vigorous
efforts for the Lusaka process and its implementation, as
well as for his help in improving the political atmosphere
in Angola.

The Lusaka Protocol assigns a crucial role to the
United Nations. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's assessment that the respect for the cease-fire
shown by the Government of Angola and UNITA and
their commitment to ensuring the safety and security of
personnel have made it possible for him to recommend
that the third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) now take over from UNAVEM. II. It is
also encouraging to learn that many Member States, not
least neighbouring countries, have indicated a readiness to
contribute a significant number of units and observers to
the new operation.

Sweden participated with military and police
observers in UNAVEM. II. The Government has decided
to provide 20 military observers to UNAVEM. III.

The Swedish Government intends to continue to
support the peace process and the rebuilding of the
country in ways that are found most suitable.
Humanitarian relief programmes will continue, but
assistance will increasingly be directed towards basic
needs such as the strengthening of transport facilities,
logistics and so on.

The number of mines dispersed is a serious problem,
causing continuous suffering and death, as well as
preventing the return of normal life. A decision has
therefore been taken in cooperation with the Angolan
Government and the World Food Programme to begin
mine-clearance operations to be carried out by Swedish
military personnel.

The Swedish Government also takes a positive
attitude towards examining the possibility of sending
Swedish military experts to start up demobilizing centres
or, alternatively, to assist in demobilizing operations.

What we now hope for, and indeed expect, is the
full commitment of the parties to the process towards real

 

and lasting peace and security in Angola. Sweden, for its
part, is ready to make its contribution towards this goal.

