Mr. Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate and salute President
Chiluba; the Foreign Minister of Namibia, the current

 

President of the General Assembly; the Foreign Minister of
South Africa; and my brother, Ambassador Baali, speaking
on behalf of President Bouteflika, the current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU). I also wish to
commend the continuous efforts he is undertaking and to
support his proposal concerning the importance of
coordination between the OAU and the Security Council.

I would also like at the beginning to express to you,
Mr. President, our appreciation for setting up January 2000
to study African issues. There are a number of questions
that we all agree are very important, and we consider that
your choice of them has been very wise. In addition to the
issues of peace and security in some African countries, we
have not ignored some general issues of great importance
to the whole continent such as refugees and AIDS. We will
perhaps deal with other issues in the future, issues that are
no less important, such as combating poverty and starvation
as major causes of conflicts and deterioration in the
political, social and security situation. We have attached
great important to ending the conflict in Angola. The
presence of President Nelson Mandela here was a
significant event that highlighted the importance of the
continuation of the Arusha peace process, the Security
Council's support for his efforts and the continued support
of the international community. The meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was undoubtedly of
great significance.

Participants have linked HIV/AIDS and the question
of refugees to the problem of peace and security in Africa.
As we come to the end of January 2000, and not to the end
of the "month of Africa", as we hope that every year will
be a "year of Africa", we wish to reaffirm the necessity of
following up the outcome of these meetings, as many
previous speakers have already emphasized, so that Africa
will continue to be a main priority for the Council
throughout the year so that we can translate sincere political
will and promises into deeds.
In this context, allow me to make a few remarks. First,
concerning HIV/AIDS, the discussion has increased
awareness of the danger of this epidemic and of the
importance of moving swiftly to adopt a comprehensive,
stable strategy, in coordination with the specialized
agencies, in order to put an end to the escalation of this
epidemic. The commitments stemming from the meeting on
this issue, particularly those mentioned by the representative
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) provide the best incentive for the international
community to make more efforts and to follow up on such
efforts. We look forward to the reports presented by
UNAIDS concerning what will be achieved in
implementation of the many recommendations in this
area.

On another subject, the Security Council has
emphasized the importance of redoubling efforts in order
to allow the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to give
humanitarian assistance to refugees and internally
displaced persons and to find solutions to their problems
and situations. We note the attention given to this issue
by the Security Council. We wish to emphasize, along
with previous speakers, that we must adopt practical
measures in order to implement the proposals presented
by Mrs. Ogata of UNHCR. We wish to reiterate the
international community's appeal for support for African
States in building their capabilities so they can deal with
the problem of refugees and displaced persons and with
their major causes, and in finding political solutions that
would help bring about peace, development and stability
in the region.

As for the long-standing conflict in Angola, which
is considered one of the major challenges facing the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular, we wish to reaffirm our satisfaction
with the announcement of the Angolan Government that
it will hold firmly to the Lusaka Protocol as a basis for
the peace process. We call upon UNITA, the party
primarily responsible for the war's continuation, to prove
that it is fulfilling its commitments in accordance with the
Lusaka Protocol. The fact that the Security Council has
unanimously agreed to find a solution to the conflict in
Angola, to compel UNITA to stop defying the
international community and to continue the sanctions
regime is a clear message concerning the Council's
commitment. We look forward in this regard to
considering the report presented by the sanctions
Committee on new measures that might be taken by the
Council.

In considering the situation in Burundi, the Council
renewed its strong support for the Arusha peace process.
We heard President Mandela express his views and advice
on the Arusha peace process. We hope that he will give
us a fresh evaluation of what has been achieved in that
regard. Security Council resolution 1286 (1999) appealed
to all parties, and it is incumbent upon us to evaluate in
the near future the parties' respect for this resolution.

Regarding the discussion of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we have reaffirmed our position through

 

the presidential statement made by you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Council, concerning the territorial integrity
and national sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its sovereignty over its natural resources, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Charter. This was
one of the most important outcomes of that meeting. We
called for an immediate halt to all military hostilities and
for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These are basic
conditions needed for the transitional period. The Council
has shown its support for and determination to uphold the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. This reaffirmation shows once
again that this Agreement is the way to find a solution.

We must now accelerate the dispatch of military
observers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
hope that the Council will adopt a resolution immediately
to extend the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the Secretary-General's report of 17
January 2000 (S/2000/30). We expect all parties to the
conflict to cooperate with and support the United Nations
Mission and the United Nations Special Envoy. The degree
of cooperation with this Mission will show how the Lusaka
Agreement will be implemented. Similarly, we must
emphasize the importance of national dialogue in the next
phase, and we hope that the international community, and
the United Nations in particular, will support this dialogue
and the work of President Masire by providing the
necessary resources and cooperation.

The meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
opened a constructive dialogue among all parties to the
conflict, the signatories to the Lusaka Agreement, the
Security Council and the Secretary-General. It was also an
opportunity for some parties to the conflict to sit together
and have a close and direct dialogue. That was a great
achievement. We look forward to the repetition of this type
of meeting. We are optimistic Vis-a-vis any initiative that
starts a dialogue between the parties because dialogue leads
to understanding, builds trust and hastens progress towards
organizing an international conference on the situation in
the Great Lakes region, as proposed by Egypt and France.

In conclusion, we believe that these open meetings
have led to increasing transparency in the work of the
Council. Direct involvement of the parties in the discussion
will give us a unique opportunity for dialogue and will
encourage the resolution of such problems. There is no
alternative to dialogue. The results were very positive and
there is conviction within the Council that we should work
quickly to deal with the issues that have been discussed.
We propose in this context that the Council undertake
practical evaluations of the degree to which these results
have been implemented.

Allow us, at the end of this month and of your
successful presidency, Sir, to welcome the next President,
Argentina. We look forward to another month of vigour
and revitalization. We promise the incoming President our
cooperation and wish him every success.

I also wish to join those who preceded me in
expressing our condolences to the families of the victims
of the Kenyan aircraft crash.

