At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mark Lowcock for their briefings. Resolution 2532 (2020) was a step in the right direction, as it marked unequivocally the Council's clear commitment to addressing the impact of the pandemic on items on its agenda. It also contained important provisions calling for a cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause, as well as a plea for intensified international cooperation to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. Yet, two months after the adoption of that resolution, we believe that much more is needed to translate those provisions into concrete reality on the ground. Today's debate is a timely opportunity to reiterate our resolve to implement this resolution in a way that makes a difference to people's lives, especially those most affected by the pandemic, in conflict zones and refugee camps. It is an opportunity to rebuild momentum around the need to stand as one in full solidarity against this invisible yet global common threat to the whole of humanity. While commending all the measures taken by the Department of Peace Operations to protect the safety, security and health of all United Nations personnel in peace operations and special political missions, and to preserve their ability to deliver their mandated priority tasks, the appeal for a global ceasefire, even though prompted some positive responses from Governments and non-State actors, did not yet move the parties in many instances to suspend hostilities or take steps to de-escalate. Even where there was apparent goodwill among conflict parties to pause violence in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), such intentions were not often translated into technical ceasefire agreements with clear terms and security guarantees that all sides could accept. Obviously, the ceasefire appeal requires stronger diplomatic efforts to meet these challenges, and I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General's Special Representatives and Special Envoys as well as the Resident Coordinators, who, despite the difficult circumstances, are engaging actively with conflict actors to help move towards ceasefires on the ground as a prerequisite for lasting peace. On the humanitarian front, the situation has deteriorated in many conflict zones, particularly in Syria and Yemen, where the pandemic is exacerbating the already dire security and humanitarian conditions. The impact of COVID-19 on conflict-affected settings has been much worse than initially expected, with a serious and growing risk of famine in many regions. Millions of additional people there will face a food crisis because of the combination of conflict and the pandemic, and millions of children may never return to school. Those tragedies would create opportunities for armed and terrorist groups to recruit and radicalize desperate young men. If we fail to provide a coordinated international response to the pandemic, we would risk losing the gains made on health, poverty, education, women's empowerment, development and stability over the past decades around the world. It is Tunisia's profound belief that we will not be able to defeat this pandemic in each of our countries without solidarity and unity at the international, regional and national levels; solidarity because none of us can face it alone, and unity because no one is immune until everyone is immune. We commend in this regard the leading role of the United Nations system in coordinating our global response to COVID-19 and believe that the World Health Organization should make a central contribution to those efforts. In conclusion, with the outbreak of COVID-19, the world has clearly entered a volatile and unstable new phase. The pandemic is changing our assumptions about threats to international peace and security. As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is important to recognize that today humankind is facing today new types of enemies. They are invisible, transboundary and global, and no country will be immune from their impact. We cannot face such dangers using the same instruments we have inherited from previous times. As the nature and scope of threats evolve, we need to rethink security and adapt our approaches and tools. Tunisia strongly believes that the Security Council needs to discuss these issues in greater depth to be able to deliver on its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
