Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): We
are pleased to see you with us once again, Sir, presiding
over this important meeting of the Security Council. I
wish also to welcome the presence of Ms. Frechette,
Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Likewise, we wish to thank Mr. Kellenberger, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
for being with us today and for the very interesting
statement he made this morning.

 

On your commendable initiative, Mr. President, the
Security Council is today considering the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. This question is
both topical and related to the Council's responsibilities in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security.

To look at the armed conflicts that have taken place in
recent years is to come to the inevitable and disturbing
conclusion that the suffering of civilians is increasing, as
are the risks they face, which include threats to their lives.
Aggression; forced displacements, both inside and outside
countries; the blocking of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance; and the hardships endured by vulnerable groups,
in particular children, women and the elderly, all are threats
to the physical security of defenceless civilians.

Unfortunately, these practices are the result of
deliberate actions, aimed at civilians taken by the parties to
the conflict. Civilians are targeted and used as a means of
warfare. As is noted by the Secretary-General in his report
submitted to the Security Council in September 1999 on
this question, not even United Nations personnel and
international humanitarian personnel are spared.

Following consideration of this question in February
and September 1999, the Security Council strongly
condemned those actions and affirmed the resolve of the
international community to deal with them.

Today, on the basis of its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the Council
is preparing to adopt a new draft resolution on this issue
that will provide for a number of steps and actions aimed
at strengthening the physical and legal protection of
civilians in armed conflict, so as to safeguard them during
armed hostilities, ensure that humanitarian assistance can
reach them and provide them with a secure environment
pending a resolution of the armed conflict. The inhuman
practice of targeting civilians, which has occurred in recent
armed conflicts, must be put to an end. On the basis of that
conviction, we support the draft resolution before the
Council.

Accordingly, I should like to stress certain aspects of
the question that my delegation believes to be particularly
important. First, as the report of the Secretary-General and
the draft resolution before us today make clear, the question
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict is extremely
complex, because it encompasses many aspects that are
interconnected or closely linked to varying degrees,
including in the political, legal, humanitarian, peacekeeping
and peace-building areas. Given the multidimensional
nature of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, it
is necessary to adopt a comprehensive, consistent, non-
selective approach, taking into consideration the specific
characteristics of each situation.
The second aspect of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is the fact that it is, in essence,
a humanitarian action. As such, it must be guided by the
principles of neutrality and impartiality.

Thirdly, any action to protect civilians must
supplement efforts to find a solution to the conflict in
question, in accordance with the provisions regarding
dispute settlement mechanisms in the United Nations
Charter. Of course, the best approach is to prevent
conflicts before they start, and, consequently, this is the
best way to reduce human suffering, especially that of
defenceless civilians.

Fourthly, because of the many aspects relating to the
protection of civilians, coordination among the various
actors is highly desirable to ensure the desired
effectiveness in the framework of a comprehensive and
complementary approach. The role of coordinator should
be played by the United Nations.

Fifthly, it is essential to respect the principles of the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity
of States and non-interference in their internal affairs, as
well as to secure the consent and cooperation of the
parties, in particular the Governments of the countries
concerned.

The question of the protection of civilians is not a
new one. In the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories,
civilians have waited too long for the complete
observance of international law, including international
humanitarian law and the relevant conventions, in
particular the Geneva Convention Relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, and their
fundamental rights, of 12 August 1949. Other more recent
situations in Africa also require international attention.

Those are the comments that I wished to make on
behalf of my delegation, and I reiterate our support for
the draft resolution before the Council.

