Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Miroslav Lajcak
for his briefing, which gave us a good overview of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also welcome
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Spirie, and we are grateful to
him for his statement.

From the overview gained from the briefing, we
can see that some progress has been made in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In particular, in mid-April, a police
reform law was adopted. On 16 June, the Stabilization
and Association Agreement and the accompanying
Interim Agreement were signed with the European
Union. On 8 November 2008, a memorandum of
understanding was also signed by the most influential
Bosnian parties.

However, this progress should not lead us to lose
sight of the fact that the overall situation remains
unstable. That fact was highlighted by the attempts to
change the Constitution and to call into question the
Dayton Agreement, as well as the threats against the
authority of the High Representative. We are also
disturbed by the lack of understanding between the
various political entities; which slows progress in
crucial areas such as reforming the economy, public
administration and the defence sector. The parties must
work to reach the objectives set by the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council.

It is also essential that the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina continue to strive to resolve the
question of refugees and displaced persons and that
they cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia.

Good-neighbourly relations are essential to the
viability of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is, of
course, in the process of being rebuilt as a State. Given
the turmoil in which the country's rebirth took place,
Bosnia and Herzegovina should cooperate with its
neighbours and undertake, as soon as possible, the
demarcation of its common borders with them, which
would certainly help to lay a solid foundation for
fruitful subregional cooperation and stabilize the
region.

In resolution 1845 (2008), the Security Council
expressed support for the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the Dayton Agreement of 10
November 1995. The international community must
continue in that vein, and continue to support Bosnian
and Herzegovina with a view to the full
implementation of the various agreements. In this
connection, we welcome the contribution made by the
European Union and its multinational stabilization
force. We also welcome the efforts by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Lastly, we commend the work and the
praiseworthy initiatives of the High Representative and
his Office in terms of the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
Herzegovina. We would urge them and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council to
resolutely continue their work for stability and lasting
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

