Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): My delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mudenge, Chairman of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
ministerial delegation to the Security Council, as well as
those of my colleagues from southern Africa who have
spoken before me.

The Council is meeting to consider the situation in
Angola barely three months before the termination of the
life of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). Botswana, like other
members of the international community, had hoped that by
now the peace process in Angola would have become
irreversible. It is a matter of profound regret that today the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has reached a
stalemate. It is clear that the gains of the last few months
are in grave danger. The most crucial aspects of the Lusaka
Protocol, such as the completion of the quartering of
UNITA personnel, the handing over to UNAVEM. III by
UNITA of its heavy weapons and ammunition and the
selection of UNITA personnel to be incorporated into the
Angolan Armed Forces, remain unimplemented.

UNITA's persistent obstruction of the activities of
UNAVEM. III, such as the detention of a helicopter and its
crew on 8 September, the denial of permits to aircraft to
carry out investigations in Chitembo and interference with
the demining activities of the United Nations-contracted
company, are acts which the international community
should deprecate in the strongest possible terms. These
practices, including UNITA' s policies of procrastination and
its reluctance to honour its commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol, have cast a shadow of doubt on UNITA's will for
peace. The atmosphere of trust and mutual confidence
between the Government of Angola and UNITA, which has
been nurtured with the help of UNAVEM. III and which is
vital to the implementation of the peace process, is being
undermined. The decision of the Third Extraordinary
Congress of UNITA to reject the Government's offer to
Mr. Savimbi of a vice-presidential post is deeply regrettable
and is not helpful to the creation of a climate conducive to
national reconciliation in Angola.

 

UNITA must recognize that the path to peace and
democracy in Angola can only be through unity and
national reconciliation. In this respect, we encourage the
Government of Angola and UNITA to hold high-level
talks aimed at resolving the outstanding issues and putting
the peace process back on track. Southern Africa has a
strong desire to see peace prevail in Angola, and to this
end, the Heads of State or Government of the subregion
are prepared to play a constructive role in the search for
a lasting solution to the political crisis in Angola. We
encourage Mr. Savimbi and UNITA to have confidence
in the commitment of the leaders of southern Africa to
mediate in a fair, impartial and credible manner. It is our
hope therefore that Mr. Savimbi will respond positively
to their invitation to attend the next meeting of SADC on
the situation in Angola.

It is a matter of public record that UNAVEM. III is
currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation. What this means is that the international
community has invested enormous resources to contribute
to the peaceful resolution of the Angolan crisis. It is
therefore extremely important that UNAVEM. III should
succeed in the discharge of its mandate. It should be
appreciated that UNAVEM's failure would have far-
reaching consequences not only for Angola but also for
the whole SADC region. And the international community
cannot afford to allow the enormous resources expended
in the UNAVEM. III operation to go to waste.

The situation in Angola must not be allowed to
fester. A continuation of the current stalemate can only
lead to the intensification of mutual suspicion between the
Government of Angola and UNITA and result in a new
outbreak of hostilities, which would pose a serious threat
to peace and stability in southern Africa. The time has
come for the Security Council and the international
community as a whole to send a firm message that a
return to hostilities will not be tolerated.

Southern Africa a few years ago witnessed the
collapse of the Bicesse Accords and its tragic aftermath.
We do not wish to see such a painful experience repeated.
The Council should not allow such a situation to occur in
Angola for the second time as this would severely impair
the credibility of the Council. Botswana and other
southern African States are convinced that the Security
Council should take measures to ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions. The Council should
therefore be prepared to impose on UNITA the measures
set out in paragraph 26 of Security Council resolution 864

 

(1993) and call for the vigorous and strict implementation
of the measures outlined in part B of that resolution.

When UNAVEM. III was launched on 8 February 1995
I observed that the primary responsibility for the successful
implementation of the provisions of both the "Acordos de
Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol rested with the people of
Angola. I also noted that this could be the last chance for
them to receive the support of the international community
in the search for a peaceful solution to their problem. This
is not to suggest that the United Nations has no
responsibility to the people of Angola. It has; and it cannot
and must not shirk it.

We should do everything in our power - all of us -
to ensure that we succeed this time.

