Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
introduction of the report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/68). I also
thank Prime Minister Thaci and Mr. Daeie on their
presentations.
My delegation commends the various actors
involved in the promotion of peace, stability and respect
for the rule of law in Kosovo and the entire region,
namely, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union, which are
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo on the
ground.

The report of the Secretary-General shows that
substantial progress has been made at the political level,
thanks to the political will of Pristina and Belgrade to
implement the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between the two parties.

Municipal elections have now been held in the
various towns. We welcome that political progress,
which the international community should encourage.
However, the report mentions political conflicts in
northern Kosovo, where opponents of the Brussels
Agreement between Pristina and Belgrade conducted
a protest march against the election campaign. We
urgently call on all the parties involved to engage in an
open dialogue to find a lasting and acceptable political
solution.

With regard to security, the report refers to a
net decrease in the rate of intercommunity crime
and violence. We encourage the authorities to
continue in their role in maintaining public order. My
delegation congratulates the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for the activities it
carries out to strengthen the capacity of the ministries
involved in the maintenance and promotion of internal
peace and security.

With regard to human rights, the report also
underscores the difficulties in implementing the
recommendations on the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. We encourage Kosovar leaders
to create conditions conducive to the return of those
people to their places of origin, as well as to organize
their social reintegration and the recovery of goods
to the original owners, which will make it possible to
build confidence among the various communities.

In conclusion, Chad would like to commend the
important continuing role played by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the other
actors in the Kosovo crisis. In that regard, Chad urges
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, to support the Mission until the conclusion of
its stabilization mandate in Kosovo.

