The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
March, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, for her
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of February 2011. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Viotti and her delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council's business last month.

Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like,
at the outset of the meeting, to extend a warm welcome
on behalf of the Council to the new Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Noel Nelson Messone. We look
forward to cooperating closely with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Liberia

Letter dated 11 February 2011 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2011/74)


The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
2
should like to invite the representative of Sierra Leone
to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/106, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United States of
America.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2011/74, which contains a letter
dated 11 February 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of
America.


The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1971 (2011).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
11-25076

