Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
With this shameful vote, the Security Council has just
missed a historic opportunity. By their vote, Council
members have assumed an enormous responsibility.

I wish at the outset to read out a statement issued by
the Republic of Cuba on the aggression by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). That statement
reads as follows:

"Following a series of distressing and highly
manipulative political events, prolonged armed
clashes, and complex - and hardly transparent -
negotiations on the question of Kosovo, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) finally
launched its heralded brutal air attacks against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose peoples were
the most heroic of those who fought the Nazi hordes
in Europe during the Second World War.

"This action, intended to 'punish the Yugoslav
Government', is being conducted outside the context
of the Security Council, where the main promoter of
the aggression, the United States, would have had to
face opposition by other members which from the
outset have vigorously opposed any action that could
undermine the prerogatives of that organ under the
United Nations Charter with respect to the
maintenance of international peace and security. This

 

has thus led to a violation of the norms and principles
of international law.

"The war launched by NATO revives mankind's
justified fears concerning the emergence of a
contemptuous uni-polar system governed by a warlike
empire that has declared itself to be the world's
policeman and that is capable of dragging its political
and military allies into the most foolish of actions.
This is similar to what took place early and during the
first half of this century with the creation of military
blocs that enshrouded Europe in destruction, death and
misery, dividing it and weakening it as the United
States built up its own economic, political and military
might.

"We may well ask whether the use and abuse of
force will solve the world's problems and protect the
human rights of the innocent people who are dying
today because of the missiles and bombs that are
falling upon a small country of cultured, civilized
Europe.

"The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cuba vigorously condemns this aggression against
Yugoslavia by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), under the leadership of the United States,
and it denounces the dishonest manoeuvring that has
led to the continued imposition of such uncivilized
practices on the international political scene in order
to satisfy the interests of those seeking to impose their
designs on all the States of the globe in the name of
a new and unworthy world order, created in their
image and likeness.

"During this time of suffering and pain for the
peoples of Yugoslavia, Cuba urges the international
community to rally its forces in order to put an
immediate end to this unjustifiable aggression, to
avoid further and even more regrettable losses of
innocent life and to allow that nation to resume the
peaceful course of negotiations so as to solve its
internal problems - matters that depend solely and
exclusively on the sovereign will and
self-determination of the Yugoslav peoples.

"Cuba expresses its concern that the aggression
could, in an unpredictable manner, spread to the other
States of the region, either because of the violence
itself or because of its unsettling social and human
effects.

"The ridiculous attempt to impose solutions by
force is incompatible with any civilized reasoning
and with the essential principles of international law.
The firmness of the positions that are being used to
try to justify this new crime only reflects the moral
impossibility of sustaining ideas and policies that run
counter to the interests of the peoples involved in
the conflict and of imposing on them an imperial
will. If this course were to be continued, there could
be unforeseeable consequences for Europe and for
all of humankind."

We are living in a shameful time in which
international legality is being violated. Never before has
the unipolar order imposed by the United States been so
obvious and so disturbing. When the Security Council
serves as its docile instrument, then the United Nations
seems to be working, and its foundations - the Charter
and international law - seem to be in force, although
they are always subject to capricious interpretations and
gross manipulation.

Some days ago we were surprised to witness an
occasion on which the Security Council refused to
authorize an international criminal act by the United
States and its accomplices. Today we have witnessed the
capitulation of the Security Council. When the Security
Council plucks up its courage and refuses to yield to
unipolar might, and tries to fulfil the responsibilities that
the Charter and the community of nations have entrusted
to it, then the super-Power, which does not accept lack of
discipline on the part of its subjects, takes matters into its
own hands.

The no-flight zones, the missiles striking Kabul,
Khartoum, Tripoli, Baghdad and Benghazi, and now
Pristina, Pancevo and other cities, remind us of the harsh
realities of global disorder. What is going to become of
the Security Council, or at least of its remains, after
today's vote? What will become of the United Nations?

While on the ground floor of this building there is
talk of reform, democracy and transparency, in this high
command - the Security Council - everyone's real
position becomes painfully clear: the positions of those
who play with words in order to conceal hegemonic
interests, and of those of us who make up the great
majority that is always ignored and always subject to the
political pressure of the powerful, because the majority
often forgets the weight of our countries when we unite
to reclaim our place. If we do not take our rightful place,
the United Nations, instead of developing as the emerging

 

government of a global democracy in a globalized and
united world, will merely be a crude, repressive instrument
of the powerful, as this meeting has made clear.

No one can forget in these tragic circumstances, in
which the destiny of us all is at stake, the historic
contribution made by the Serbs during the Second World
War, when they fought more heroically than any other
people against fascism and against the Nazi hordes in
occupied Europe. Humankind cannot be stripped of its
memory, however intoxicated it may be by technology used
to disseminate lies or by television used to promote war. It
must be recalled here and now - because it is a fact -
that these are the bitter fruits of a conspiracy to destroy
Yugoslavia. That is what is at the root of this conflict and
of the grave events we are now experiencing.

Some of those who today are brutally bombing in the
past conspired and fought to dismember that noble and
multi-ethnic country. Today they are punishing some of
those they previously promoted. Bombs are not the path to
peace. War is no humanitarian solution. History teaches us
that only negotiations can build peace. Cuba hopes that -
without delay, because every minute costs lives - an end
will be put to the armed aggression, and there will be a
resumption of negotiations in order to reach a just and
lasting peace, as a condition for full respect for the rights
and the dignity of all the ethnic groups, peoples and
religions of the former Yugoslavia.

