Mr. Vural (Turkey): May I first congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
also express our appreciation to your predecessor, the
distinguished Ambassador of Kenya.

There is no doubt that to date considerable progress
has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina towards the
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.

The Stabilization Force, as a successor to the
Implementation Force, has played a key role in creating a
positive security environment. This has allowed the
necessary steps to be taken towards consolidating the
sovereign, integral, democratic and multi-ethnic State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been successful in carrying out its task.
The International Police Task Force is doing excellent
work in the field. Both of these tasks remain of vital
importance. However, several aspects of the Peace
Agreement, especially those pertaining to humanitarian
and civilian affairs, require firmer compliance by some of
the parties.

During the last three months, there has been an
increase in violent incidents against returning refugees
and displaced persons. There has been continued
resistance to integrating minority officers into the police
force. Problems relating to common institutions, the
disbanding of parallel bodies, the return of minorities and
the full implementation of municipal elections still remain
unresolved.

I would also like to underline the importance of
economic revitalization in the process of attaining peace,
stability and reconciliation in the region. We welcome the
measures taken in the financial field, which will allow
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make better use of multilateral
economic assistance.

The implementation of the Peace Agreement
includes the return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes and the establishment of common institutions.
We attach importance to the early fulfilment of these
prerequisites. Parties to the Peace Agreement must also
fulfil their obligation to cooperate with the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991. Without a solid foundation of justice, peace
will remain elusive.
We welcome the positive steps taken towards
normalization of relations between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But more needs to be done. We call upon
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to establish full and
unconditional diplomatic relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Finally, we cannot isolate the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina from that in the rest of the region. In the
light of the alarming developments in Kosovo, the
international community has to be vigilant about the
ramifications of these developments with respect to
overall peace and security in the region. We should not
allow the peace process in Bosnia to be derailed. Building
on what has been achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
therefore, is not only imperative but most timely. The

 

draft resolution before the Council contains the elements
required for that purpose. My Government therefore
supports the main thrust of the draft resolution.

It is our hope that the time will come in the near
future when the goals of the peace process have been
reached and when there will be no need for such measures.

