The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Serbia.

Mr. Starcevic' (Serbia) I would like first of all to
welcome Mr. Haris Silajdzie, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The delegation of Serbia has studied the thirty-
seventh report on the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement (S/2010/235) and listened to the
views expressed in the Council today with keen
interest. As a signatory and guarantor of the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and pursuant to
resolution 1031 (1995), Serbia is consistently and
firmly committed to full respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Proceeding from the strategic foreign policy priorities
and commitments of the Republic of Serbia to the

promotion of relations with neighbouring countries, I
would like to confirm once again the support of my
country for the integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and our readiness for close cooperation in all areas of
mutual interest, particularly in building peace, stability
and prosperity in the Balkans and in furthering our
common goal of j oining the European Union (EU).

As a country committed to maintaining good-
neighbourly relations, Serbia is a staunch advocate of
the lasting stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It will respect every agreement reached
by consent of the two entities and by consensus among
the three constituent peoples in Bosnia and
Herzegovina containing sustainable solutions that are
in the spirit of modern democratic values. We
encourage all participants in this process to do
everything that is necessary to achieving such an
agreement. Similarly, it is by upholding the principle of
consensus - two plus three - that Serbia views the
ongoing process of transfer of competences from the
Office of the High Representative to the EU Special
Representative.

Guided by its resolve to help achieve complete
normalization and foster a new quality of relations,
Serbia has taken important steps towards full national
reconciliation. The declaration on Srebrenica adopted
by the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia is
a clear signal of the support of my country to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and of our readiness to confront the
past and take political responsibility for the future and
well-being of the region.

The Declaration adopted at the Istanbul summit
by the Presidents of Serbia and Turkey and the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the results of the trilateral meetings
of the Foreign Ministers of Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Turkey held thus far have made an
important contribution and given impetus to the
promotion of good-neighbourly relations, better
regional cooperation and a common European future.

Serbia views the development of its relations with
Republika Srpska on the basis of the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations to be within the context of
its efforts to strengthen overall relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I wish also to point out that my
country supports the continuation of negotiations and
concrete work on the resolution of border issues
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia.

Serbia supports Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
road to the European Union and strongly advocates its
inclusion in the EU decision on visa regime
liberalization. Serbia expects that the EU-Western
Balkans conference, to be held in Sarajevo on 2 June,
will encourage the EU commitment to continuing the
process of enlargement.

Serbia continues to believe that bilateral and
intra-regional economic cooperation provides a special
impetus to the lasting stabilization of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as of the entire region of South-
East Europe and the Western Balkans. For its part,
Serbia stands ready to cooperate fully in this regard.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head
of the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.


