Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to express
my congratulations to Malaysia for assuming the
presidency of the Council during the month of August
and to thank you, Sir, for organizing this highly
important debate. My delegation would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for preparing the annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2016/360) as
well as for his tireless efforts in working to improve
the situation of children worldwide. My appreciation
also goes to Ms. Leila Zerrouui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their briefings on the situation on the
ground relating to children in armed conflict.

While associating itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, I wish to
speak in my national capacity as follows.

Cambodia shares the concerns expressed by
fellow delegations about the difficult plight of children
affected by armed conflict. Children are the hope of
the future, yet time and again children fall victim to
acts of violence committed by non-State armed groups.
Attacks against children are on the rise, and there
appears to be no safe haven for children to escape armed
violence. The Secretary-General clearly outlines in his
report that attacks on schools and hospitals continue
unabated, and that abductions of children by terrorist
organizations have increased considerably.

The international community cannot continue to
tolerate the impunity of non-State armed groups and
must respond swiftly and effectively. In this context, we
must strengthen the existing legal instruments for the
protection of children in armed conflict. At the same
time, we must be careful to ensure that the international
response to non-State armed groups does not cause
further harm to children. We must be careful not to
inadvertently contribute to children's suffering, and so
must ensure that the global response is fully compliant
with international law and emphasizes the protection of
civilian populations, particularly women and children.

The Royal Government of Cambodia is resolved
to protect children and their rights in situations of
armed conflict. As a State party to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and a signatory to its Optional
Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict of 2000, Cambodia supports initiatives of the
United Nations aimed at protecting children in conflict.
Moreover, having endorsed the Paris Commitments,
the Royal Government of Cambodia is committed to
working with our global partners, Member States
and United Nations agencies in our efforts to end the
victimization of children by non-State armed groups.

Cambodia views with particular concern the
observations contained within the Secretary-General's
report that children, in seeking safety and peace
at refugee camps, have been recruited to serve as
child solders, taken sexual advantage of, abducted
and otherwise victimized. This is a particularly
development, which negatively affects children's
psyche, contributing to their radicalization.

In this context, it is important to make children's
concerns part of any peace process negotiations.
Mr. President, in your concept note (see S/2016/662).
you rightly point out that engaging non-State armed
groups on child-protection issues may reap positive
benefits, as we have seen manifested in various parts
of the world. Cambodia welcomes these efforts and
supports the use of such an approach in the future.

The successful reintegration of children into society
is a crucial consideration in this respect. As important
as it is to prevent radicalization, it is also necessary
to create effective deradicalization programmes that
would address the re-entry of child solders or those
children affected by armed conflict into peaceful
society. This would require prioritizing reintegration
programmes focused on the education, health and
social welfare of children.

In this context, radicalization should be addressed
in schools and at home, where children are taught at an
early age about the dangers of j oining, either voluntarily
or by force, non-State armed groups. Moreover, migrant
children should be effectively integrated within schools
in their respective host nations so as to feel accepted in
what is a new and foreign place to them.

Children are the hope of a better world and the
driving force for the successful implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In this light, my delegation
would like to reiterate its deeply held belief that the use
of children in armed conflicts can be prevented only
through the establishment of adequate social, political
and economic conditions worldwide. To ensure a bright
future for children and young adults, we must build
inclusive societies marked by tolerance, mutual respect
and peaceful coexistence.

