Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

Let me join others in thanking Japan for
organizing this timely debate, and the Ministers for
their valuable remarks.

Five years ago, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan observed that there was a gaping hole in the
United Nations institutional machinery. No part of the
United Nations system effectively addressed the
challenge of helping countries with the transition from
war to lasting peace. Member states agreed with
Mr. Annan's observation. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Peacebuilding Fund were established. This
year, we are assessing how well they have filled that
gap and how to improve common peacebuilding
efforts. The Nordic countries will continue to stay
actively engaged in the review process.

However, peacebuilding is not confined to the
PBC alone, but also embraces the much broader scope

of policies, interventions and processes, as this debate
demonstrates. Indeed, it is very much a collaborative
effort of the whole United Nations and beyond. Most
important, it is a national task of the country
recovering from conflict. We look forward to the
discussion later this year on the results of the
implementation of recommendations in the Secretary-
General's report on Peacebuilding (S/2009/304).

Allow me to highlight a few points that the
Nordic countries believe are important for the review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, and
for peacebuilding more generally.

Peace is much more than the mere absence of
violence. Building sustainable peace requires much
more than a short-term strategy for security, political
stability and the initial dividends of economic
recovery. Sustainable peace requires that the
foundations of a peaceful society are restored and that
a State be accountable to its people. It requires respect
for the fundamental rights of each individual,
professional and trustworthy rule of law and security
institutions and a social compact based on an inclusive
and transparent reconciliation process.

The current approach to peacebuilding falls well
short of that vision. Mandates and strategies tend to
concentrate on short-term deliverables, because
ensuring measurable progress on security and political
stability is so difficult. But we must try and, in so
doing, we must acknowledge the diversity of post-
conflict situations.

No peacebuilding policy will be valid in all post-
conflict situations. What builds peace in one country
does not necessarily build peace in another.
International assistance to post-conflict countries must
build on an understanding of the country context and
allow for more flexibility and adaptability. The
international community must move away from
imposing unrealistic expectations and timelines for
sweeping reforms, keeping in mind that sustainable
peace requires a holistic long-term vision and
resilience to stay on course.

National ownership built on an inclusive and
transparent political process is the basis for effective
peacebuilding interventions. That is why the review of
the Peacebuilding Commission must focus on
delivering added value at the national level and assess
whether the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
is sufficiently able to foster and promote nationally
owned and coordinated peacebuilding efforts.

The role of the international community, in our
view, should be to ensure not only the principle of
national ownership but also national accountability to
the local population. While supporting transitional
governmental structures, the international community
should act as a guarantor of the emergence of truly
inclusive political processes. Civil society needs to be
supported and genuinely consulted. It goes without
saying - even though I am saying it - that women,
who make up more than half of the population, should
be fully included in all peacebuilding and political
processes from the beginning.

When the going gets difficult, and it will, it is the
role of the international community to stay focused on
the goal of inclusive national ownership while
accepting necessary risks, including financial ones.
That is mutual accountability and partnership with a
society recovering from a conflict.

Coordination is another key pillar of mutual
accountability. Countries recovering from conflict have
to be able to expect a coordinated and supportive
approach from the international community. That
includes a more coordinated approach from the United
Nations intergovernmental bodies, better integration of
all relevant United Nations actors and improved
coordination between the United Nations and other
organizations, such as the international financial
institutions. That requires leadership that is able to cut
through turf battles. The Nordic countries encourage
the Secretary-General and the Security Council to
continue to demonstrate proactive leadership in their
efforts to achieve that.

Finally, as Member States, we must also look at
our own responsibilities. Coordination begins at home.
We need to speak with one voice at all levels and
pursue a consistent peacebuilding policy in the various
multilateral and bilateral settings. As contributors to
the broader peacebuilding architecture, we must
recommit to that agenda, including by promoting and
applying a whole-Government approach, however
difficult and challenging that may be.

