Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate Azerbaijan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and you, Mr. President, for convening and
presiding over today's meeting. Your presence here
sends an important signal regarding the priority your
country attaches to United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts. It is a priority that the United Kingdom shares.

The United Nations is at the forefront of the work
to counter terrorism across the globe. We applaud those
efforts, and the commitment to tackling terrorism
shown by the United Nations and its Member States.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon and requires a
global response, which the United Nations is uniquely
placed to lead. We welcome ongoing efforts to build on
the legal framework for countering terrorism,
addressing the conditions that can give rise to violent
extremism and taking practical measures to prevent
terrorist attacks.

I want to make two main points in today's debate.
First, sanctions are a key instrument in the response of
the United Nations to international terrorism, and the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities is
fundamental to that. The United Kingdom welcomes
the further improvements adopted to ensure that the
procedures in the Al-Qaida sanctions regime continue
to be fair and clear. The Al-Qaida sanctions
Ombudsperson plays a particularly important role in
that regard, and I take this opportunity to reiterate the
United Kingdom's full support for the Office of the
Ombudsperson. At the same time, sanctions must be
implemented effectively and robustly. We therefore
welcome all initiatives to reinforce Member States'
capacity to that end.

Secondly, I want to highlight the importance of
coordination - what the Secretary-General earlier
called "working as one". There are a large number of
international bodies involved in the global counter-
terrorism effort. With such a level of activity, effective
coordination is key.

Resources are necessarily limited, and we must
make certain that we are getting the most out of all our
good work. The Secretary-General's call for a counter-
terrorism coordinator provides an excellent opportunity
to shape the United Nations response to terrorism. It is
an important step forward that the United Kingdom
strongly supports. We must ensure that that position
has the right mandate to bring cohesion and coherence
to the United Nations counter-terrorism work. We need
to think carefully how best to manage the resources in
order to achieve that result.

In addition, we must maintain focus in our efforts.
To that end, we welcome the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We hope
that the themes covered in the review will help guide
the strategic direction of the United Nations in its
counter-terrorism efforts. I would like to take this
opportunity to extend our thanks to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia for its contribution towards establishing
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.

The United Nations has a unique and vital role in
countering terrorism. Let me affirm that the United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with all
partners to ensure that the United Nations is properly
equipped to deliver.

