Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council. I hope that you will find your presidency a
useful occasion to reflect the discussions you have led in
your capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
the real working methods or the Council.

I would also like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren and
Mr. James Cockayne for their very useful briefings
this morning. I would especially like to express my
appreciation to Ms. Landgren for basing some of her
comments on her experience as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. That really added power
to her statement. I further thank Mr. Cockayne for
focusing in his briefing on a specific issue and through
it informed us of the complexities of the discussion that
we are undertaking right now.

We believe that note 507 (S/2017/507, annex) is a
living document and that it should therefore serve as an
inspiration for further improvement of working methods
rather than something that we merely just follow, as the
Permanent Representative of South Africa said earlier
this morning, speaking on behalf of the current elected
10 members ofthe Council. We are also ofthe view that
reforms to the Council's working methods must balance
the dual needs for transparency and effectiveness and
for ambition and feasibility. This requires a flexible
approach that takes into account many views from both
inside and outside the Security Council. We would
therefore like to commend the President for organizing
today's open debate.

Improving the Security Council's working methods
is a process that has evolved over time. It is vital for
ensuring the Council's legitimacy by pursuing a
decision-making process that is transparent and draws
on the wisdom of all 15 members of the Security
Council working together. We must also be conscious
that the prime objective of upgrading the Council's
working methods should be to enhance its capacity to

take the best action in the timeliest manner to restore
and maintain international peace and security.

Every year five non-permanent-member countries
are elected to bear indispensable responsibilities. We
believe that it is necessary and important to give these
new members enough opportunities to prepare in
advance and then actively participate in the Council's
work from day one. Tomorrow, five members are to be
elected to serve on the Security Council from 2020.
We hope that they will be able to make the best use
of the recent improvements of the Council's working
methods so that they are well prepared to hit the ground
running. From this perspective, we welcome the
ongoing discussions in the Council on important issues,
including penholdership and subsidiary bodies.

Lastly, I would like to point out that working methods
are an essential part of Security Council reform, but not
the only one. Ultimately, a comprehensive reform of the
Council must include an expansion in its membership to
reflect current realities through adding more Member
States that have the capacity and willingness to take on
major responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Japan will continue to
work with all Member States towards this goal.

