The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Bangladesh, Belarus,
Brazil, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malawi, Malaysia, Morocco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Senegal, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2014/384, which contains a letter dated
1 June 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on
the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and before giving him
the floor I would like to make an important statement.

In a few hours, Mr. Ban Ki-moon will depart on yet
another international tour. It will be a long and difficult
one. Clearly, there is something symbolic in the fact that
on 13 June - his seventieth birthday - the foremost
diplomat on the planet will be travelling to the highest
world capital, La Paz. He will go there from Brazil,
where he will attend the opening of the soccer World
Cup championship, which, as we know, is also marking
an anniversary. It is also highly symbolic that the birth
of the Secretary-General was essentially a harbinger of
the universal Organization.
I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Security Council and all those present today when
I say that, through his activities at the head of world
diplomacy, which are commensurate with his wealth of
experience and professionalism, inexhaustible energy
and commitment to universal ideals, Mr. Ban Ki-moon
is indeed serving the international community. I wish
him every success in his noble work for the benefit
humankind.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

