The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

Like previous speakers, I wish at the outset to
welcome the participation in today's debate of the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany. Their participation clearly attests
to the gravity of the situation.

I associate myself with the statement that will
shortly be made by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union, and I shall
confine myself now to a few brief comments.

France condemns in the strongest terms
yesterday's deadly clashes in Kosovo between the Serb
and Albanian communities. Our first thoughts are for
the families of the victims.

The violence also targeted the international
presence in Kosovo, which has been working for peace,
stabilization and reconstruction. Some dozen KFOR
soldiers were wounded, and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) too was a
target: several UNMIK buildings and vehicles were set
on fire. This flareup of violence is the greatest
challenge posed to the international community in
Kosovo since 1999.

Whatever the causes, recourse to such acts of
violence cannot be tolerated. Inter-ethnic violence and
violence against KFOR and UNMIK are unacceptable
and must end immediately. Those responsible must be
arrested and brought to justice.

We urge all of Kosovo's political leaders, both
Albanian and Serb, to act responsibly and to call on the
population to put an immediate end to violence and to
restore calm. They must set aside confrontation and
work together to put an end to the violence.

France attaches the greatest importance to the full
and complete implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). Only the "Standards for
Kosovo" will make it possible for Kosovo to draw
closer to Europe. Here, respect for multi-ethnicity is
among the key conditions, and under no circumstances
must it be jeopardized by violence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Albania.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

