Ms. Landgren: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to update and complement the report before the Council
on the situation in Liberia (8/2014/123).

The political and security environment remains
relatively stable. Progress continues in a number of
areas, but as Liberia enters its second post-conflict
decade, it also continues to face great challenges
to institutionalizing reforms in critical sectors and
building capacity for effective governance. These are
complex and daunting processes, as even before the
war Liberia had few well-functioning meritocratic
institutions and effective accountability mechanisms.
Seizing this window to get the fundamentals right will
be critical to consolidating Liberia's hard-won peace
and to charting the country's inclusive development.

Voices across a wide spectrum continued to express
dissatisfaction with national authorities and policies.
Motorcycle taxi unions, business owners and civil
society have held demonstrations; health workers have
gone on strike twice since December; and all operations
at Liberia's main university were interrupted for three
months due to student protests and violence. Eleven
anti-government protestors were charged with sedition
in October, bringing criticism that the Government
was using the law in an instrumental manner to
dampen opposition and dissent. Tensions between large
concessions and communities continued.

Legislative elections for half of the Senate's
30 seats are scheduled for October. Approaching the
end of the voter roll update, the National Elections
Commission has registered some 60,000 people, far
short of its initial goal of 400,000 - a goal later cut
by half. About one-third of registrants are women.
This month, the Senate approved an amendment to
the election law that encourages parties to include at
least 30 per cent women in their governing structures
and candidate lists. Although this falls short of an
obligation and still requires the concurrence of the
House of Representatives, the measure represents a
step forward in the public debate over women's political
representation.

Turning now to Liberia's reform processes, since
January the Constitution Review Committee has had
more structured and sustained engagement with the
legislature. The United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) continues to advocate for broader agreement
among major stakeholders, including the executive,
on the scope and timeline of constitutional reform.
The Committee's civic education activities faced
severe delays, causing their public consultations to
be conducted largely in parallel with civic education.
A national conference to validate constitutional
amendment proposals ahead of their submission to
the President is planned for April. Should this also
be delayed, the mid-2014 target for submitting these
proposals may be difficult to meet. On the other hand,
pushing the pace in order to meet these timelines could
risk compromising the quality of public consultations
and miss the opportunity to incorporate the public's
views.

The Government also took further steps towards
implementing its decentralization policy. Efforts
towards deconcentrating 12 ministries and agencies
continued, with greatest progress in critical service
areas, such as health and education, where both
ministries have established county boards and devolved
some monetary resources and decision-making. The
Governance Commission is attentive to UNMIL and
donor partner concerns about weak coordination in the
overall deconcentration process. A local Government
act, calling for the election of local officials and other
critical measures for effective decentralization, has
been drafted and is now with the President, although
the current version would require constitutional
amendment for its implementation.

These reforms are fundamental for the country's
future, more inclusive, character, which also links
them to national reconciliation. With the National
Reconciliation Road Map giving structure to the
process, and with the Peacebuilding Fund having
allocated $15 million to reconciliation initiatives, some
progress has been made. The Palava Hut initiative
was launched in October, but discussions around
methodology continue, and actual implementation has
not yet begun. A national history project and a review
of national symbols have both been launched, although
their implementation has been slow. The Government's
contribution to the implementation of the Road Map has
been limited, with most successes being in those areas
receiving funds from the international community.

Let me turn now to two broad areas central to
continued stability: issues of accountability and
transparency, and issues of justice and security.

There have been some recent efforts to
secure greater public accountability. The Liberia
Anti-Corruption Commission has begun investigating
bribery allegations made against a former legislator
and an official of the National Oil Company of Liberia.
Also, last month six former senior officials of the
Forestry Development Authority were indicted on
charges of economic sabotage and criminal conspiracy
related to the fraudulent issuance of timber private use
permits for commercial logging on 2.5 million hectares
of land. The Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy
also completed a draft mine and mineral act, calling
for benefits-sharing with communities. The Liberia
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative has done
important work in conducting post-contract award
process audits and strengthening the sanctions regime
for non-compliant companies and the Government.
These developments are positive, and I cannot overstate
the importance of greater accountability, transparency
and consultation with communities in Liberia's valuable
natural-resource sector.

Since last month, the Armed Forces of Liberia have
been led by a Liberian for the first time since the war.
There was palpable jubilation in the streets and on the
airwaves at the appointment of Brigadier General Daniel

D. Ziankhan. As the Council is well aware, progress in
Liberia's security sector is critical to UNMIL's steady
military drawdown. The Liberia National Police (LNP),
bearing the greatest burden of the security transition,
has been hard pressed to cope. Complicated budgetary
procedures and its own weak capacity for financial
management have limited the ability of the police to
administer even small allocations. I want to highlight
some important commitments the Government made at
the start of this year that are expected to give a boost to
the security sector.

The first is the personal engagement of the Minister
of Finance. In February, the Minister took steps to
ease the complicated requirements for disbursement
of transition-related funds to the police, immigration
service and other agencies. This will alleviate the
paralysis at the police training academy, which has over
1,000 recruits waiting to start training. These funds will
also help to resource urgent operational requirements
related to the security transition. UNMIL applauds
the Minister's continued involvement, which has also
addressed critical needs at the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization.

The second is the President's own commitment to
activating more training resources and the better use
of facilities. With partners, the United Nations has
supported the fast-tracking of management training for
officers of the LNP and the Bureau of Immigration and
Naturalization at the Ghana Institute of Management
and Public Administration. Together with the Bureau
of Immigration and Naturalization, UNMIL is
also supporting the conversion of former UNMIL
facilities in Foya, Lofa county, into a new immigration
training centre. However, more needs to be done to
operationalize the LNP regional training centre in
Harper, and to make better use of training facilities at
the justice and security hub in Gbarnga. The President
has also committed to achieving a better balance in the
2014-2015 national budget between infrastructure and
national security, and to streamlining procedures for
financing recurrent costs.

There has been progress in a number of areas
within the security sector following a series of reviews
conducted last year. Most notable has been the baseline
assessment of the Liberia National Police, which has
informed a new LNP strategic plan and a joint LNP-
United Nations development framework that outlines
specific and targeted interventions to fill gaps, while
including a robust monitoring and evaluation system.
The framework is expected to be signed by the LNP and
UNMIL next week. A similarjoint baseline assessment
of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization will be
completed this year. Following a security sector reform
retreat in September, marked by frank discussion, the
National Security Council is overseeing preparation of
a new national security strategy. UNMIL will continue
to offer support through this process.

In June, UNMIL will complete the second phase
of its three-phase military drawdown endorsed by
the Council. As I speak, United Nations troops are
withdrawing from counties along the Sierra Leone
border to cover other areas, and another battalion is
being repatriated. At the conclusion ofthese movements,
half of Liberia's counties will be left without a fixed
United Nations military presence, with the remaining
battalions configured to provide coverage in Monrovia
and along the Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea borders, which
are also the country's most populated areas.

The joint transition planning process is an example
of exceptional collaboration between UNMIL and the
Government. The implementation of the first phase
highlighted deep institutional weaknesses and stringent
resource constraints. National institutions have begun
taking on security functions in areas no longer covered
by UNMIL, such as static guard duties at important
locations, including at the Monrovia Freeport and the
Central Bank. To achieve this, however, they have
spread existing capacity more thinly, and at times
diverted resources away from priority areas.

When planning began for this security transition,
the impending withdrawal of United Nations forces from
any county prompted public and Government anxiety.
The public discourse has shifted now to acknowledging
that UNMIL will not be staying forever. The coming
phases will need careful management. The detailedjoint
planning to date, Government and UNMIL dialogue
with communities, and the calibrated and gradual
phasing of the drawdown have been instrumental in
allaying concerns, while making clear the goals to be
reached by Liberia's security institutions.

An effective security sector needs to work with
a functioning criminal justice system that inspires
public trust, which remains extremely low in Liberia.
Some 75 per cent of the prison population is in pre-trial
detention, creating insecurity in overcrowded prisons,
while failure effectively to prosecute even serious
crimes promotes a culture of impunity. Many courts
in Liberia still fail to sit, and those that do address
a minute fraction of pending cases, with UNMIL
monitoring showing that, on average, only 8 per cent
of cases are fully tried. The first justice and security
hub is operational and has brought services to the
counties it covers. Based on lessons learned, services
are now slowly being rolled out in the second and third
hubs. Once hubs are established, it is the Government's
obligation to sustain their functioning.

Measures have also been taken to implement the
recommendations of last year's management and
accountability review of the police, judiciary and
prosecution, which were validated in November.
Among these is the drafting of a police act, which is
expected to address clear and merit-based recruitment
and promotion procedures within the police and issues
of police oversight. However, the disbarring of the
Minister of Justice for six months by the Supreme Court
in January has created additional challenges to gaining
momentum in justice and security sector reforms.

Meanwhile, there are encouraging parallel
developments that can also help to reduce conflict. Last
week I visited one of Liberia's six land coordination
centres, in Harper, Maryland county, and met with two
claimants who had been locked in decades of dispute
over their lands. The centre is working to resolve this
and to demarcate the properties. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund-supported alternative dispute
resolution mechanisms, such as the land coordination
centres, using trained staff, will remain important
and should receive significant international support
for the years to come. As the local head of the land
coordination centre explained to me, its mediation role
is free, also making it more attractive to users than the
justice system.

Since I last addressed this body (see S/PV.7029),
there has been steady progress towards durable
solutions for those who sought refuge in Liberia
in connection with the Ivorian post-election crisis.
Voluntary repatriations surpassed targets in 2013,
and in January and February of this year over 5,300
refugees returned to Cote d'Ivoire, with the assistance
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). However, in the early morning
hours of 17 February, the Government of Liberia,
a party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, forcibly returned a group of Ivorians,
including 14 refugees, to Cote D'Ivoire, in breach of
international law, in what appears to have been a closely
coordinated operation with the Ivorian Government. Six
ofthe refugees have since been returned to Liberia. The
Government has not been forthcoming with UNMIL as
to the nature of the operation.

Over 46,000 Ivorian refugees remain in Liberia, and
I am concerned that recent events, including an attack
in Cote d'Ivoire near the border on 23 February, may
have a chilling effect on returns. I am encouraged that
the two Governments, with UNHCR, plan to resume
the work of the Tripartite Commission on Humanitarian
and Refugee Issues at the ministerial-level meeting this
month. Despite a long period of calm, the situation
remains fragile along the Liberia/Cote d'Ivoire border.
Aside from their apparent security cooperation,
engagement between the two Governments on concrete
measures to stabilize the border has continued to be
overshadowed by other priorities, or hampered by
resource constraints.

With the closure of our sister mission in Sierra
Leone this month, we reflect on the stability that has
returned to West Africa and to Liberia's neighbours.
As we look ahead, we are conscious of regional and
national watershed events to come: presidential
elections in 2015 in Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire, and in
2017 in Liberia. Much is at stake here, and stability and
confidence will need to be maintained. We are equally
conscious of the enormous pressures on United Nations
peacekeeping globally, with resources needed in
several countries simply to avert immediate bloodshed.
UNMIL is currently engaged in a comparative analysis
with the United Nations country team, on which we
expect to report at our next meeting. But the Council
should be under no illusion that the bulk of UNMIL
work can be assumed by anyone other than the
Government of Liberia itself. Continuing to manage
an appropriate exit strategy from Liberia, in whose
stability the international community has invested so
much, will remain a delicate challenge for UNMIL and
for the Council.

