Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere
congratulations to you and to your friendly country,
Sir, on Ukraine's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the current month. I would also like to
extend my congratulations to your predecessor,
Ambassador Sai'd Ben Mustapha, Permanent
Representative of Tunisia, and to the members of his
delegation for their superb stewardship of the Council
last month. I would also like to pay tribute to the new
members of the Council.

In beginning my remarks, I would like to
associate the Sudan's position of support with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Emirates.

Many months after the last open meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which took place last year, the
situation in occupied Palestine continues to worsen.
This is due to the fact that the occupying Power
continues to employ excessive use of military force
against innocent, unarmed Palestinians. The occupying
Power also continues to carry out its criminal plan to
tighten the blockade against Palestinian towns and
villages so as to strangle the Palestinian economy and
to subjugate and starve the Palestinian people. All
those efforts are first and foremost meant to isolate the
Palestinian people within the occupied territories and
to cut them off from the outside world, to destroy the
Palestinian economy and to undermine the
infrastructures of Palestine. This is in addition to the
declared measures aimed at changing the demographic
and geographic composition of the Palestinian
territories through the building of settlements, and
through measures taken in the Holy City of Jerusalem
with a view to creating new realities on the ground that
will be difficult to reverse in the future.

The primary responsibility for the rising death
toll among the innocent civilian Palestinian population
in occupied Palestine falls squarely on the Security
Council, which last December failed to adopt a draft
resolution calling for protecting the Palestinian
people - and especially women and children - from
the daily acts of aggression committed by the Israeli
occupation forces. The Council put forward untenable
justifications that cast doubt on its credibility before
world public opinion and that in fact confirmed the
Council's practice of double standards and its lack of
even-handedness. The Council gave the entire world
the impression that Israel was exempt from the
provisions and rules governing international peace and
security that, under the Charter of the United Nations,
are supposed to be upheld by the Security Council.

The daily criminal acts of aggression committed
by Israel against the Palestinian people, in addition to
its violations of resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council and of international
humanitarian law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, put this Council to a real and
major test. We therefore expect the Council to rise to
its level of responsibility by reconsidering its previous
position and moving forward in order to adopt effective
measures that would ensure an end to violence and to
the use of random force by the Israeli occupation
authorities against innocent Palestinian civilians and to
mandate the composition of an international force to
protect them.

Any failure by the Council to establish a
protection force to protect the Palestinians against daily
repressive measures by the occupying Power and to
monitor the situation in occupied Palestine would be
tantamount to backtracking by the Council from its
obligations as set forth in the Charter and would also
be tantamount to a protection of the aggressor and an
encouragement to that aggressor to further pursue the
daily acts of killing and torture against the Palestinian
people.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm what we
have said before this Council on previous occasions -
that the long-sought peace in the Middle East will not
be achieved as long as Israel persists in its expansionist
policies, its acts of oppression and aggression and its
efforts to Judaize Jerusalem. The only viable way to
bring about peace throughout the Middle East is to end
the Israeli occupation through a real commitment by
Israel to the land-for-peace formula. Israel must fully
comply with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), which constitute the foundation of the
peace process in the Middle East. For its part, Israel
has indeed moved backwards in this process by
disavowing its commitments and promises, in the
belief that it can achieve its full security at the expense
of the security of other parties.

