Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefings presented today by the Under-Secretary-
General for the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, Ms. Michele Coninsx. We are also grateful
for the activity report presented by the representative
of Kazakhstan, Ambassador Kairat Umarov, in his
capacity as Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

The scenarios in which terrorism operates today
have surpassed local and regional dimensions to
become a global problem. The threat of terrorism
and violent extremism constitutes one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community,
particularly because terrorist groups and organizations
have developed capacities for long-distance recruitment
through various methods and narratives.

In that context, the emergence of foreign terrorist
fighters has taken on particular significance, given that
those individuals travel to a State different from their
country of residence or nationality with the purpose
of committing, planning, preparing or participating
in terrorist acts and providing or receiving training to
commit such acts, including by taking part in various
internal conflicts. That phenomenon proves that
terrorism and violent extremism are not tied to any
specific nationality, religion, civilization or ethnic
group, and that any measures intended to confront
or prevent that phenomenon should not be based on
such criteria under any pretext. On that understanding
and in the face of such a serious transnational threat,
we believe that the response of the international
community must be global and must make effective use
of all of the means provided for by the Charter of the
United Nations.

It is important to make it very clear that foreign
terrorist fighters did not emerge suddenly. Rather,
they are the product of a process of ideological
radicalization, and once on the ground, of military
training. That terrible situation was made possible
by vacuums in Governments, the weakening of law
and order and of security forces, and the absence of
border controls, which were fostered to a large extent
by the implementation of regime-change policies,
interventionism and interference in the internal affairs
of other States.

More than three years following the unanimous
approval of resolution 2178 (2014), which proposes
parameters to confront the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters, we must question what progress and results have
been attained in tackling that problem. Undoubtedly,
the use ofnew communication technologies, such as the
Internet, has been one of the platforms through which
terrorist groups and organizations have managed to
disseminate their radical ideology and misinformation
in order to recruit fighters, in addition to generating
economic resources through smuggling and the illegal
sale of cultural and historical objects, among others,
the profits of which are legitimized through money-
laundering and the use of tax havens, which reduce or
eliminate controls, especially in the investment and
service sectors.

According to the study published in July by the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, entitled Enhancing
the Understanding of the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Phenomenon in Syria, the factors that have had the
greatest influence on people when they were recruited
are linked to their socioeconomic situation and their
vulnerability when exposed to promises of material and
personal benefits, as well as to ideological or religious
convictions. Those factors have motivated more than
30,000 fighters from more than 100 countries to move
to conflict zones since 2011, mainly in Syria and Iraq.
However, according to the twentieth report, submitted
in August by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has been decreasing,
while the number of people returning to their countries
of origin or moving from conflict zones to third
countries has increased.

In dealing with that situation, the international
community should orient its efforts towards a smooth
and effective exchange of information on those
individuals. That should involve both States and
international organizations, such as INTERPOL,
as no country or region is exempt from the potential
arrival of those individuals. By the same token, the
coordination of the work of the various Committees
and subsidiary organs of the Security Council
with that of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism is a fundamental task needed to prevent the
emergence of further threats to international peace and
security in the world. In the same vein, the effective
implementation of resolutions - such as resolution
2354 (2017) on narratives and methods to combat
terrorism - constitutes a useful tool for preventing and
combating extremist rhetoric.

We believe that the countries of origin of foreign
terrorist fighters should implement integration policies
aimed at avoiding situations in which social and
political isolation and precarious economic situations
generate the space for extremist ideologies to spread
and flourish. In that sense, all the efforts made by
regional and international organizations should focus
on a perspective of inclusion.

At the same time, all the efforts made by the Security
Council and our Organization aimed at eliminating
terrorism should count on the maximum support of all
Member States and must seek to bring to justice those
responsible for terrorist acts, so that they can be duly
investigated, prosecuted and punished. Finally, Bolivia
expresses its greatest support for the transparent and
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and we call on all States to
commit to the fight against that scourge.

