Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Nicaragua wishes to congratulate
Malaysia for its excellent stewardship of the Security
Council this month and for convening today's debate
on an issue as important as the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Nicaragua has always stressed the importance
of further progress towards total and complete
disarmament, including not only nuclear weapons but
also other conventional weapons of mass destruction,
the use of which violates the fundamental principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.

It is unjustifiable and unacceptable that, despite the
recent adoption of a new agenda for development for
the next 15 years, spending is increasing on the means
to develop, upgrade and test weapons of all kinds, while
every day less is being spent to promote the lives and
development of human beings. While millions ofpeople
are suffering the effects ofthe economic crisis, poverty,
hunger and disease, global military expenditures are
increasing at an astounding rate.

We would like to reaffirm Nicaragua's position of
peace and solidarity in favour of the non-proliferation
of all weapons of mass destruction. We affirm the role
of the General Assembly and its resolution 70/36 on
measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction. We firmly believe that the only
guarantee for preventing the use or threat of use of
weapons of mass destruction and their non-proliferation
to non-State actors is the total and complete elimination
of nuclear weapons. Our urgent wish and priority is to
have a world free of nuclear weapons. We welcome and
celebrate the date of 26 September as the International
Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
and the efforts that truly contribute to that end.
We also reaffirm that all efforts to ensure nuclear
non-proliferation must go hand in hand with nuclear
disarmament efforts.

Nicaragua strongly believes that, by establishing
nuclear-weapon-free zones, the non-proliferation
regime will be strengthened, with international peace
and security being an important contribution to the
achievement of nuclear disarmament. We recall the
crucial importance of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and the
Declaration of Latin America and the Caribbean as
a Zone of Peace. In that regard, we regret the failure
in 2012 to hold an international conference for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
We reiterate that such a conference is an important and
integral part of the final outcome of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We urge the parties to hold
that conference as soon as possible.
Nicaragua attaches special importance to
compliance with the NPT as the only legally binding
instrument of international consensus in the global
system of non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of atomic energy. Nicaragua condemns
any use of chemical weapons or other weapons of mass
destruction and is firmly committed to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and to strict compliance with
its provisions.

We recognize the explicit political will of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to accede to
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the assistance
provided by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, which led to the successful
programme to achieve the destruction of all chemical
weapons in Syria and the completion of an extraordinary
plan under exceptional circumstances. Resolution
1540 (2004), unanimously adopted by the Security
Council, affirms that the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery constitutes a grave threat to international
peace and security. We should focus on improving its
implementation so as to bring about, above all, greater
assistance and cooperation among States. It is vital to
respect the nature, integrity and objectives of resolution
1540 (2004) and its methods, which were designed to
achieve positive results.

Nicaraguarejectstheuse ofdouble standardsbysome
countries that claim to be in favour of the eradication of
terrorism and support the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and of biological and chemical
weapons to non-State actors, while at the same time
they undertake warlike acts, on the pretext of a war
against terrorism, and/or campaigns geared towards
toppling legitimate Governments, as well as picking on
specific countries for purely political interests. At the
same time, they ignore the nuclear capacities of other
States. The proof of this is the military doctrine of the
NATO countries to use nuclear weapons as a security
policy, which remains intact. While they threaten with
their missiles, they are also developing new strategies
to be able to place them in outer space.

We have often highlighted the deadlock in the
disarmament machinery. Nevertheless, we must be able
to resolve the real problem: the actual political will of
certain States to make real progress, in particular when
it comes to nuclear disarmament.

