Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru welcomes the convening of the quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle East. We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their very comprehensive briefings. We have been following events surrounding the question of Palestine with deep concern. The rigidity of positions, the absence of dialogue between the parties and the constant occurrence of violent episodes have led to a stagnation in the peace process. The current scenario is unsustainable and destabilizing for the Middle East and for the international community. We are alarmed that the prospects of a political solution appear increasingly distant and that unilateral decisions and actions or announcements thereof may result in further escalations of violence. Peru, guided by its commitment to multilateralism, international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes, supports the two-State solution, with internationally recognized and secure borders based on the pre-1967 lines, to be negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine. Such negotiations must also determine the final status of Jerusalem. We therefore encourage the political and religious leaders of Israel and Palestine, and all those with capacity to influence, to act responsibly and to promote the re-establishment of a high-level dialogue that will allow both peoples and the Middle East as a whole to advance towards sustainable peace. That will involve, inter alia, compliance with the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular, we deem it a matter of urgency to put an end to the growing practice of settlement-building, the demolition of property and evictions in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. Such practices undermine the two-State solution and contravene the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). We also underscore the urgent need to address, immediately and in parallel, the serious humanitarian crisis affecting the Palestinian population, which has been aggravated in recent years by financing cuts to aid programmes. To overcome this complex reality, we consider it essential to address its root causes, particularly the lack of basic goods and services and employment, as well as the isolation to which millions of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are subjected. The current situation provides fertile ground for those who promote violence and extremism. In that regard, we encourage the continuation of infrastructure and development projects and the promotion of efforts aimed at enabling the Palestinian Authority to resume effective control of the area and ensuring that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East enjoys stable and predictable funding. Given the extremely delicate situation in the Persian Gulf, we echo timely calls for the leaders of the key actors concerned to demonstrate tangible signs of moderation, commitment to peace and respect for international law and the Charter of the United Nations. All differences must be channelled through the political and diplomatic track and never a military option. We take this opportunity to urge the Iranian authorities to reverse measures aimed at reducing their obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is acentral instrument for the preservation of the non-proliferation regime and for regional and global stability. We also appeal for a careful assessment of the imposition of any new national sanctions, due to their implications for Iranian civilians and their potential to exacerbate current tensions and furthererode trust. Against that backdrop, the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, is particularly pertinent.
