Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in thanking today's briefers for their updates on the
situation in Burundi.

We welcome the efforts and dedication of former
PresidentBenjamin Mkapa in support ofthe EastAfrican
Community-led intra-Burundi dialogue. We now look
to the East African Community and the Government
of Burundi to take that work forward. We very much
encourage the region to remain engaged. We think that
the support of the region is vital to stability in Burundi.
I would just like to say that I listened very carefully to
what some colleagues have said about this. I would say
to them that we should of course not overstate the risks,
nor can we understate them. No member of the Council
should need reminding of the terrible consequences of
inter-ethnic tension that we have seen in the region in
the past. The East African Community and the African
Union are engaged because stability is at risk. As I have
said, we should not overstate the risks, nor should we
understate them as we consider this issue.

Credible, free and fair elections in 2020 are crucial
to peace and prosperity in Burundi and across the
region. Parties must be allowed to campaign freely in
the run-up to the election. In that light, we welcome the
registration of political parties as a sign of the opening
of political space. We continue to salute the President's
decision not to stand in the 2020 elections. The United
Kingdom reiterates the African Union's call for the
Government of Burundi and the political parties in that
country to work together for the smooth conduct of the
next elections. We think that it would be helpful for
there to be engagement between the United Nations and
the Government of Burundi to inform any decisions on
how the United Nations could best support Burundi in
its electoral process.

The continued reports of human rights violations
are deeply concerning. As the November report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1028) makes clear,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights continued to receive allegations of
grave violations and abuses, including killings, forced
disappearances, ill-treatment, cases of arbitrary arrest
and detention and threats and restrictions on freedom
of association, expression and movement. It is therefore
extremely worrying that reporting has been restricted
by the Government of Burundi, which requested
the closure of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on 5 December. We
regret the closure of the Office, and we encourage the
Government of Burundi to continue talks with the
Resident Coordinator's team to determine how human
rights experts and officers can be attached to the
country team and can help to inform that important part
of the work. As Ambassador Lauber said in a statement
agreed by the Government of Burundi, among others,
human rights are a key part of peacebuilding. We do the
people of Burundi no service if we do not acknowledge
that or even mention it.

The run-up to the 2020 elections is a critical time
for Burundi. We all have talked about and welcomed
the current stability in Burundi, but failure to address
alleged human rights violations will threaten it, as will
the ongoing humanitarian crisis. With those elections in
mind, we believe that it is crucial that the region and the
international community remain seized of the situation.
We therefore believe that Burundi should remain on the
Council's agenda.

