Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Since elections were held in Haiti at the end of
last year, the Haitian Government has continued its efforts
to consolidate democratic rule and to resolve the various
economic, social and institutional problems that impede the
country's development. Through the formulation of
economic policies and strategies and institutional reforms,
the Government is attempting to respond to the demands of
a people anxious to improve their living conditions.

However, these measures are being adopted in an
atmosphere in which security is still relative, owing to
increasing crime and the widespread feeling among the
civilian population that once the presence of the United
Nations comes to an end in that country, groups or persons
linked to the former de facto regime will be able to
undertake destabilizing acts against the democratically
elected Government.

There is no doubt that economic recovery and the
consolidation of democratic institutions in Haiti require an
atmosphere of security and trust. The Government of
President Preval has quite justifiably expressed its concern
in that respect, as well as its desire for the continuation of
the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to ensure
stability and security while the necessary police officers are
trained.

Honduras believes that the international community
must continue to contribute to the consolidation of the
progress achieved by the Haitian people following the
restoration of democracy. Haiti needs a secure and stable
environment that allows the Government to carry out the
economic, institutional and judicial reforms it has
proposed, that makes it possible for the upcoming local
elections to go smoothly and that makes the country more
attractive for domestic and foreign investment.

The creation of these conditions is up to the
institution responsible for maintaining order and security
in Haiti: the Haitian National Police. However, that
institution has serious limitations preventing it from fully
carrying out its functions: it lacks competent high-ranking
officers, coordination, training and equipment. In such a
situation it is not advisable to withdraw the military and
police personnel provided by the United Nations to
support the Haitian National Police. On the contrary: it is
necessary to continue that assistance so that Haiti can
have a professional police force that is of appropriate size
and is completely in step with the objectives of
consolidating democracy and revitalizing the judicial
system.
The Haitian Government has already decided to
establish a professional police force that promotes the rule
of law and respect for human rights in Haiti. To that end,
there is a programme of activities aimed at promoting the
force's development in terms of training, infrastructure,
logistics, management and operations. Honduras believes
that the international community must help the people and
the Government of Haiti achieve that objective, and
therefore resolutely supports the establishment of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti with the mandate
and composition set out in the draft resolution the Council
is about to adopt, and in favour of which my delegation
will vote.

My delegation is aware that Haiti is in difficult
economic straits, with low growth and high
unemployment. The Haitian Government will also face
many social problems, solutions for which must be found
in order not to imperil the achievements already made.
We believe that the efforts of President Preval and his
Government to consolidate democracy, ensure strict
respect for human rights and bring about Haiti's
development must be firmly supported by the
international community. In this regard, we acknowledge
the efforts of the United Nations system to speed up
Haiti's economic growth, protect its environment and
strengthen its national institutions. In addition, we urge

 

the international financial institutions to increase their aid
to Haiti so that it can solve its socio-economic problems
and thus ensure the existence of the state of law and the
politics of national reconciliation that began with the return
to constitutional order.

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to the
Governments of the United States and Canada for the
voluntary contributions they have pledged to this operation
for peace.

