The President: The next speaker is the
representative of El Salvador. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Castaneda-Cornejo (El Salvador)
(interpretation from Spanish): My delegation appreciates
the invitation to participate in this meeting of the Security
Council, which you, Sir, have wisely convened, to debate
the important humanitarian issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Canada has always
distinguished itself by an honourable, consistent and
outstanding involvement in United Nations efforts to
achieve international peace and security, in particular by
its humanitarian devotion to alleviating the suffering of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. Your own
diplomatic work, Sir, confirms this.

This meeting to discuss the subject of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict is of great significance to
the international community. It makes it possible to study
the mutual interrelationship between the political action of
the Security Council and the work of humanitarian
assistance personnel to protect and assist civilians in
armed conflict.

We support the valuable views expressed by Mr.
Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross; Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund; and Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict

 

during the meeting held by the Security Council on 12
February 1999. We also endorse and support the important
presidential statement issued on behalf of the members of
the Security Council on that same date, which expresses the
political interest of the international community in adopting
concrete measures to put an end to the practice of
committing violence against civilians in armed conflict.

We note with concern a trend towards the targeting of
military action by parties to a conflict on the civilian
population, in particular its most vulnerable groups:
children, women, the elderly, the sick, refugees or displaced
persons. This constitutes a clear and intolerable violation of
basic human rights and freedoms and of the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. It also
constitutes an obstacle to national and international efforts
to promote sustainable human development.

We consider it fundamental that all the parties
involved in an armed conflict ensure respect for the
principles and norms of international humanitarian law, a
prerequisite for the process of finding peaceful solutions to
armed conflicts.

In this respect, we believe it is appropriate to highlight
the following aspects derived from El Salvador's
experience.

It is important that the parties to a conflict strictly
observe these principles and basic norms for the protection
of the civilian population.

The parties involved must have the political will to
recognize the need to respect and apply the provisions of
the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, as well of the Additional
Protocol II, adopted in 1977.

Agreements for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms among the parties
directly involved in an armed conflict must be adopted, thus
ensuring respect for the non-combatant civilian population.

In the case of El Salvador, the signing of the San J ose
Agreement on Human Rights before the cessation of the
armed conflict by the Government of El Salvador and the
Farabundo Marti national liberation front on 26 July 1990
was respected by both parties. The adoption of ceasefire
agreements that were respected by the parties involved,
before the final Peace Accords were reached, made it
possible to conduct humanitarian relief activities to provide
support and care for the population, including in the zones
of conflict. In El Salvador the ceasefire agreements, made
it possible, for example, to develop infant vaccination
days conducted by the Government in cooperation with
the United Nations Children's Fund. The success of these
programmes would not have been possible without the
respect for international humanitarian law and the direct
and indirect cooperation of the parties to the conflict,
which in practice shared common areas of mutual respect,
to the benefit of the civilian population and the national
and international non-governmental humanitarian
assistance organizations, particularly the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

Lastly, there was the signing of the Peace Accords
themselves, which complemented the initial agreements
and which were the real expression of the will of the
parties to the conflict to find a negotiated, lasting
permanent political solution to the Salvadoran crisis.

We also consider it important to promote a culture
of peace through education in all its dimensions and in all
of its scope as a strategic measure to complement national
and international efforts to promote a solution to armed
conflict through dialogue and negotiation. There is a need
for a concerted global effort of education and training,
which must be supported by the United Nations in order
to provide the population at all levels with a greater
capacity for dialogue, tolerance and respect for human
rights.

We also believe that in connection with the
protection of the civilian population, particularly children,
in an armed conflict, it is vital to see to it that the parties
to a conflict pledge to respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law and, more specifically,
those of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. They
must also take complementary actions, such as putting an
end to the practice of using children as soldiers,
promoting universal recognition of the minimum age of
18 for recruitment, and speeding the demobilization of
children that are now participating in armed conflicts.

The elimination of impunity for war crimes, in
particular as regards crimes committed against children
and the non-combatant civilian population, as established
in the Statute of the International Criminal Court adopted
at the 1998 Rome Diplomatic Conference, also deserves
our support on the subject before us.

 

In conclusion, we consider it relevant to emphasize the
importance of integrating the efforts of the Security Council
in the protection of civilians in armed conflict with the
actions taken by the Economic and Social Council for the
promotion of sustainable human development, since the
latter actions are geared towards promoting the eradication
of the main causes of these conflicts, such as extreme
poverty, discrimination, displacement and marginalization.
Strengthening of cooperation and the coordination of these
principal organs of the United Nations with humanitarian
assistance personnel also makes it possible to develop more
effective, better coordinated action for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

The President: I thank the representative of El
Salvador for his kind words addressed to me and to my
country. I invite him to resume the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Chamber.

(spoke in French)

The last speaker inscribed on my list for this morning
is the representative of Haiti. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


