Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Over the past
month, Madam President, you have led us with
wisdom, skill and determination. You have brought
your prodigious qualities to your responsibilities, and
they have also been reflected in your remarks today.
You deserve high praise. We also pay tribute to
Ambassador Ward and others in your mission for their
splendid work; truly, it has been a great presidency.

The circulation of your paper setting out the
objectives for the month was a useful innovation. It
enabled the Council to focus on the issues to be
followed during the month. This paper has now
emerged as a point of reference as we assess our
performance throughout November and as we reflect
on the follow-up. This month has witnessed the
adoption of a number of landmark resolutions. Much
credit for that fact is owed to your innovative exercise.
You set for us a dozen objectives. Let me flag some
that we believe to be key.

On the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the ministerial meeting with the Lusaka
parties was marked by a significant breakthrough: the
commitment of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie to demilitarize Kisangani. The Council will
have to pursue that long-sought objective. Resolution
1304 (2000) remains, essentially, on paper only. Let us
pursue implementation of resolution 1376 (2001)
through all means. If need be, the Council should step
up pressure on the parties to facilitate the phase III
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Some progress has been achieved with regard to
the operation of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea. Nonetheless, the peace process is
threatened by the mounting hostility between Addis
Ababa and Asmara. The violation of the demilitarized
zone is one of a number of negative developments. We
should seek the advice of the Secretary-General on a
possible course of action; perhaps a Council mission to
the area would help calm the situation.

Now I would like to refer to Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has, naturally, dominated our agenda
throughout the month. The United Nations has assumed
the central role that the General Assembly
recommended. Without any prejudice to ongoing
efforts, let me in this connection raise the issue of the
United Nations peacekeeping capacity. Our heads of
State and Government made a solemn commitment in
this regard last year. The reality is that the Council's
role in Afghanistan remains limited. Once again, the
capacity of the United Nations to respond quickly in a
conflict situation remains in question. The
responsibility had to be assumed by a coalition of the
willing. The developments on the ground far outpaced
the preparedness of the United Nations to rapidly put in
place a peacekeeping operation.

This brings me to the thematic and operational
issue of peacekeeping operations. My delegation
appreciates the time allotted by your presidency,
Madam, to the Working Group. However, I understand
that there is lack of consensus on a favourable response
to the proposal of the troop-contributing countries for
setting up mission-specific committees.
It would be unfortunate if the Council were to
retract the commitment it made in its recent
presidential statements and resolutions. Let me make
one point clear - and I am speaking for the largest
troop-contributing country. Bangladesh strongly
endorses the draft note presented by Ambassador Ward
as Chairman of the Working Group. Resolution 1353
(2001) recognized partnership with the troop-
contributing countries. We, as troop-contributing
countries - contributors of formed units - have a
high stake in the missions concerned. We are seeking
an institutional framework to foster this partnership.
The troop-contributing countries, in asking for the
framework, are seeking one shared objective - that is,
doing right by peacekeeping.

My final point involves the relationship between
the Chamber and the world beyond. The Council is
primarily responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security, although that is not its exclusive
responsibility. We need a partnership with a broader
United Nations membership - the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and other
stakeholders, including the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Within the United Nations
system this could and, indeed, should be done within
the ambit of the Charter, as has been remarked.

A way to engage the outside world is, perhaps, to
have increased recourse to public meetings. We must
make ourselves relevant to the rest of the world. The
Council must be brought out of the consultation room.
In emphasizing this point, I refer to the discussion on
the matter in January this year, under Ambassador
Mahbubani's presidency. Greater transparency in our
work is essential if we want the world to hear us and
listen - I echo some of the sentiments of Ambassador
Greenstock today. But how do we go about that? Would
unscripted deliberations make the Council's work more
interactive? Should we cease to restate our national
positions only in formal statements? The right answers
to these queries could render our performance more
rewarding.

We need to explore ways and means for
substantive dialogue with the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, as well as with the
other funds and programmes. Sir Jeremy's initiative for
joint meetings with the Economic and Social Council
should be pursued.

The Arria-formula meetings have been used
fruitfully. This has particularly assisted in discussions
with the NGOs. The Council should arrange for regular
exchange of information and views with humanitarian
and human rights non-governmental actors, as well as
those associated with gender mainstreaming. Such
partners as those have unsurpassed outreach. We
should also relate more widely to the think tanks. All
of us keenly profited from yesterday's conference. The
initiative, coming after the forum on regional
approaches sponsored by Ambassador Valdivieso, set a
very positive trend.

On a personal note, I would like to say that I am
the newest kid on the block. But I was fortunate
enough to receive my initiation during the period of
your stewardship, Madam. Some days ago, in this
Chamber, Olara Otunnu gave a rendition of a song by
Bob Marley. Today, with the torch passing to Mali, but
in the full knowledge that your contribution will
continue, let me cite another great singer closely
associated with your country, Harry Belafonte, and say,
"Jamaica, farewell".

