Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Your presence in the Council
today, Sir, demonstrates the importance that the United
Kingdom accords to the search for peace and security in
Somalia. We welcome the Prime Minister Sharmarke of
Somalia to the Security Council, and thank him for his
statement. We deeply appreciate the statements of our
briefers. We thank Mr. Nicholas Kay for his resilience,
Ambassador Te'te Antonio for his determination and
Ms. Susana Malcorra for her commitment.

Somalia has made significant progress in its post-
conflict recovery. That seems to be the consensus
around the table. The formation of federal states and
the creation and consolidation of regional Interim
Administrations are eloquent examples of that
progress. We also see encouraging developments in the
establishment of key mission-building institutions, in
particular the Boundaries and Federation Commission.
We believe that these building blocks are essential to
the realization of efficient and stable federalism in
Somalia.

The conduct of nationwide elections will serve
to consolidate that federalist approach. We urge the
Somali Government and other stakeholders to commit
to an inclusive, legitimate and peaceful process in
the conduct of the 2016 elections. The composition of
the National Independent Electoral Commission and
the appointment of the chairperson are significant
developments. It is essential that the Commission be
sufficiently equipped and empowered to successfully
prepare and manage the 2016 electoral process.

The current attacks by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group continue to pose a threat not only to Somalia,
but indeed to the entire region. We commend the
determination and courage ofthe African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army
in fighting Al-Shabaab, and we express are unwavering
support for the ongoing Operation Juba Corridor. We
welcome the recent African Union-United Nations
harmonized concept of operations for AMISOM. We
hope that it will enhance United Nations support to
AMISOM. and political process in Somalia.

It is crucial that the military gains recorded by the
joint operations of AMISOM. and the Somali National
Army against Al-Shabaab be consolidated to forestall
a resurgence of the group. We believe that this can be
best achieved by a coordinated stabilization strategy.
The formation and operation of functional caretaker
administrations in the newly recovered districts must
remain a priority in order to avoid the creation of a
vacuum that could be exploited by terrorists.

Security sector reform (S SR) is an important vehicle
for supporting the security and safety of the State and
indeed the Somali people. In that regard, we take note
of the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to
build a more integrated and accountable security sector.
The development of effective and accountable security
sector institutions would significantly benefit the
process of stabilization in Somalia. If those strategies
are to produce tangible outcomes, attention must be
paid to the development of a Somalia national security
architecture and other SSR initiatives.

On the economic front, we acknowledge the efforts
of the Federal Government to promote sustainable
economic development in Somalia through a national
development plan based on the New Deal Compact.
We welcome the recent International Monetary Fund
article iv consultation mission in Somalia, described in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/702) as the first
in 25 years. It is our expectation that this will facilitate
the country's access not only to concessional lending,
but especially its debt forgiveness process.

Still on economic issues, we commend the World
Bank for its support to the development of the Somali
power sector and other measures the Bank has taken
to enhance job creation and private investment in the
country. We also commend the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for its support to the
Somali agricultural sector, including the vaccination of
14 million livestock.

With regard to health care, we welcome the
adoption in June of the Somali National Health Policy.
We acknowledge the progress made in service delivery
across Somalia with essential health services now
reaching over 4.2 million people.

Concerning the education sector, we are pleased
to note that, in June, over 7,000 students took the
first centralized examination for students completing
secondary school since 1991. This is a major achievement
for which we commend the Somali authorities. We urge
donors to field the funding gap that is hampering the
provision of non-formal training to overage children.
The more young Somalis can be productively engaged,
the better it will be for social stability in the country.

Resolution 2245 (2015), which the Council
unanimously adopted today, will significantly enhance
the capacity of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the successor to the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia. This
is critical for effective operations by AMISOM. and the
Somali National Army.

As the leaders of Somalia and all people of good
will steadily and stridently reassemble the elements and
ingredients of national power, we must all sustain the
momentum. We commend the leaders of Somalia for
their commitment to reducing the threats to peace and
security in their country. We acknowledge their efforts
to comply with relevant Security Council resolutions.
We encourage the Government and all stakeholders
to remain focused on the task ahead. Our collective
aspiration is to see in the very near future a peaceful,
stable, prosperous, federalist, democratic and united
Somalia.

