Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia welcomes
the Secretary-General's focus on prevention. It is
undoubtedly the best long-term strategy for protecting
civilians. However, where such efforts fail, the
protection of civilians must remain our highest priority.
The reason is obvious. Already in 2017, we have
witnessed frequent, direct, as well as indiscriminate,
attacks against civilians. We have witnessed the
arbitrary denial of consent to humanitarian access. We
have witnessed utter contempt for human rights. We
have witnessed such behaviour in conflicts around the
world, including in South Sudan and Yemen, but most
especially in Syria.

In line with what others have said today, Australia
is particularly alarmed by the frequency, severity and
deliberate nature of attacks against health care. Today's
briefers, like those who have presented before them,
have painted a heartbreaking picture of realities on the
ground and have provided dire warnings about the risks
of failing to implement resolution 2286 (2016) in full.
For that reason, we commit to doing our part to translate
resolution 2286 (2016) from rhetoric into action.

We applaud the Secretary-General's statement that
he will facilitate a global effort to mobilize Member
States, civil society and other stakeholders in order to
enhance respect for international humanitarian law.
We are in full agreement that that must, as a priority,
include responding to serious violations, including by
holding perpetrators to account.
For good reason, the scorecard of the United
Nations on the protection of civilians is one of the
litmus tests of the Organization's effectiveness and,
frankly, its credibility. Australia therefore expects the
members of this Council to support timely and decisive
action aimed at preventing or ending the commission
of mass atrocities, consistent with the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group's Code of Conduct,
as well as with the French and Mexican initiative on
veto restraint.

United Nations peacekeeping operations that
have been given a protection mandate must prioritize
implementation. Despite the significant growth of
the protection-of-civilians doctrine and guidance,
performance across peacekeeping operations remains
mixed. The High-Level Panel on Peace Operations
emphasised that protection mandates must be a
mission-wide task that utilizes every tool at a given
mission's disposal, including non-traditional strategies,
such as unarmed civilian protection. The Independent
Special Investigation into South Sudan stressed the
importance of a forward-leaning, highly mobile
posture, including conducting robust, dismounted,
day-and-night patrolling. All peacekeepers must be
empowered and supported by both the United Nations
and the troop- and police-contributing countries to act
in accordance with their protection responsibilities.

To assist in such efforts, Australia has provided
support to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to disseminate guidelines and policies on the protection
of civilians. We have also endorsed the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians, which we consider
provide useful guidance to peacekeepers.

In closing, let me pay tribute to those in the field
trying to provide protection to civilians, often at great
risk to themselves. Together with those whom they are
trying to protect, those brave men and women deserve,
at the very least, our respect and protection.

