Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Since this is the last public meeting
of your country's presidency of the Security Council,
Sir, my delegation wishes to thank your delegation. It
was an honour to have your Foreign Minister participate
throughout the month. The debates that you organized
had a great impact. I truly congratulate you. It was
the second Council presidency in 2019 that was led
in Spanish. As a result, many ambassadors have now
learned the language.

We would first like to thank Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener for her detailed briefing on the situation in
Myanmar and the latest developments on the ground.

The Rohingya crisis continues to affect nearly
1 million refugees in Bangladesh and the remaining
Muslim Rohingyas in Rakhine state, who suffer from
segregation and limited access to essential services.
Ethnic conflicts are on the rise, the peace process is
on the verge of collapse and insecurity has intensified,
creating opportunities for armed groups to engage
in illicit drug production and human trafficking.
This human catastrophe on both sides of the border
represents a threat to international peace and security
and has generated numerous situations that require the
immediate attention of the international community.

In that regard, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its strong condemnation of the serious human rights
violations and horrendous crimes that have affected
the Rohingya community in Myanmar and recognizes
the Council's responsibility to address the crisis and
respond appropriately to it. The Council to date has
addressed this issue on several occasions and in different
formats. However, there are no clear indications of a
sustainable and lasting solution that would allow the
Rohingyas a dignified, secure and voluntary return to
their territories.

According to published data, the current displaced
and refugee population totals nearly 1 million people.
The displacement has been generated by what is
described as ethnic cleansing, genocide and atrocity
crimes. Such strong and regrettable descriptions
require action commensurate with their severity. The
Security Council seems paralysed and inert, but the
time has come for us to mobilize and act to prevent
further atrocities, protect vulnerable populations and
ensure that perpetrators are held accountable for their
actions. However, collective responsibility begins with
individual responsibility.

It is also time for the Government of Myanmar
to assume its responsibility to protect its citizens on
its territory. We urgently call upon the Government
to implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which include,
among other issues, the implementation of strategies
for socioeconomic development, citizenship,
freedom of movement, community participation and
representation, intercommunal cohesion and the
security of all communities.

It is also essential to fully comply with the
memorandum of understanding, which will allow
Rohingya communities a dignified and sustainable
return that adheres to human rights standards and will
ensure unrestricted access of humanitarian assistance
to all displaced people. That will enable us to effectively
mitigate the impact of this regrettable human and
humanitarian crisis. The responsibility to ensure the
dignified return of refugees lies with the Government of
Myanmar, which must create the necessary conditions
for the return of refugees with the cooperation of
the international community, particularly United
Nations agencies. We must remember that a solution is
possible and that we must prevent a repetition of the
failures of the past. Human rights and humanitarian
principles cannot be applied selectively, watered down
or disregarded.

I would now like to refer to another aspect of
this crisis - the attribution of responsibilities for
perpetrators of atrocities committed against the
Rohingya population. There has been no type of
investigation to date or access allowed for fact-finding.
Access for the Special Rapporteur has been rescinded
and journalists have been arrested for investigating and
verifying crimes committed. In short, there has been no
process of accountability.

Above all, we are concerned about the victims of
gender-based violence, the degrading and cruel acts of
sexual assault that have been committed against women
and girls. Those levels ofbrutality and violence indicate
a clear trend of using those crimes as a strategy to
intimidate and punish the civil population. We urgently
call for the launching of relevant investigations to
identify those responsible for those horrendous acts,
so that they are brought to justice and we can avoid
a situation of impunity with regard to these atrocity
crimes, which constitute a serious violation of human
rights and international law. It is imperative that
significant actions be taken for these purposes.

According to the report of the United Nations
fact-finding mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64), the
judicial system in Myanmar cannot conduct a just and
independent investigation -a process that undoubtedly
will have to be led by the international community. All
options should be considered, including a referral to
the International Criminal Court. It is imperative that
a clear signal be sent to other Governments that might
be tempted to follow that path of military brutality and
violation of rights.

The Council must assume its responsibility and
agree to a constructive and coordinated process
and use all the tools at its disposal in the interest of
achieving tangible progress and a lasting settlement of
this crisis, a process that links with the Government
of Myanmar and with continued support for a process
of accountability. That link is essential. The isolation
of the Government does not produce positive effects in
the eradication of the root causes of this crisis. On the
contrary, it could exacerbate the underlying factors of
the crisis.

Last but not least, the Dominican Republic would
like to acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Bangladesh. We call on the international
community, especially Council members, to continue
to support Bangladesh in that task.

Myanmar is a cruel reality that represents an
affront to the international community, which, because
of a lack of consensus, to date has not taken action.
The Rohingyas, the entire population of Myanmar and
the whole world is watching us. The time for action
has arrived.

