Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Can I respond
immediately by thanking you, Madame President, and
Prime Minister Gusmao and others who have expressed
their sympathy over the earthquake that occurred about
24 hours ago. Dawn is just now breaking in
Christchurch and it will only be then that we can see
the true extent of what is unquestionably a national
tragedy. I thank you for your sympathy.

I want to thank Prime Minister Gusmao and
Special Representative Haq for their statements, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/32).

I want to acknowledge with deep respect the
Prime Minister's lifetime of effort to provide Timorese
with a path to a safer and more prosperous future, and
in particular his leadership in nation-building over the
past decade. It is an honour to have him join us today.

The Secretary-General's latest report paints a
positive picture of progress over the past year, with the
security situation more calm and stable and the country
more prosperous than at any time since independence.
The impressive commitment to democratic and
constitutional norms across the political spectrum and
the willingness to put long-term interests ahead of
short-term gains bode well for next year's elections.
Steady progress has been made in strengthening the
justice and corrections sectors and the various
institutions responsible for ensuring Government
accountability and respect for human rights. Strong
economic growth, together with targeted social
programmes, has delivered progress in addressing key
socio-economic challenges.

All of this is cause for optimism. But we cannot
be complacent. The next 18 months will test whether
the political and security climate can withstand the heat
of competitive democratic elections. It will also test the
readiness of core State institutions to sustain
themselves with reduced international support.

When we last met in October (see S/PV.6405),
there was broad recognition that Timor-Leste was
entering a new phase. A period that required a large
international presence to ensure security and support
core State institutions is now giving way to one in
which a confident and capable Government is
increasingly charting its own course and defining the
future form and scope of its international assistance.

After a decade focused on security and stability,
attention has now turned to longer-term challenges of
institutional development to achieve sustainable and
inclusive growth. Carefully and effectively managing
this must now be the Mission's overriding priority. The
transition process must be nationally owned and led,
with careful planning and sequencing of changes to the
international presence in order to minimize risks of
instability and disruption and with thoughtful
judgments regarding the transfer of specific Mission
functions and capacities to the Timorese Government.

New Zealand welcomes the early engagement
between Government and Mission leadership, notably
through the High-Level Committee on Transition and
its working groups. We applaud the Mission's work to
mitigate the economic impact of a future drawdown
and to prepare local staff for post-UNMIT
employment.

Nowhere will astute transition management be
more important than in the security sector. We are
pleased with progress made over the past year in
transferring executive policing authority to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) and at the Secretary-
General's advice that this process should be completed
in the coming months, as it will be a significant
milestone in the reconstitution of the Timorese security
sector following the 2006 crisis.

Following handover, work will remain to ensure
that PNTL administrative and operational capacities
are sufficiently robust for it to operate unassisted.
Little time remains before the PNTL will be asked to
do just that. We therefore welcome the establishment of
a process to agree priority measures to strengthen these
capacities within the National Strategic Development
Plan. All this requires close cooperation and
coordination between the Mission and the PNTL
leadership.

We also encourage early engagement with
potential bilateral and multilateral partners. We also
welcome assurances on early engagement with those
partners, focused on expectations of future donor
assistance to ensure they are realistic and clearly
signalled. For its part, New Zealand is considering
what bilateral assistance it can provide to the PNTL.
This is likely to be focused in the area of community
policing, building on the results and lessons learned
from our recent pilot programme within UNMIT.

As UNMIT's policing undergoes fundamental
change, so too must its size and composition. We
support the Secretary-General's proposal to reduce the
number of United Nations police, and are open to
further gradual reductions if consistent with the wishes
of the Government and realities on the ground. This
drawdown must be conducive to maintaining stability
in the lead-up to the 2012 elections and beyond, while
providing the PNTL the space to operate with greater
responsibility and autonomy.

The Mission must also be adequately equipped
with the skills necessary to carry out the complex
specialized tasks that now form its primary focus.
Civilian and non-civilian deployments should be
configured to effectively strengthen the human and
organizational capacities of State institutions. We urge
the early deployment of the 19 additional civilian
experts approved last year. We support the Secretary-
General's proposal that an independent assessment be
conducted of PNTL capabilities.

All of this requires that we ensure the PNTL's
long-term credibility and integrity. As an active and
committed partner, we share the concerns at the recent
certification of officers facing serious disciplinary and
criminal allegations. This is a matter only the
Government of Timor-Leste can resolve. While we
appreciate the challenges, it is only by demonstrating
that its personnel are as legally accountable as all other

citizens that the PNTL will become the trusted and
respected institution that Timor-Leste needs and
deserves. We support the Secretary-General's call for
early steps to address this issue.

Our immediate priority must be to ensure a
smooth transition and stable and credible elections next
year. It is also important to focus on Timor-Leste's
needs beyond 2012. That period is harder to visualize,
but we need to consider our respective roles in helping
Timor-Leste address its longer-term challenges. Recent
gains have been impressive but only concerted action
will address the needs of the 41 per cent of the
population still living below the poverty line. Urgent
challenges remain in terms of developing
infrastructure, addressing poverty and extending
essential basic services.

New Zealand looks forward to the launch in June
of the Government's National Strategic Development
Plan, which must be Timorese-led and form the
framework for future action by international partners.
As a long-term partner, New Zealand will align its
development assistance with the Plan's priorities.

New Zealand is proud of Timor-Leste's
considerable achievements over the past decade and
proud to call itself a neighbour, partner and friend of
this young country. The Secretary-General's report
suggests we are well on track to delivering a new
Timor-Leste. New Zealand is committed to working
with the Government and its international partners to
help Timor-Leste deliver on that promise.

