Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Mr. President, the
Netherlands joins you and other members of the Council in
welcoming Ms. Del Ponte and thanking her for her
informative briefing. It really goes without saying that we
support her, as we strongly support both the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

As was emphasized by Ms. Del Ponte and other
speakers, one of the main issues that the Council should
address is State non-compliance with article 29 of the
Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. The Netherlands has taken note of
President Kirk McDonald's letter of 2 November to the
President of the Security Council, including the shockingly
long list of reports in the annex to that letter.

In our view, the Tribunals play a particularly
important role in the maintenance of peace, justice and
reconciliation. They also serve as a trial ground where we
are learning important lessons for later use in the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. For the
Prosecutor to be truly independent, she must be able to
perform her duties without hindrance, relying on the full
support and cooperation of all States. In this respect, the
Netherlands regrets that certain States and entities have
consistently failed to meet their responsibility to cooperate
with the Tribunal.

Our obvious focus on the non-compliance of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose President has
been indicted by the Tribunal, should not diminish our
concern at Croatia's failure to comply with the request of
the Prosecutor to hand over documents on Operations
Flash and Storm. Although we acknowledge that Croatia
has a better record than the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Croatia should reconsider its position and
comply without delay. These matters cannot remain
unresolved.

Would Ms. Del Ponte be in a position to tell the
Council a little more about her discussions with the
Croatian authorities on this matter? Does the Government
of Croatia realize that this issue will not simply go away?
The Croatian insistence that Operations Flash and Storm
were legitimate is beside the point. What needs to be
investigated is whether crimes were committed during
these operations. No military action, no matter how
justified, is exempt from that scrutiny.

Finally, we would like to wish Ms. Del Ponte every
success in the performance of her duties.

