Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): The linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime are well
established in the Philippines. The Abu Sayyaf Group,
the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, the Maute
Group and Ansar al Khalifa, which have all declared
allegiance to the Islamic State, fund their operations
through criminal activities, mostly drug trafficking,
kidnapping, extortion and arms smuggling. They
initially cooperated with criminal organizations but
have since developed their own criminal networks,
which operate under the false rubric of freedom
struggles, covering themselves with the mantle of
victims of human rights and of religious conscience
violations whenever the State moves against them to
protect its citizens.

The Marawi siege of 2017 illustrates the symbiotic
relationship between terrorism and the illegal drug
trade. With drug money, terrorists gathered a motley
assortment of well-armed extremists, criminals,
mercenaries and foreign terrorist fighters to take control
of Marawi. Narco-politicians supported the local
terrorist groups with personnel, funds and firearms,
which helped to sustain the siege that followed the
Government's counteroffensive. Intensive military and
law enforcement operations allowed us to recapture
Marawi in six months, which was less than the six years
it took to recapture Raqqa.

Beyond law enforcement and military operations,
a comprehensive approach is needed to address the
linkages between terrorist organizations and organized
crime. On the political level, the Philippines now has
the Bangsamoro Organic Law, which gives autonomy to
Muslim Mindanao and is intended to end the decades-
long conflict in that region, which has been used by
the Abu Sayyaf and local terrorist groups as a freedom
struggle. It was anything but that. We are also amending
our Human Security Act to make it more responsive to
such linkages.
Drug trafficking offers a profitable illicit revenue
stream. The drug trade weakens social resistance and
corrupts a political response. It is known that local
terrorist group members are both narcotics distributors
or dealers and consumers. Shabu is frequently used for
recruitment and the shabu trade is primarily run by
organized criminal groups, illustrating the cooperation
between terrorist groups and local and transnational
criminal organizations. They learned the lesson of the
opium trade, whereby Britain subdued a once-proud
continent-sized country to its will. Our anti-drug
operations therefore target the trade.

Since money is the main driver of such linkages,
identifying and curtailing the sources of finance and
tracking its flow are essential. Financial intelligence
units, law enforcement agencies, the prosecution service
and local Government units must work together, share
information with one another and raise awareness. The
public sector, as appropriate, must also work closely
with the private sector. Intelligence gathering can be
more effective if agencies focus not only on terrorist
acts per se but more on the means that enable them.

At the subregional level, we conduct joint maritime
patrols with Malaysia and Indonesia over our tri-border
region of the southern Philippines, eastern Malaysia
and Sulawesi to strengthen border controls, especially
in the light of the Abu Sayyaf Group's trademark
transnational kidnap-for-ransom operations, which
took the life of the Netherlander Ewald Horn.

At the regional level, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations Comprehensive Plan of Action on
Counter-Terrorism provides for the establishment
of computerized shared databases on terrorist
organizations and their associations, as well as
transnational organized crime groups with possible
links to terrorist organizations, with a view to
developing a joint risk and threat assessment.

Here at the United Nations and at the international
level, more exchanges of best practices and capacity-
building are needed for law enforcement and financial
intelligence units. We recall that elements of the United
Nations counter-terrorism group came to us three weeks
before Marawi fell to warn us that the defeated Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the Middle East would
attempt to revive its caliphate in South-East Asia.

Our counter-terrorism efforts are anchored in
respecting human rights, because a State's first,
foremost and overriding responsibility is to protect
the law-abiding against the lawless and the innocent
against those threatening their safety and well-being.
To that responsibility, the President of the Philippines
has made an iron, unwavering and total commitment,
and he will not be deterred by criticism.

