Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): The
2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture, along
with the concurrent reviews of peace operations and
of resolution 1325 (2000), have enabled us to draw
important and complementary conclusions. Preventing
violent conflict and the achievement of sustainable
peace must remain at the forefront of our efforts in
the area of international peace and security. All three
reviews provide us with an important opportunity
to learn from years of experience and to reflect the
growing global consensus that peace, stability and
development are inextricably linked.

Canada believes that peacebuilding efforts must be
in line with and in support of that concept in order to
allow for better functioning at all stages of the conflict
cycle. Indeed, we see peacebuilding as encompassing
actions before, during and after conflict in order to
maintain peace. That means that conflict prevention,
including the prevention of the resurgence of a conflict,
must be at the core of our peacebuilding efforts. To that
end, it should be acknowledged that the root causes of
and solutions to conflicts are political in nature.

We commend the Advisory Group of Experts for
having clearly articulated that point and for making
constructive recommendations in that regard in its report
on the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture (see S/2015/490). It is now incumbent upon
Member States and organs of the United Nations to
adopt and implement reforms that will revitalize the
international community's ability to effectively prevent
and respond to instability and conflict.

(spoke in English)

Canada deeply appreciates and supports the
key elements of the draft resolution prepared by
co-facilitators Angola and Australia on the 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture. The draft
is substantive and ambitious, but realistic. We are
encouraged by the wide-ranging level of engagement
in this process to date and will continue to support the
co-facilitators' efforts and to engage constructively
with all Members. In particular, we wish to see
reforms that will improve United Nations operational
coherence, both in New York and in the field, enhance
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
conflict prevention and strengthen its efforts to advise
the Security Council.

On this last point, Canada's experience as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration on Sierra Leone has reinforced for us
that the PBC has a particular role and added value in
the design of mission mandates to ensure support for
longer-term peacebuilding objectives. In this instance,
the United Nations presence entailed a gradual
drawdown from an integrated peacekeeping mission
through different iterations of special political missions,
to graduation from the Security Council's agenda. At
the present time, the United Nations country team on
the ground is working in close collaboration with and
in support of the priorities of the Government of Sierra
Leone.

Canada urges the Council to remain engaged in
the ongoing peacebuilding review. Through close
cooperation between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, we remain confident that we can
operationalize concrete measures to enhance United
Nations and international responses to the threat of
violent conflict. Canada looks forward to continuing
such discussions.

