The Secretary-General: I have been invited to
address the Security Council on the tragic situation
in Aleppo. Since late November, we have seen Syrian
Government forces and their allies capture large
swathes of territory in eastern Aleppo. In the past
48 hours, we have seen an almost complete collapse of
the armed opposition's front lines, leaving them with
only 5 per cent of their original territory in the city.

That came about after levels of bombardment that
many witnesses describe as unprecedented. Civilian
deaths and injuries continue at a brutal pace as the
United Nations receives credible reports of scores of
civilians being killed either by intense bombardment
or summary executions by pro-Government forces. We
have seen shocking videos of a body burning in the
street, ostensibly after aerial bombardment. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has received reports of civilians, including
women and children, in four neighbourhoods being
rounded up and executed.

As front lines have shifted, civilians have fled
across dangerous routes, taking almost no belongings
with them. Many families have lost contact with their
families inside of eastern Aleppo, after they were
displaced or after they burned their SIM. cards and
devices for fear of facing repercussions if detained.
There have been allegations of young men being rounded
up and detained, or sent to fight for Government forces.
Tens of thousands have already been recorded flooding
into western Aleppo, but it is likely that many more
thousands who are not recorded or registered have been
displaced; but we have no accurate data.

Nor do we have accurate data about the number that
remain in the opposition-controlled pocket of eastern
Aleppo, because all of the health and governance
entities capable of counting the living and the dead
have effectively dissolved into the chaos. Moreover,
the Syrian authorities have systematically denied us
a presence on the ground to directly verify reports.
However, that does not mean that the reports that we
are receiving are not credible - we are confident that
civilians number in the thousands.

Meanwhile, yesterda the Russian Defence Ministry
reported that it had helped more than 100,000 civilians
leave eastern Aleppo neighbourhoods, including
40,484 children, and that it had supplied 78 tons of
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons.
It also reported that 2,215 militants had lain down
weapons and left eastern Aleppo, and that the Russian
military was continuing to demine eastern Aleppo
neighbourhoods and had completed the demining of
more than 31 hectares of urban structures, as well as 18
kilometres of roads.

The Russian Defence Ministry has also stated that
no opposition, humanitarian organizations or human
rights defenders are present in Aleppo and that eastern
Aleppo had been under the full control of terrorists.
It has also suggested that the estimate of 250,000
besieged civilians was overstated and has emphasized
that terrorists held over 100,000 civilians as human
shields in eastern Aleppo and left as soon as presented
with the opportunity to do so. The Russian Federation's
Reconciliation Centre has also reportedly registered
allegations of torture and execution, as described by
residents fleeing eastern Aleppo.

We understand that there are ongoing negotiations
between the parties for an evacuation deal, facilitated
by Russia and Turkey. We support those efforts and
stand ready to help implement and oversee such an
agreement, which we understand may now be imminent.
We remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law to prioritize the safe
passage of civilians out of eastern Aleppo and to ensure
that those who have surrendered or have been captured
are treated humanely and in line with international law.

The Security Council and Member States have
repeatedly emphasized the importance of early
warning and prevention as critical to addressing
the challenges of international peace and security.
There was an abundance of early warning given to
the Council regarding the situation in Aleppo. Most
notably, my Special Envoy repeatedly warned over
the past several months that eastern Aleppo could be
destroyed by the end of the year if urgent action were
not taken. He proposed concrete measures to address
concerns regarding the Al-Nusra Front without risking
unnecessary loss of life or destruction of parts of one
of the oldest continually inhabited cities in the world.

Inaddition,the GeneralAssemblyhasoverwhelmingly
voted to urge preventive action by the Council on
Aleppo. But when presented with opportunities to do
so over the past three months, the Council failed to do
it. Since September, the Security Council has failed to
adopt three draft resolutions that could have enabled a
humanitarian truce, the evacuation of civilians and the
entry of lifesaving aid.

I have said before that we have collectively failed
the people of Syria. The Security Council has not
exercised its pre-eminent responsibility with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
History will not easily absolve us, but that failure
compels us to do even more to offer the people of
Aleppo our solidarity at this moment.

The immediate task is to do all we can to stop the
carnage. As the battle for Aleppo concludes, I call
on the Syrian authorities and their allies, Russia and
Iran, to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law to do the following: urgently allow
the remaining civilians to escape the area, and facilitate
access for all humanitarian actors and the delivery of
critically important assistance. The laws of war and
universal human rights must be respected.

In recent days and hours, we appear to be witnessing
nothing less an all-out effort by the Syrian Government
and its allies to end the country's internal conflict
through a total, uncompromising military victory. I do
not accept recent statements by the Syrian Government
and the Russian Ministry of Defence that there were
no opposition groups or humanitarian organizations
present in eastern Aleppo.

That does not mean that I discount the importance of
fighting terrorism or the need to combat the confirmed
presence of the listed terrorist group the Al-Nusra
Front in eastern Aleppo. In fact, I support and agree
with that, but, as my Special Envoy has argued, should
the presence of fewer than a 1,000 fighters determine
the fate of tens, and possibly hundreds of thousands,
of civilians? Context also matters. No one disputes
that Al-Nusra Front fighters are indeed present in
Aleppo. But they are also present in larger numbers and
concentrations elsewhere in Syria. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is not known to be present
in Aleppo, but it appears to have exploited the focus on
Aleppo by the Syrian Government and its allies to go
on the offensive in Palmyra.

The Syrian conflict will not end as a result of what
happens on the battlefield in the next days and weeks.
Military advances will not solve the refugee crisis,
nor will the defeat of ISIL and its poisonous ideology
be complete when Mosul and Raqqa are ultimately
liberated. That is wishful thinking.

Just this week, Colombian President and Nobel
Peace Laureate Juan Manuel Santos warned us that
a final victory through force, when non-violent
alternatives exist, is nothing other than the defeat of
humankind itself. In Syria the consequences of such a
de-humanizing approach could be to further accelerate
radicalization leading to the next iteration of Al-Qaida
and ISIL. It would also send a frightening signal to the
millions who have already fled the violence, rendering
the Syrian refugee population semi-permanent and
placing further pressure on the region and on Europe.

The Council has repeatedly affirmed that an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process that addresses
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people is the
only way to find a sustainable solution to this wretched
conflict. It is past time for the Council to act - and to
force others to act - on that prescription. Aleppo should
represent the end of the quest for military victory, not
the start of a broader military campaign in a country
already ravaged beyond all recognition by five years
of war. The current battle needs to be followed by an
immediate end to violence by all sides and unfettered
humanitarian access through genuine engagement
without preconditions, around the political tools we
already possess, including resolution 2254 (2015).

