Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
behalf of the Chinese Mission in New York and me
personally, I express our deepest condolences with
regard to the untimely passing of Ambassador Tanoh-
Boutchoue to his family and to the Permanent Mission
and Government of Cote d'Ivoire. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
was a senior diplomat and our close colleague and
friend. His passing is extremely tragic.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, for
his presence and Her Excellency the Foreign Minister
of Colombia for attending the meeting. I thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing.

The Colombian peace process is crucial to
achieving comprehensive peace and development in
Colombia. It is also instrumental to maintaining peace
and stability in the whole region. China commends
the commitment and relentless efforts made by the
Colombian Government, President Santos Calderon,
and all other parties concerned.

A comprehensive implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace signed between the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is central to the
Colombian peace process. Currently, the implementation
of the Peace Agreement is facing some challenges. We
hope that the parties concerned in Colombia can meet
each other halfway, overcome difficulties and continue
to consistently facilitate the peace process in order to
maintain the positive momentum of the Colombian
peace process and establish conditions conducive to the
full implementation of the Peace Agreement between
the Government and FARC-EP.

The Colombian peace process is irreversible, based
on a high-level consensus among all parties in Colombia
and the international community. The Security Council
and the international community must continue to play
close attention to and support the peace process, respect
the ownership of the Government and the people of
Colombia with regard to the process and provide
constructive assistance to the overall implementation
of the Peace Agreement.

China commends the important role played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Arnault, and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia in facilitating the Colombian
peace process. We hope that the Mission will continue
to enhance its communication with the Government and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun and
do more to build trust and facilitate the implementation
of the peace agreement.

China applauds the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional
(ELN) for honouring its commitment to a unilateral
ceasefire during the parliamentary elections this year.
We hope that the Verification Mission will continue
to leverage its role in urging the ELN to reach a new
ceasefire agreement with the Government as soon as
possible.

Together with other members of the Council,
China is ready to make a greater contribution to the
ongoing facilitation of the peace process and the early
achievement of overall peace and security in Colombia.

