Mr. Holmes: The hour is late, and I will be brief.
I will not try to respond to all the detailed points that
have been made but will just make a few comments.
Obviously, I have listened very carefully to
today's debate and to all the comments that have been
made. I welcome the continued clear commitment to
the protection of civilians agenda as being at the heart
of the Council's work and the recognition by most, if not
all, speakers of the need to do more to ensure that our
words have more impact where they matter most - on
the ground - to overcome what more than one speaker
described as a disconnect what we may say in this and
other chambers and the reality on the ground. I also
endorse the point made by so many: that we need to do
more to prevent conflicts and tackle their root causes,
and not just talk about the effect on civilians.

Understandably, many, if not most, speakers
emphasized deep concern at the situation in and around
Gaza. Earlier, I gave some casualty figures for Gaza
from 13 January. The reason I was not able to give
fully up-to-date figures was that the Palestinian
Ministry of Health had no power at the time. They have
now released the latest casualty figures, as from, I
think, 4 o'clock local time today, according to which
the figure of Palestinians killed is now 1,013, of whom
322 are children and 76 are women. And the number of
injured now stands a 4,560, of whom 1,600 are
children and 678 are women. This means that one in
every 270 people in Gaza has now been killed or
seriously injured in the almost three weeks of
hostilities.

These really are shocking figures. Although such
comparisons obviously have their limitations, if we
translated these figures to the population of New York
City, the equivalent proportion would lead us to the
number of more than 30,000 dead or injured; and if we
compared it to the population of the whole United
States, we would reach a figure of over 1 million
people.

All this, again, underlines the sentiment
expressed by so many in the Chamber today: that we
need to do much more to ensure respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law governing the conduct
of hostilities and to spare the civilian population. But,
as I think virtually all speakers emphasized, only a full
and fully respected ceasefire will spare the civilian
population, on both sides, from the unrelenting danger
and fear that they currently face.

A number of speakers referred to the challenge of
the implementation of protection of civilians mandates
on the ground by peacekeeping missions, as I did in my
own presentation. Although we have been using such
mandates as a means through which to enhance
protection on the ground, I think we have all
acknowledged that their actual impact has to date been
mixed. So I welcome the acknowledgement by so many
speakers of the need to provide peacekeeping missions
with better guidance on how to translate these
mandates into action. As I said, the joint study by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, which is looking at these issues, will of
course be brought to the Council's attention later in the
year, and we look forward to working with members to
take the issues forward.

I am also encouraged by the support expressed in
the debate for the expert group of the Council on the
protection of civilians, which will meet this week for
the first time. Let me assure those who remain
concerned at the possible bureaucracy, cost or
perceived duplication involved in this group that the
expert group is very modest in nature. It is an informal
forum for systematic consultation on protection of
civilians concerns between the Council and OCHA. It
has no cost implications but is simply a means of
systematically and transparently relaying information,
analysis and possible language on protection issues to
all Council members. Its creation is certainly not an
attempt to isolate protection of civilians issues from
their wider context of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.

The expert group will also be able to play a role
in ensuring more consistent application of the aide-
memoire. I very much welcome the support which has
been expressed for the aide-memoire and for OCHA's
work in revising it. Let me thank, in turn, all Council
members for their very constructive engagement in this
revision process. I look forward to the aide-memoire's
use in the future by the Council, and indeed by other
actors. We certainly agree with those Member States
that have said that it should be reviewed and updated
regularly.

In that context, I also welcome the comments
from those States that referred to the important role of
regional organizations in the protection of civilians. We
are working with a number of such organizations,
including for example the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
European Union and NATO. And I would very much
agree with the sentiment expressed by the
representative of Uganda, that the aide-memoire should
prove to be a useful vehicle through which to share the
Council's experience on the protection of civilians with
the African Union.

Let me make just two final brief points. First of
all, at least two speakers - I think the representatives
of Burkina Faso and Finland - referred to the
importance of women's participation in all stages of
conflict prevention and peace process: that is, having
women at the table in all these areas. Let me take the
opportunity to wholeheartedly endorse that thought and
to express the wish that it will be respected more in
peace negotiations and other forums as they go
forward.

Secondly, and finally, a number of delegations
welcomed the conclusion of the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. Some also referred to the continuing work
in Geneva in the framework of the Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons to try to reach an
agreement in that forum as well. Let me simply express
the hope that any agreement there will not mark any
regression from what has been achieved in the Oslo
Convention on Cluster Munitions.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Council. I also thank all
speakers for their contributions and their support.

