Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his very
comprehensive and insightful briefing.

Unfortunately, despite our constant calls for
de-escalation in the Middle East, there has not been any
progress at all. On the contrary, last week's escalation of
violence in and around Gaza resulted in casualties and
many wounded. After weeks ofa relatively calm period,
we are facing a very alarming situation i one of the
most violent escalations since the last war in Gaza, in
2014. Nearly 470 rockets were fired into Israeli territory
by Hamas and the Islamic Jihad's affiliated factions.
At the same time, Israel conducted approximately 70
retaliatory air strikes within the Gaza Strip.

Poland condemns in the strongest terms the rocket
attacks carried out by Hamas and other militant groups
from the Gaza Strip targeting civilian communities
in southern Israel. There is no justification under any
circumstance for indiscriminate and deliberate acts
of violence against the civilian population. They are
unacceptable. They must stop and never be repeated.

At the same time, Israel's response should respect
the principle ofproportionality and be carried out within
the framework and limits of international humanitarian
law. We strongly urge the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any actions that may lead
to further escalation. I would also like to take this
opportunity to personally thank the United Nations and
Special Coordinator Mladenov, as well as the Egyptian
authorities, for their unprecedented efforts to put an
end to the recent hostilities.

Both Israelis and Palestinians have a right to live in
peace and safety. Poland supports a two-State solution,
which would incorporate the national aspirations of
both parties to the conflict, including the Palestinian
right to self-determination and independence as well as
the Israeli right to ensure its security and to normalized
relations with Arab States.

On the political track, we have to acknowledge
that currently the process is almost entirely blocked.
That clearly influences the situation in Gaza, which
is not taking place in a vacuum. We stress that the
humanitarian situation of 2 million people in the Gaza
Strip grows more desperate with each passing day.
Limited access to basic services, including health care,
and chronic energy and water sanitation crises are their
daily reality on the ground. All of that could easily lead
once again to an escalation of social tensions that may
destabilize the situation in the region even further.

We must sustainably address the root causes and
improve the situation of the people in Gaza. In order
to do so, we must see progress in efforts to reunite the
West Bank and Gaza under one single and legitimate
Palestinian Authority. That is why we underline our
strong support for the Egyptian-led efforts to achieve
intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

Advancing urgent infrastructure
projects - as proposed by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians - aiming to improve
water, electricity and health system, and creating
employment could have a quick impact on the ground.
In our opinion, infrastructure remains a key element of
sustainable de-escalation. The importance of practical
steps is crucial, as we strongly believe that, in the
absence of hope and real prospects, the inhabitants of
Gaza, especially the younger generation, might resort
to inflammatory rhetoric.

On the subject of youth, let me briefly touch upon
the situation of United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Although the

Agency recovered from major financial deficit this year,
it will face the same problem in 2019. In the absence of
a lasting political solution, the international community
must do its utmost to ensure the continuation of the
Agency's work on a sound financial basis.

