Mr. Bougacha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to convey to you, Mr. President, and to our
brother country of Equatorial Guinea, my sincere
congratulations on your successful presidency of the
Security Council in February. We also thank you for
organizing today's open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union for the
implementation of the initiative on silencing the guns
in Africa by 2020.

I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union
High Representative, for their briefings. I also want
to thank Mr. Vasu Gounden, who introduced the
programmes undertaken in this area by the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes.

African leaders announced their determination to
put an end to wars in Africa by 2020 and make Africa
a conflict-free zone. At the beginning of this month,
they adopted the African Union Master Road Map of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020, thereby reaffirming their collective political
determination to prioritize the defusing of conflicts
and overcoming other major challenges, such as fragile
development, terrorism, organized crime, climate
change and illegal migration, among other things.

Tunisia actively participates in the efforts of
the African Union (AU) and the Security Council,
in particular, and the United Nations, in general, to
establish peace in Africa - from the 1960 Peacekeeping
Mission in Congo to the deployment of an air transport
unit in Mali at the beginning of this year. We have been
contributing to the peaceful settlement of conflicts for
decades. For example, a regional initiative launched
in 2017 by President Essebsi, in coordination with
the Presidents of Algeria and Egypt, to support the
comprehensive political settlement in Libya and give
momentum to reconciliation and dialogue between
Libyan brothers, as well as to support the efforts of the
United Nations envoy in this fraternal country.

In addition to aligning itself with the statements
made on behalf of the Group of Arab States and
the Group of African States, Tunisia would like to
underscore the following points.

First, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2457 (2019), on supporting peace and
security in Africa as well as supporting the African
Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. That
is an important positive message from the Security
Council, and the United Nations in general, of the very
strong support for the African Union and the efforts
of Africa and its leaders in conflict management. We
co-sponsored the resolution to reiterate our support for
all initiatives that ensure effective Council measures to
maintain international peace and security, including in
the African continent.

Secondly, the African Union currently has in place
the necessary resources, mechanisms and political will
to work in partnership with the Security Council in
this vital area. It also works to further strengthen the
existing means of preventive diplomacy at the African
level, including the Panel of the Wise, the Continental
Early Warning System and the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

Thirdly, resolving the root causes ofconflict is a key
lever for protecting peoples and countries. We therefore
reiterate Africa's efforts to achieve comprehensive,
sustainable and inclusive development; to reaffirm
democracy, the rule of law and good governance; and
to promote human rights and the role of women and
young people in all aspects of life.

Fourthly, the success of the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative is a sine qua non condition for the
African continent to be able to fulfil the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union's
Agenda 2063.

Fifthly, institutional dialogue between the United
Nations and the AU constitutes a solid foundation for
an effective partnership that will be able to implement
shared priorities. Undoubtedly, the genuine reforms
undertaken simultaneously by both organizations
demonstrate a shared vision and the importance
of adapting institutions to current situations at the
international level.

The African Union Master Road Map of Practical
Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 is one of
the components of Africa's common action. The Road
Map reflects Africa's aspirations to put an end to wars on
the continent and focus on economic and development
issues. We appreciate the Security Council's support
for the efforts made towards the adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), which, we hope, will be followed by other
resolutions along the same lines.

