Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his valuable briefing and reaffirm the full support
of the State ofKuwait to his role in finding a solution to
the protracted Palestinian question, which has had such
a severe impact on the daily lives of the Palestinians
who have been living under the yoke of occupation for
more than five decades. We also thank our colleague
Ambassador Nikki Haley. I am pleased that her very
important final statement to the Security Council was
on today's topic of the Palestinian question, and that
she has revealed some of the points of the peace plan
that the United States will soon unveil.

We once again commend the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov and the parties concerned to improve the
daily lives of the citizens of the Gaza Strip, which have
led to the completion of the joint review of the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism in order to promote and
improve its effectiveness and performance. We look
forward to the implementation of its recommendations
by 1 January 2019. In that regard, we were awaiting a
written report for this month by the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),

similar to his first written report submitted in June (see S/PV.8289) following his response, for which we are
grateful, to a request by 10 Security Council members.
This month, however, we regret to say that was not the
case. We therefore call for an increase in the number of
written reports on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) over the course of 2019. We do
not want to settle for just one written report per year.
That accords with the provisions of the resolution,
presidential note S/2010/507 and the practices used
in addressing other items on the Security Council's
agenda.

As always, we listened carefully to Mr. Mladenov's
briefing, especially with regard to the recent
developments in the West Bank, which show once
again how dangerous the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has become, thanks to the crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people and their land and holy sites, as well
as their inalienable rights. The most recent of those
crimes was the Israeli act of aggression against the
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and other parts of the
occupied Palestinian territory on 11 November, which
targeted the lives of Palestinian civilians and their
homes, media facilities and civilian infrastructure.
Its victims included dozens of martyrs and unarmed
civilians who were killed or injured as a result of the
Israeli occupying forces' war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

The most recent child fatality was that of a boy
aged four years and eight months, a victim of the
occupying Israeli forces' relentless crimes against
Palestinian civilians. On 12 December we saw the
images of hundreds of civilians in the town of Absan
in Khan Younis burying the small body of Ahmed
Abu Abed. His killing was the forty-second murder
of a Palestinian child since the Great March of Return
began in March. Since then, more than 230 Palestinian
martyrs have perished and more than 24,000 have
been injured. Reports from Doctors without Borders
estimate that more than 1,000 of those who have been
injured in the Gaza Strip now suffer from permanent
disabilities as a result of the live ammunition used by
the Israeli occupying forces.

The Security Council must not stand idly by in
the face of Israel's systematic crimes against unarmed
Palestinians. They are war crimes and crimes against
humanity under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. As members of the
Security Council, we must assume our responsibility
and stop Israel, the occupying Power, from perpetrating
such illegitimate and provocative actions in deliberate
and dangerous violation of international law and
the relevant United Nations resolutions. We call on
the United Nations and the Secretary-General to
implement General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on
the protection of Palestinian civilians, pursuant to the
Secretary-General's latest report (A/ES-10/794). We
must urge the States and institutions of the international
community to engage in the protection of Palestinian
civilians and establish a practical and effective
mechanism for implementing both the resolution and
the report.

We also call on the international community,
especially the Security Council, to implement resolution
2334 (2016), which emphasizes that Israel's settlement
activities are a blatant violation of international law and
an obstacle to peace. It calls on Israel, the occupying
Power, to immediately and fully cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem and reaffirms the importance
of the implementation of other relevant international
resolutions on the illegal and illegitimate nature of
Israeli settlement activities, including resolutions 465
(1980) and 497 (1981).

We reaffirm our condemnation of Israel's repeated
acts of aggression against the Al-Aqsa Mosque in the
form of daily violations and dangerous incursions,
which provoke Muslim and Arab feelings of
resentment. Those unprecedented attacks have recently
increased and demonstrate that Israel, the occupying
Power, plans to change the Mosque's current historic
and legal status, which will have grave consequences.
We welcome Jordan's announcement that it will be
organizing an international conference on 20 December
on an appeal for the Al-Aqsa Mosque, with wide Arab
and international participation. The aim is to hold
consultations in support of the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
Jerusalem and its Islamic holy sites. We reiterate our
rejection and condemnation of all violations by Israel,
the occupying Power, of Islamic and Christian holy
sites, especially its attempts to change the existing
historical and legal status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by
dividing it in space and time, undermining the freedom
of Muslim prayer.

In conclusion, we welcomed the General
Assembly's adoption few days ago of resolution 73/89,
submitted by Ireland on behalf of the European Union
and entitled "Comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the Middle East". We reiterate our support for putting
an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance with
the relevant international resolutions, international
law and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, with all its
provisions. The Initiative states that a comprehensive
peace and the normalization of relations with Israel
are conditional on ending Israel's occupation since
1967 of Palestinian and Arab territories, including
East Jerusalem; on Israel's recognition of the State of
Palestine and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to self-determination and the
right of return and reparation for Palestinian refugees;
on ajust resolution of the Palestinian question pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 194 (III); and on a
rejection of any deal or initiative for a resolution of
the conflict that is not in line with the internationally
agreed terms of reference pertaining to the peace
process in the Middle East.

