Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As this is the first time under your presidency
that my delegation has the honour of taking the floor,
Mr. President, I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you and to thank you for organizing
today's debate on a topic dear to Africa: ways to
combat subregional and cross-border problems in West
Africa. We wish also to assure you of the great
satisfaction that my delegation feels at seeing you, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, at this meeting. That
attests to the importance that the sister Republic of
Benin attaches to subregional and cross-border
problems, faithfully echoing the ongoing concerns of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union and the United Nations
regarding West Africa.

To guide this debate, the Secretary-General has
issued a report on the topic under consideration, which
is very instructive and which he introduced himself.
His briefing was supported by Mr. Ahmedou Ould-
Abdallah, Head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa, and also by the Special Adviser to the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Mr. Diouf. I wish to
pay tribute to both of them for their briefings.

Since independence many subregional and cross-
border problems have affected international peace and
security in West Africa, and they undermine all the
development efforts of our States. Those problems are
the increased use and unlawful proliferation of
mercenaries, child soldiers, small arms and light
weapons and their accessories, ammunition and
explosive devices; a culture of impunity; the spread of
HIV/AIDS; the continued weakening of the security
sector; youth unemployment; environmental
degradation; social exclusion; wars; mass movements
of refugees; unfair and unlawful exploitation of natural
resources; weak national institutions and civil society
structures; violation of human rights, particularly those
of women and children; and poor public management.
Sadly, this list is far from exhaustive, as the Secretary-
General himself recognized in his report S/2004/200.

The frenzy with which many producers, brokers
and traffickers in small arms and their accessories
illegally prey on Africa generally and on West Africa
in particular is not mentioned. Similarly, there is no
reference to the most perverse manifestations of
liberalization and globalization in poor countries, for
example.

If cross-border and subregional problems, whose
links and cumulative mutual effects have been clearly
highlighted by the Secretary-General, are not
thoroughly listed, described and universally
recognized, we will not find a realistic and achievable
solution any time soon. By periodically adding to his
analyses of the real political environment prevailing in
the poor countries of West Africa, the Secretary-
General will help to enhance a realistic understanding
of subregional and cross-border problems in West
Africa on the part of the Security Council and will thus
help the Council to arrive at cohesive and rapidly
evolving solutions to those problems. That will also
contribute to the implementation by all actors,
subregional and international, in the political life in
West Africa of concerted actions that the Council will
have assigned to them, both to entities of the United
Nations and to their various partners.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his efforts to develop an integrated and coordinated
approach to conflict prevention in West Africa, and we
welcome the progress achieved in settling specific
cross-border problems, to which he refers in the
progress report before us for this debate. We encourage
him to pursue and step up those efforts because we
firmly believe - along with ECOWAS, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement - that Africa
as a whole and West Africa, with which we are
concerned today, will find salvation only through the
effective and good-faith implementation of the
integrated and coordinated approach to conflict
prevention that is being developed.

My delegation can only welcome the fact that
finally, as the Secretary-General had already pledged in
his report S/2001/574, the United Nations has
undertaken, in an irreversible manner, the healthy
transition from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. By striving to achieve and tirelessly
implement this culture of prevention, the progress,
however modest, that has already been achieved in
settling specific cross-border problems will ultimately
pave the way to a progressive strengthening of
international peace and security in West Africa. Such
progress will create and strengthen the optimal
conditions for the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and
will reduce, and indeed eliminate, the need for United
Nations peace missions in West Africa. The Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations is well
aware of the growing burden that they represent for the
United Nations, since such peace missions tend to
become interminable. Everyone will be relieved by the
possibility of ending them.

Let us hope for an effective transformation of the
ECOWAS moratorium on small arms into a legally
binding convention, which will complement the
existing legal instrument on the marking and tracing of
small arms and light weapons, their accessories,
components and ammunition, as well as explosives.

It is essential to sensitize decision makers and
populations so that they understand that, thanks to
resolute action by States and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), States will be able to control the
transfer, stockpiling and use of weapons, which
especially in Africa means strengthening democratic
institutions and the capacity to provide public security.
NGOs will have a role of monitoring, and of providing
information and education to the population so as to
support the democratic functioning of public
institutions.

We ardently wish to see harmonization and
concerted action, in West Africa as well as in the whole
of Africa, to implement national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes that
receive, in a timely manner and at the necessary level,
essential external technical, material and financial
support. It would be desirable for integrated strategies
to be implemented for sensitive border areas in West
Africa, indeed in Africa generally, along the lines of
those promoted by the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. Let us look forward to such
effective and concrete measures. Only then will the
interminable cycle of violence and instability become a
distant memory in the history of the independent States
of Africa. Armed conflicts, the recruitment and
proliferation of mercenaries and child soldiers, illicit
trafficking in small arms, violations of human rights,
impunity, corruption, unemployment, excessive
population growth, most infectious diseases, and all
cross-border and subregional problems will be resolved
in a lasting fashion. Thus peace will finally be
established and consolidated in West Africa, and our
peoples, our States and our nations will embark on the
path towards the genuine realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and the objectives of NEPAD, for
the benefit of West Africa, Africa, the United Nations
and the international community.

