Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, the Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine ofthe Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Ertugrul Apakan,
the Director ofthe Coordination and Response Division
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. John Ging, and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan Simonovic', for
their informative briefings.

Jordan reiterates the need for a permanent political

solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine so as to
establish peace and security there, as well as to restore
its territorial integrity and sovereignty. Prolonging the
conflict will not serve the interests of any of the parties.
Moreover, the continuation and expansion of military
confrontations and acts of provocation can lead only
to the exacerbation of the current situation, while
rendering the agreements devoid of all meaning. That
will aggravate outstanding issues among the parties
involved, leading to the deterioration of economic and
humanitarian conditions, which will have even greater
adverse effects on civilians in particular and on the
security and stability of the region as a whole.

Jordan calls upon all parties to assume their
responsibilities and focus on positive and constructive
dialogue within the framework of the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group, in order to
achieve a peaceful settlement of the crisis. The Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) provide a basic,
solid foundation for any political settlement. The
parties concerned should demonstrate sincerity and
commitment to the implementation of those agreements
and build upon them in order to achieve a ceasefire and
settle the conflict. In that connection, we emphasize the
need for the comprehensive implementation of all the
terms of the agreements.

We are deeply concerned about the continued
breaches of the ceasefire and the fragile security
conditions that have led to the humanitarian crisis in
which thousands have been displaced, a further 9,000
people have lost their lives and more than 20,000 people
have been injured. We emphasize that the political
de-escalation of the Ukrainian crisis would help to
resolve the humanitarian crisis. In any event, efforts to
mitigate the crisis must be redoubled. It is imperative
to protect civilians and their rights, to investigate all
crimes and violations of those rights and to ensure the
prevention of impunity.

We reiterate the need to support the OSCE and
to facilitate its work and access to all areas so that it
can discharge its mission and verify the Withdrawal of
heavy weapons from the areas adjacent to the contact
line. We also call upon the Government of Ukraine
to proceed with the positive measures and reforms it
is undertaking, including the recent adoption of the
national human rights strategy. We emphasize the
need to provide basic humanitarian and social services
to civilians and to internally displaced persons in
particular, regardless of the political affiliations of the
parties to the conflict.
