Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the outstanding
leadership and efficiency with which you have directed the
work of the Council during the month of June.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Mr. ter
Horst, and the Friends of Haiti for their enduring efforts to
bring about lasting peace and security in Haiti. With the
successful conclusion of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), we would also like to take this
opportunity to express our special thanks to the staff of
UNMIH and the countries contributing troops to it for their
outstanding achievement in helping consolidate Haiti's
democracy.

Since the historic transfer of power which took place
last February, the Government and the people of Haiti have
made considerable progress in their quest for democracy
and stability under the leadership of President Preval.
Unfortunately, however, despite the tremendous progress
achieved to date, the overall security environment still
remains unstable, as the Secretary-General's report
indicates. The potential for instability that might be created
by the premature departure of the United Nations is
particularly worrisome in the light of the signs of growing
popular discontent over the difficult economic situation.

Furthermore, the inability of the incipient Haitian
National Police to maintain law and order on its own is a
serious cause for concern. The fledgling police force is still
faced with the same old problems and in need of sustained
assistance from the international community before it
becomes a fully functioning force.

We believe that in the longer term, the emphasis of
the United Nations role in Haiti should be reoriented and
the focus should shift from the current peace-keeping
operations to enhanced socio-economic development
activities. However, at a time when the nascent democracy
is still quite frail and the National Police are not fully
prepared to independently ensure the kind of stable and
secure environment required for the consolidation of
democracy and sustainable economic development, we
believe that the security concern should remain a priority.
It is in this context that we agree with the Secretary-
General's View that complete withdrawal of the United
Nations presence is inappropriate at this time.

The case before us represents a challenge from the
perspective of United Nations peace-keeping operations as
well. UNMIH was a model of success in combining a
traditional peace-keeping operation with post-conflict
peace-building efforts. We believe that a continued United
Nations presence should contribute to a smooth transition
from the peace-keeping to the peace-building stage. In
this regard, we are pleased that the mandate of the new
Mission is geared further towards the promotion of
institution-building, national reconciliation and economic
rehabilitation in Haiti.

We note with satisfaction that the difficult financial
situation of the United Nations has been duly addressed
in the draft resolution, through a substantial reduction in
the troop strength of the United Nations Support Mission
in Haiti (UNSMIH) from the level recommended by the
Secretary-General. In this connection, we welcome the
willingness of the Governments of the United States and
Canada to provide generous voluntary support to
UNSMIH. My delegation has held the view that the
assistance and commitment of the countries in the region
are not only desirable but also indispensable for the
activities of the United Nations. We are pleased that the
cooperation of the Organization of American States with
this world body in consolidating peace and democracy in
Haiti has been duly taken note of in the draft resolution.

Finally, the current situation in Haiti, as in many
other areas of conflict, demonstrates the crucial link
between peace and development. As noted in the
preamble of the draft resolution, long-term peace and
stability cannot come to pass without progress in
economic, social and institutional development. It is in
this spirit that we strongly encourage the development
activities which are being conducted by various agencies
and the international financial institutions.

In closing, my delegation would like to stress once
again that the people of Haiti bear the ultimate
responsibility for their own destiny. We therefore applaud
the Government and the people of Haiti for their firm
commitment to the rule of law, democracy and
development.

 

We find the draft resolution before us encompasses all
the core elements that we have just mentioned. We will
therefore join the Council's consensus and vote in favor of
the draft resolution, which we believe marks another
milestone in Haiti's path to democracy and prosperity.

