Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, for his statement. I would also like to welcome
and thank Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements.

Six months after the holding of parliamentary
elections on 8 June 2014, Chad is pleased to note the
signing of a coalition agreement between the principal
political parties in Kosovo, which allowed the formation
of a new Government in Pristina and the establishment
of the Assembly of Kosovo. This new momentum will
make it possible to overcome the State's paralysis and
address the fundamental issues with regard to Kosovo's
management and administration.

We welcome the adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo
of the law on the Kosovo budget for 2015. Moreover,
we note that the municipal budgets in northern Kosovo
are also finalized, but are encountering difficulties in
terms of taking into account the salaries for health and
education personnel. In that regard, we urge the new
authorities to promptly reach a solution to this situation.

With regard to security, in particular the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into
the Armed Forces of Kosovo, Chad believes that the
new authorities need to find the appropriate space to
facilitate the conditions to resolve this issue, while
respecting Kosovo's general interests, territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We also welcome the
new Government's commitment to fighting violent
extremism and terrorism through the adoption by the
Kosovo Assembly Committee on Internal Affairs of the
draft law on the prohibition ofjoining armed conflicts
outside State territory. These efforts and developments
are moving forward, as can be seen beyond the national
territory. We commend the joint efforts undertaken by
the authorities ofBelgrade in the process ofnormalizing
the relationship between the two countries.

The constructive technical exchanges in the areas
of law, energy and migration, and the recent visits of
the Serbian President to Pristina and northern Kosovo,
demonstrate the desire to overcome the difficulties in
seeking peace and stability in the framework facilitated
by the European Union. These political and technical
gains will remain tenuous as long as the economic
and social situations are not brought under control and
stabilized.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/74), a number of situations and challenges call
for particular attention and firm commitment if we want
to bring about lasting solutions to Kosovo's problems.
These include, inter alia, the growing number of
demonstrations in different regions of Kosovo, which
have led to many arrests and discontent. The most recent
one was on 24 and 25 January. There are 1,655 cases of
disappeared persons and the relevant authorities must
address that situation. The establishment of a specialist
court to continue the work in the area of war crimes and
crimes against humanity is needed. There were more
than 17,000 internally displaced persons at the end of
2014 and the number of voluntary returns had declined,
according to the information provided by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The movement of illegal migrants increasingly towards
Western Europe is a problem.

With regard to the process of disarming the civilian
population, the efforts of the local authorities, with the
support of United Nations Development Programme,
have made it possible to withdraw from circulation
more than 1,500 firearms in 2014. The number of
incidents affecting religious sites and places of worship
has led to the establishment of a monitoring Committee,
including all the churches and other denominations,
to provide an institutional and collective response to
hate speech and graffiti. Lastly, efforts to bring about
greater participation of women in political spheres and
to strengthen measures for their protection are key.

Chad believes that the democratic process has been
launched in Kosovo and that taking into account all the
variables will guarantee the building of a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo. Kosovo will not achieve
this new phase without the contribution and persistent
and serious work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, and his entire team for their
commitment to carrying out their mission.

Concerning the accusations of corruption on the
part of certain members of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), Chad urges the
relevant bodies to investigate them in order to establish
responsibility. We have renewed confidence in EULEX,
which we believe can continue to oversee the situation
and play a role in the area of the rule of law.
In conclusion, we would like to once again
commend Pristina for the positive developments
concerning national reconciliation and normalization
of relations with Belgrade, and to congratulate UNMIK
on its commitment to promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

