The Secretary-General: I thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, His Excellency Dato Sri
Anifah Aman, for arranging this critical debate on
children and armed conflict.

The past year was one ofthe worst in recent memory
for children in countries affected by conflict. My report
(S/2015/409) before the Council outlines the enormous
challenges we face in upholding the fundamental rights
of tens of millions of children. We have seen crises
multiply and intensify, making protection more and
more difficult. Grave violations against children have
been an affront to our common humanity in the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Nigeria, South Sudan and the
Syrian Arab Republic.

I am also deeply alarmed at the suffering of so many
children as a result of the Israeli military operations
in Gaza last year. I urge Israel to take concrete and
immediate steps, including by reviewing existing
policies and practices, to protect and prevent the killing
and maiming of children and to respect the special
protections afforded to schools and hospitals.

Around the world, many thousands of children
have experienced acts that no child should suffer.
They have been killed, maimed, forcibly recruited,
tortured and sexually abused. Their schools have been
destroyed. And in a worrying trend, abductions have
increased rapidly. Groups such as the Lord's Resistance
Army have been kidnapping children for many years,
but the scale and nature of that grave violation is
changing. Abduction is now being used as a tactic to
terrorize or target particular ethnic groups or religious
communities, and children have been a particular focus.
The large number of abductions by Daesh and Boko
Haram has shocked us repeatedly in recent months. But
we should also recognize that the practice is prevalent
in many other situations covered by the report and is
perpetrated by a great range of other non-State armed
groups. I am pleased that at the last open debate on
children and armed conflict, in March (see S/PV.7414),
there was broad support from Member States to address
the challenge and increase the tools available to deal
with it.

Next month, we will mark the tenth anniversary
of the Council's resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the monitoring and reporting mechanism
on the recruitment and use of child soldiers. My Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
her predecessors have made great strides in protecting
children from recruitment. The "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign is based on many years of work to change
attitudes. This year has witnessed further progress.
We are moving ever closer towards a world in which
no child wears a Government uniform and engages in
combat. I encourage those concerned Governments
represented in the Chamber today to redouble their
efforts to implement the goals of the campaign and to
work with my Special Representative. However, there
is still much to do in addressing the challenge of ending
grave violations against children by non-State armed
groups.

The report before the Council highlights some
progress made in that regard. For example, the release
of 1,757 children from the Cobra Faction is a bright
spot in an otherwise bleak picture in South Sudan. My
Special Representative will continue to work with such
groups to ensure that we are doing our utmost to protect
children in these most difficult environments.

Grave violations against children are of great
concern both in countries of origin and in countries
to which children flee. Children may cross the border
to flee conflict, but that does not mean that they are
safe from its effects. They require urgent and sustained

protection interventions.

I regret that the contents of my annual report this
year on children and armed conflict have been the
subject of more controversy and discussions than usual,
to the extent of threatening its integrity. The mechanism
has withstood scrutiny, and the content of my report
should speak for itself. It represents a strong overview
of egregious violations suffered by children in conflict
in 2014. It increases global awareness, highlights the
need for accountability and calls for action. It is a
stark reminder that the protection of children in armed
conflict must be our common priority.

A healthy debate in which Member States put
forward their Views and provide information is
appropriate. But national interests should not cloud
the objective at stake - protecting children, which is
a moral imperative and a legal obligation. Those who
engage in military action that results in numerous grave
Violations against children will, regardless of intent,
find themselves under scrutiny. Member States should
pursue all avenues to protect children affected by armed
conflict. One important way is by ending impunity for
the violations outlined in the report.

I also wish to reassure everyone that I am committed
to ensuring that the United Nations itself does more and
better to prevent any abuse of children in the context
of conflict. Recent allegations concerning abuse in
the Central African Republic make that all the more
essential. I urge Member States, and in particular all
the parties to conflict identified in the report, to work
with my Special Representative to prevent future grave
Violations against children. Children have the right to
be protected in their schools, in their homes, in their
communities. Let us keep the rights of children at the
centre of our efforts to build a future of dignity for all.

