Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to express my delegation's
appreciation for your initiative to hold an open debate
to allow interested countries non-members of the
Security Council to express their views on the situation
in East Timor.

I would like also to join previous speakers in
thanking Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his
comprehensive and informative briefing.

It was only 13 months ago, with the conclusion of
the 5 May agreement, that the long-cherished historic
aspirations of the East Timorese people began to be
fulfilled. Indeed, there have been many uncertainties,
untold sacrifices and unexpected tragedies along the
way. Yet the overall security situation in East Timor is
now stable, and nation-building, including
reconstruction and development, is taking place.

In this regard, no one deserves more credit than
the East Timorese themselves, who have shown their
strong will to overcome severe hardship in their
struggle for independence. The Secretary-General has
also played a crucial role in this historic endeavour
with his bold and timely initiatives. Certainly, without
the Indonesian Government's cooperation with the
United Nations and the international community's
generous contributions of funds and personnel, this
progress would not have been possible.

Although I agree with the evaluation of many
people that the work of the United Nations in East
Timor has been a success, there are still challenges
before us. Let me take this opportunity to comment on
a few tasks that my delegation believes are of primary
importance. First, we should put economic
development and employment at the top of our agenda.
We cannot deny the difficulty of making and
implementing reconstruction projects with limited
resources in a country that has very limited and little
infrastructure, but we still need to try to make social
and economic stability a reality. Although some
progress has been made, more efforts should be
undertaken to accelerate the disbursement of the World
Bank's trust fund.

Secondly, I believe that there must be greater
participation by the East Timorese in the decision-
making process with regard to both UNTAET and
World Bank projects. Without a sense of ownership,
even the most well-designed programme will not be
sustainable.

Thirdly, with regard to Mr. Vieira de Mello's
reference to political benchmarks, such long-term
benchmarks for UNTAET's project for nation-building
in East Timor should be suggested as soon as possible,
after consultation with the East Timorese people.

Fourthly, UNTAET and the Indonesian
Government must take more decisive steps to
implement repatriation and to ensure the safety of the
refugees. This is especially important in the light of the
heavy casualties among East Timorese refugees in West
Timor during recent floods.

Finally, contributions from the international
community should be continued if the dream of a new,
independent and viable country is to be realized. It is
especially imperative that contributing States fulfil
their pledges; in this regard, we welcome the results of
the donors' meeting in Lisbon.
The Republic of Korea has actively participated
in the efforts of the international community to help
East Timor, sending more than 400 peacekeepers and
other personnel. My Government has also provided
$250,000 in humanitarian assistance and $400,000 to
the UNTAET Trust Fund, and we will contribute
$600,000 for the training of East Timorese, in close
consultation with UNTAET, for the next two years,
beginning in 2001. The Republic of Korea remains
committed to supporting the important objectives of the
United Nations in East Timor.

