Mr. Campbell (Ireland): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Council on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries have
aligned themselves with this statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, Malta,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. Iceland and
Norway also wish to align themselves with this statement.

Conflict in Afghanistan has for far too long divided
its people and brought destruction and suffering to that
country. Recent developments have seen an intensification
of hostilities, which continues to prejudice the essential
conditions for peace and stability, without which a society
cannot make economic or political progress. The
European Union calls for the immediate cessation of
armed hostilities and urgently exhorts the leaders of all
the Afghan parties to renounce the use of force and to
engage in political dialogue, which alone can bring about
a peaceful settlement of the present conflict. The
European Union attaches great importance to the
readiness of the United Nations to assist this dialogue and
to support every effort undertaken to resolve the conflict
by peaceful means.

The Union further reaffirms its full support for the
United Nations Special Mission and expresses its
appreciation for the intensive work undertaken by the
special envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. H011, and his

 

team. They must be given every support in their important
task.

The European Union urges all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan. In
particular, the flow of arms into Afghanistan from outside
its borders must end.

The European Union also remains concerned about the
use of Afghan territory for the production of drugs and the
training of terrorists. The European Union reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. Only
negotiation and cooperation between the parties can offer
the opportunity for the emergence of a new, stable
Afghanistan to which all its people can freely owe
allegiance.

No society can achieve an acceptable degree of peace,
justice and stability without full respect for all human rights
and fundamental freedoms. The European Union calls
therefore on all the parties in Afghanistan to act in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and to
respect human rights. The European Union can no more
accept discrimination on the basis of gender than it can
tolerate discrimination on the basis of race or religion. We
wish accordingly to express particular concern over the
recent measures restricting the education of girls and female
employment. We support fully the statements made on
7 October to this effect by the Secretary-General and
subsequently by his spokesman, as also the statement made
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights on 4 October.
We recall in particular that among the instruments formally
signed by Afghanistan is the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

The European Union furthermore condemns without
reservation the recent violation of the United Nations office
in Kabul. The rights and immunities under international law
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies must be
fully respected.

Likewise, the security of all international personnel
involved in the provision and distribution of humanitarian
aid must be guaranteed. The European Union and its
member States are the largest donors of aid to Afghanistan.
This is a role which we are willing to continue, and we
look forward to a dialogue on the modalities of cooperation
ensuring assistance for all the people of Afghanistan,
irrespective of their gender or ethnic background.

 

In conclusion, the European Union urgently repeats
its call on all parties to cease their armed struggle and to
find a peaceful means to resolve their differences. The
alternative can only be further destruction and denial of
the most basic rights of the Afghan people.

