Mr. Naidu (Fiji): My delegation warmly
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October.

It is my honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the group of countries members of the
Pacific Islands Forum that maintain permanent
missions in New York: Australia, the Federated States
of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New
Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji.

Since the last time a statement was made in the
Security Council on the issue of terrorism by the States
members of the Pacific Islands Forum group, we have
continued to work individually and collectively to
combat terrorism in our region. Our resolve to continue
doing so was embodied in the Nasonini Declaration on
regional security, which our 16 leaders issued in
August this year. The Declaration, which is being
issued in document A/57/33l, affirmed our common
commitment to cooperation on law enforcement, based
on a strong legislative foundation, as a key element in
addressing the threat of terrorism and transnational
crime; it stressed our region's commitment to global
counter-terrorism efforts, including through the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and the
Financial Action Taskforce (FATF) special
recommendations, including associated reporting
requirements; and it underlined the importance of
introducing legislation and developing national
strategies to combat serious crime, including terrorist
financing and terrorism, money laundering, drug
trafficking and the smuggling of and trafficking in
people.

The fight against terrorism cannot be won with
statements of intent. It needs concrete and practical
cooperation, and it needs the continuous enhancement
of capacity to take action. In our region we have
focused both on practical cooperation and on capacity-
building. The former takes place through a number of
coordination and information-sharing mechanisms,
including in relation to police and law enforcement,
immigration and customs and weapons controls. Those
efforts are continuing to be refined and developed.

Capacity limitations present a major challenge to
many of our members. Several are in dialogue with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), and with
Ambassador Ward in particular, but we are also looking
at what more can be done regionally and bilaterally.
Forum leaders have endorsed the establishment of an
expert working group to coordinate the development of
a regional framework to address terrorism and
transnational crime, and have asked that the group
report to the Forum's 2003 meeting and review
regional implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the FATF special recommendations.

Leaders also recognized that further urgent action
was needed on the part of some members. Officials are
working on a strategy to address these subjects. They
are looking at, among other things, the vulnerability of
banking and financial systems and transport
infrastructure, particularly international airports.
Forum island countries with a capacity to assist others
recognize their special responsibilities in this regard.

Much has been achieved over the past year in
putting in place the legislative, regulatory and
administrative framework for combating terrorism. The
CTC, under the exemplary leadership of Ambassador
Greenstock, can rightly take much credit for that. But
there is no room for complacency; our efforts remain a
work in progress. We in the Pacific recognize that there
can be no standing still in the fight against terrorism.
No region is truly pacific when it comes to the threat of
terrorism.
As we face the evolving challenge of terrorism,
and as we work to implement the letter and the spirit of
resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council can be
assured of the fullest support of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group.

