Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by
extending our warm felicitations to the United
Kingdom delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this closing month of the year. That has no
doubt added to its already onerous responsibilities in
its capacity as the presidency of the European Union.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Denisov and
the Russian delegation for their able stewardship of the
Council last month.

Pakistan welcomes the convening of this open
debate. Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland and Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
informative briefings. We hope the views expressed
here by members of the Council and non-members will
contribute to evolving a more effective response of the
international community to the complex challenges
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
provides useful insight into the entire range of issues
related to the protection of civilians in aimed conflict.
An overall decrease in the number of armed conflicts
since the 1990s is indeed encouraging. However, in
today's armed conflicts, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law have escalated, with
tragic consequences for civilians, especially women,
children and minorities. As observed by the Secretary-
General,

"[i]n the new warfare... the impact of armed
conflict on civilians goes far beyond the notion of
collateral damage. Targeted attacks, forced
displacement, sexual violence, forced
conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilation,
hunger, disease and loss of livelihoods
collectively paint an extremely grim picture of
the human costs of armed conflict." (S/2005/740, para. 3)

That is a sad commentary on the poverty of
implementation of the entire body of international
humanitarian and human rights law that codifies the
protection of civilians.

A comprehensive response entails the proper
identification of underlying problems, which are
multidimensional - legal, moral, political, cultural,
social and economic. One reason for the escalation in
violations is the changing nature of conflicts, which are
now more likely to be internal wars than inter-State
conflicts. Ethnic and religious conflicts, the most
common type of civil war, are by their very nature
directed against entire populations, including civilians.

Secondly, in many instances, it is the politics of
poverty that lead to and exacerbate conflicts, involving
competition between groups, including civilians, for
scarce resources. Here again, civilians are usually in
the front line.

Thirdly, the empirical evidence of recent and old
history shows that systematic and consistent violations
of the rights of civilians are most frequent and
pervasive in situations of foreign occupation and
suppression of the right of peoples to self-
determination. The list of places mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report where the gravest violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law are
taking place amply illustrates that point. The list,
however, is not exhaustive. It excludes, for example, a
situation that is of particular concern to my country
and in which the most blatant violations have been and
are being perpetrated against civilians. An important
question that should be posed is how to protect civilian
populations when their very suppression is the object
of the conflict. Moreover, the rationale of suppressing
terrorism should not provide an escape route for the
suppression of civilians seeking respect for their
fundamental rights, including the right to self-
determination.

The challenges of addressing gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law are
also exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the
international response. In some situations, there is a
quick and even robust response; in others, the
perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity at both the national
and the international levels. Most often, there is
sufficient public concern, but insufficient political will
to act. The record of the Security Council itself in that
context is not without blemish. In the circumstances, it
is vital to reinforce the concept of the protection of
civilians in all - I repeat, all - such situations of
violations.

Indeed, the desire proclaimed at the 2005 summit
to protect populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing can be
fulfilled only if there are established standards to
ensure a uniform and timely response to all situations
in which such crimes occur or are likely to occur. And
if powerful bodies, such as the Security Council, are
unable to act, the international community should
consider utilizing the Charter authority of the General
Assembly to do so. It can also utilize international
judicial mechanisms for that purpose.

Apart from the decisions taken in the past, the
Pakistan delegation would suggest that some concrete
and practical actions be contemplated to ensure the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

First, all States should undertake a binding legal
obligation to observe and respect international
humanitarian law and refrain from and oppose
genocide and war crimes. That obligation could be
created, preferably, through an international treaty or
protocol.

Secondly, much greater emphasis is required on
preventing the outbreak of conflicts. The Secretary-
General and other United Nations mediatory
mechanisms can and must play a more active role in
conflict resolution under Chapter VI and other
provisions of the Charter. The Secretary-General and
this Council have a clear right to insist on a mediatory
role in inter-State conflicts, but even in internal
situations, an early and active role could be pursued -
perhaps with discretion - by the United Nations,
together with other influential partners.

Thirdly, international monitoring can play an
effective part in preventing violations against civilian
populations. Where the danger of conflict is perceived,
States should be asked to accept a United Nations or
impartial international presence. Where a conflict has
broken out, the United Nations should apply a standard
operating procedure of dispatching a fact-finding
mission, including for the purpose of observing and
reporting on the treatment of civilians. That would
facilitate both a political and a humanitarian response.
In that context, particular attention should be paid to
the need to abrogate draconian laws and similar legal
or administrative measures that allow arbitrary
detention, torture and extrajudicial executions.

Where United Nations peacekeeping or observer
missions are already deployed, their mandates should
include observation of and reporting on the treatment
of civilian populations and, where possible, measures
to offer them protection. Adequate resources should be
provided to peacekeeping missions for that purpose.

Lastly, the humanitarian response to situations of
violations should be adequate and timely. For that
purpose, the United Nations humanitarian capacity
should be enhanced, predictable financing provided
and coordination reinforced. States should undertake to
allow United Nations assistance to all affected civilian
populations. There should be no "no go" areas where
civilian populations are under serious threat.

Collective action and multilateral solutions to
today's conflicts offer the best hope for millions of
civilians who are trapped between death and despair.
We must not fail in responding to this challenge. We
must act boldly in all situations where the survival of
millions of civilians caught in the vise of violence and
war is threatened.

