Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to express
my appreciation for this opportunity to address the
Security Council.

Canada thanks the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its ongoing
critical work and welcomes the latest report (S/2016/218)
of the Secretary-General. Canada is grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his briefing today and for his continued dedication
and commitment to advancing peace, development and
human rights in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is now into the second year of
its transformation decade, a crucial period for
strengthening security and moving beyond aid
dependence. We welcome the recent achievements of
the Afghan Government in the face of challenging
circumstances, including elaborating a new reform
agenda, dealing with a fragile economy, countering
an intensifying insurgency, engaging in the peace
process and undertaking efforts to strengthen regional
economic integration.

Canada supports the Afghan Government's efforts
to implement its reform agenda. Through 2017, we
will contribute $227 million in bilateral development
assistance to support programming in education,
health, women's and girls' rights and empowerment,
and humanitarian assistance through capacity-building
in disaster management.

Improved security remains key to Afghanistan's
short-term stability and to the achievement of its long-
term economic and development goals. It will also
encourage the return of refugees and help convince
Afghans to remain at home and contribute to their
country's future.

While Afghan security forces have stood strong in
the face of considerable challenges, the overall increase
in violence across much of the country, including
mounting civilian casualties, particularly among
children, points to the need for continued support for
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
(ANDSF). Canada is participating in current NATO-
led security efforts by providing $330 million over
three years to sustain the ANDSF.

(spoke in French)

Canada also supports an Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process and welcomes the recent efforts
of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group. While peace
will not come easily, we are heartened by the Group's
efforts and call on the Taliban to come to the table and
negotiate in good faith. Critical decisions for a lasting
peace cannot be taken without the participation of major
stakeholder groups affected by Afghanistan's conflict.

Canada also stresses the importance of ensuring
an inclusive peace process that allows the voices of
Afghan women to be heard, in line with resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. In this
vein, we welcome the Government of Afghanistan's
recent finalization of its national action plan for
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
this resolution.

Canada also continues to call upon the Government
of Afghanistan to fully implement the elimination of
violence against women law and to make every effort
to guarantee the participation of women in all facets of
Afghan life, free from violence and intimidation. We
welcome the Government's recent steps to strengthen
services for women, including through the launch
of an emergency fund to assist women victims of
violence. We also look forward to the Government of
Afghanistan's completion and implementation of the
women's economic empowerment national action plan.

Canada continues to stand with the Afghan people
as they strive for a more secure and prosperous future.
We call on Afghanistan's leaders to redouble their
collaborative efforts to keep Afghanistan moving
forward on the path towards improved stability,
accountability and self-reliance.

