Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I welcome the
presence of the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Dacie;
I have also listened carefully to Mr. Thaci's statement.

China has always maintained that Serbia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity should be fully
respected. Resolution 1244 (1999) is an important legal
foundation for addressing the question of Kosovo.
That task should be carried out within the framework
of the relevant resolutions and through dialogue and
negotiation between the parties concerned so as to
reach a mutually acceptable solution. China welcomes
the many rounds of high-level political dialogue
that have been held recently between Belgrade and
Pristina and that have made good progress. We hope
that both parties will remain committed to promoting
constructive dialogue, try to reach agreement on issues
in the relevant areas, and seek a lasting solution to the
question of Kosovo that will help maintain peace and
stability in the Balkans and in Europe generally.

At present, the security situation in Kosovo is
generally stable, but in the north tensions remain, and
we are very worried about the situation. The parties
concerned should adopt a prudent attitude, stick to
dialogue to settle their differences and refrain from
any action that might worsen the situation. China
appreciates the work done by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
Special Representative, and supports its continuing
efforts to implement the Council's mandate. We hope
that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo Force, the Kosovo and the other international
presences will strengthen their coordination in order to
ensure that they play a positive and constructive role in
settling the relevant issues.

China is very concerned about illegal trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. Any activities contravening
international law or international humanitarian
standards should be met with zero tolerance. The
United Nations should play its part in a comprehensive
and independent investigation of such cases.

