Mr. Sen (India): Please allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. I would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Greece for
its successful conduct of the Council presidency in July.
At this juncture, I would also like to thank Mr. Arnault,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing and to
congratulate him and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) on their valuable
work in the fulfilment of their mandate in Afghanistan.

It has been a year since the Council last held an
open debate on Afghanistan. I wish to take this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
this open debate on a critical issue that is so vital for
the future of Afghanistan, regional security and,
indeed, international security, particularly in the
context of the struggle against terrorism. Needless to
say, this issue therefore continues to require the most
careful attention of the international community.

In his latest report on Afghanistan, of 12 August
2005 (S/2005/525), the Secretary-General concluded
that the Bonn process had enjoyed some remarkable
achievements, in particular the transition to elected
political institutions. He correctly attributed those
achievements to the steadfastness of the Afghan people
as they struggle to emerge from the devastation of
more than two decades of war. Indeed, under President
Karzai's leadership, the Afghan Government has made
commendable progress since the Bonn Agreement of
December 2001. President Karzai's re-election was a
manifestation of the strong desire of Afghans to
participate in their country's political process.

The international community now looks forward
to the successful conclusion of the forthcoming
parliamentary and provincial elections next month,
which will mark a successful conclusion to the formal
Bonn process. We are confident that the present
democratic process in Afghanistan will lead to the
establishment of a strong and vibrant parliament that
will be able to play its due role in the development of
the country. India has been privileged to be associated
with the construction of the Afghan parliament
building, which will be a symbol of the friendship and
cooperation between the two countries.

Unfortunately, as pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2005/525), the completion of
the political transition is a vital step, but that alone is
not enough. The Secretary-General drew attention to
the fact that Afghanistan today - especially in the
south and in parts of the east - is suffering from a
level of insecurity not seen since the departure of the
Taliban. The Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
also pointedly referred to relevant paragraphs of the
report. In addition, the Secretary-General drew
attention to the rising level of insurgency in the
country and to the sophistication of the insurgents'
weaponry. While pointing out that the country's
southern region and parts of its eastern region have
borne the brunt of the recent upsurge in violence, the
Secretary-General expressed particular concern about
the growing influence of non-Afghan elements in the
security environment. He reported that attacks by
extremist elements - including those claiming
allegiance to the Taliban and Al-Qaida - take place on
an almost daily basis. As the Secretary-General pointed
out, the Taliban and the Hezb-Islami-Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar group are not autonomous operations, their
external sources of support must be tackled, and the
insurgency's sources of funding, training and safe
haven must also be effectively addressed. The
successes achieved so far in the security sector have
included the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme and the containment of
factional clashes, which has become a localized issue
and is no longer a threat to national security.

The continuing external support for extremist
elements is aimed at undermining the central authority
of the Afghan Government, as the incidents of violence
prevent the expansion of State authority, hinder
reconstruction efforts and stall the democratic process.
The presidential elections of October 2004 clearly
showed that, given the necessary will, such cross-
border terrorism can be controlled and contained. A
statement made yesterday by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) provides
the troubling assessment that, despite the positive
impact of campaigning and voter registration ahead of
Afghanistan's parliamentary and provincial elections,
the threat of violent attacks could have an impact on
the process. It is clear that these extremist elements
and their sponsors have decided to attack soft targets
such as candidates, election officers, aid workers, local
religious leaders and others. It appears that the
elections are not the only target of these groups, their
objective being the long-term destabilization of
Afghanistan. The tap that controls the influx of
extremist elements must not only be closed for the
forthcoming parliamentary elections; it must be shut
off for good.

We are in full agreement with the assessment,
made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan in his briefing to the Security
Council in June 2005 (see S/PV.5215), that the
international response to thwart the destabilization
strategy cannot be limited to combat operations on the
ground. It is necessary to resolutely attack the
financing of terrorists, the safe havens where they are
trained and the networks that support them. The recent
bombings in London highlighted once again the
international ramifications of terrorist networks and the
infrastructure sustaining them.

The international presence in Afghanistan
provided by the NATO-led International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and the United States-led
coalition forces may be required at this stage, but we
feel that to address threats to national security, both
internal and external, indigenous Afghan security
structures should be put in place as early as possible. In
collaboration with the Afghan Government and
international partners, India is ready to provide any
assistance that will help speed up the rebuilding of the
Afghan National Army and National Police force. India
remains fully supportive of efforts to expand and
consolidate the authority of the central Government
throughout Afghanistan. The enormous task of
rebuilding Afghanistan can be achieved only through
united efforts by the Afghan leadership and the Afghan
people.

Afghanistan remains the largest opium-producing
country in the world, providing nearly 87 per cent of
the world's supply. That accounted for an estimated 60
per cent of Afghanistan's 2004 gross domestic product.
Drug trafficking is feeding criminal and terrorist
activities. A continued increase in the cultivation,
production and trafficking of narcotic drugs could
undermine the political and economic reconstruction of
Afghanistan and would have potentially dangerous
repercussions for the region and beyond. In response to
a request by the United Kingdom - the lead nation in
tackling the drug problem - for contributions to the
recently established Counter-Narcotics Trust Fund,
India is exploring the possibility of taking up a pilot
project on a community development programme to
wean farmers away from poppy cultivation.

As part of the international effort, India is
committed to supporting the economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Afghanistan. The current
commitment of India, as the sixth-largest donor
country supporting Afghanistan's reconstruction,
exceeds $500 million - a substantial amount for a
non-traditional donor like India. Of that amount,
projects amounting to $480.82 million have already
been operationalized or completed. To save time, I will
not go into the details of those projects, but will
mention only the inclusion of a vital element of
infrastructure: the construction of a 220-kilowatt
double-circuit transmission line from Pul-e-Khumri to
Kabul and a substation at Kabul, the reconstruction of
roads and the Salma Dam power project, and the
provision of aircraft. In addition, India, in partnership
with the Afghan Government, has undertaken projects
in virtually all parts of Afghanistan covering a very
wide range of sectors, including, as I said,
hydroelectricity and road construction, but also
agriculture, industry, telecommunications, information
and broadcasting, education and health.

The emergence of a strong, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan is essential for peace and
stability in the region and beyond. In a few days, the
Prime Minister of India, Mr. Manmohan Singh, will be
visiting Afghanistan in an endeavour to strengthen and
support democracy and economic growth in all
possible ways. As the Prime Minister has stated, "We
have had historic links and relations with Afghanistan.
It is our desire to see Afghanistan prosperous and
strong."

