Mr. Bhuckory (Mauritius): I thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this public meeting to further
discuss the deteriorating situation in the Middle East.

Almost all the speakers who have spoken since
this morning agree that there is indeed total despair in
the region and that the situation is clearly out of
control. We are deeply concerned by the ongoing
outrageous Israeli assaults and the reoccupation of
Bethlehem, Ramallah and other Palestinian towns. Yet
what we fear the most is the turn these events might
take in the days ahead. We have said on previous
occasions that the military assault by Israel can only be
counter-productive. Many other delegations rightly
share the same assessment. In a statement made to the
National Assembly yesterday, the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius commented on the explosive situation in the
Middle East and condemned the unprecedented scale of
the violence by Israel on the Palestinian Authority and
on the Palestinian people. He also condemned the
Palestinian suicide bombings.

At the Arab League Summit in Beirut last week,
the Arab world extended a hand of friendship to Israel
by endorsing the Arab peace initiative of Saudi Crown
Prince Abdullah. These proposals have the potential of
showing us a real ray of light at the end of the tunnel.
They provide a basis for the two parties to engage in a
meaningful dialogue with a view to ending the
stalemate. It is regrettable that instead of taking
advantage of this opportunity, Prime Minister Sharon
has further compromised the prospects for peace in the
region. The senseless and miscalculated Israeli actions
lead us to wonder whether Prime Minister Sharon has
any intention of making peace with the Palestinians.

Mauritius reiterates its condemnation of all acts
of terror and suicide bombings, especially against
innocent civilians. At the same time, it must be
emphasized that the Israeli actions in West Bank cannot
be justified. In fact, subjecting President Arafat to the
worst form of humiliation, besieging him for months,
speaking openly about his exile, reoccupying
Palestinian towns, destroying all the infrastructure that
the Palestinians have built over the years and forcing
them to bury their dead inhumanely can only further
radicalize and infuriate even the moderate Arab world.

The protests and street demonstrations in various
capitals are living proof of the grief and anger of the
Arab world. This will no doubt cause a backlash on
Israel. It will seriously compromise the vision of the
Security Council of a region where two States, Israel
and Palestine, would live side by side within secure
and recognized borders. We fear that the recent
hostilities across the blue line are not just a beginning.
An Arab world in turmoil would have dire
consequences for international peace and security, with
eventual disastrous effects on the global economy.

We again emphasize that President Arafat
remains the only interlocutor with whom Israel can
negotiate peace. We repeat once again that in this
difficult situation, he must be strengthened instead of
being isolated and marginalized. He is the legitimate
leader of the Palestinians. His physical integrity and
personal safety must be protected at all costs, and
Israel has to unconditionally end the siege on him.

Two weeks ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002), and on Saturday last it adopted
resolution 1402 (2002). The Council demanded the
immediate cessation of all acts of violence and called
for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian
cities. Unfortunately, both these resolutions have been
ignored. It is absolutely important for both Palestine
and Israel to implement fully these two resolutions and
to adhere strictly not only to their letter but also to their
spirit.

Before the adoption of resolution 1402 (2002),
the Council President clearly stressed the non-
sequential nature of the steps outlined in its paragraph
1. It would be intellectually dishonest to claim that a
ceasefire and an end of suicide attacks should precede
any pullout from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah. There is clearly no conditionality for an
Israeli pullout from Ramallah and other Palestinian
Cities.

My delegation is ready to support any draft
resolution that would reaffirm the Council's demand
for the immediate implementation of all provisions
contained in resolution 1402 (2002). It is also time for
the Security Council to engage in a meaningful
discussion on the dispatch of an international observer
force in the area that could restore a climate of trust
between the two parties.

There are influential world leaders who should be
called upon to act in such a difficult situation, and we
call upon them to press for an immediate Israeli
withdrawal. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has rightly
said that security cannot be dealt with in isolation and
that it has to be addressed alongside key political and
humanitarian issues. Hence, any proposal to address
the security concerns and which fails to include steps
towards resolving the core political issues will be
doomed to fail. The inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to statehood based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) should remain
central to any initiative. The Palestinian people will
never settle for less, nor should the international
community.

