Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. I thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for his briefing, and I also appreciate the
additional comments and information provided by the
representative of the European Union. I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his remarks.

We deeply deplore the incident of 2 July in the
city of Mitrovica, which resulted in one tragic death
and the injury of several other people. We extend our
condolences to the bereaved family of the deceased,
and we join in condemning violence and calling for
restraint. We expect appropriate measures to fully
investigate the incident and to bring those responsible
to justice.

10-43 669
Although the overall security situation in Kosovo
remains largely calm, the risk of ethnic tensions in the
north has increased after this tragic incident. All
concerned must ensure that Kosovo is a place where
ethnic tolerance and multiculturalism allow for
peaceful coexistence among communities.

It should be remembered that resolution 1244
(1999) remains in force and therefore continues to be
the key parameter guiding the international community
concerning the situation in Kosovo. That position was
expressed by Brazil in the public hearings conducted at
the International Court of Justice in December 2009, as
part of the proceedings related to the advisory opinion
on the unilateral declaration of independence by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.

As the Security Council continues to be seized of
the matter, the opinion of the Court, possibly later this
year, will be a crucial element to bear in mind. Until
such time, UNMIK should continue to play its
constructive role in promoting engagement between
Pristina and Belgrade. We expect both parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission. Success in this area
will benefit all.

In this case, our collective duty is to ensure that
every minority community can be protected from
threats or acts of intimidation and harassment. We join
the Secretary-General's call to all sides to commit to
dialogue, to help diffuse tensions and to keep peace
and stability in the region.

