Mr. Le Luong Minh: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) - Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam - on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security.

We congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for January 2010. We thank
you, Mr. President, and the Chinese delegation for
taking the initiative of convening the Council's open
debate today on this very important issue.

As they are suffering from the consequences of
the tragic earthquake, our hearts go out to the people of
Haiti and to all United Nations and other international
staff serving in the country, including those with the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We wish
them a speedy recovery.

In our ever more complex and interconnected
world, marked by an unprecedented level of
interdependence and where peace and cooperation for
development remain the dominant trend, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is crucial and beneficial not
only to safeguarding peace and security but also to
8
development. In such a world, there is a great need to
foster a stronger partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in responding to the
challenges arising from both traditional and
non-traditional security issues.

At the 2005 World Summit, heads of State and
Government expressed their resolve to expand
consultation and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations through formalized
agreements and, as appropriate, the involvement of
regional organizations in the work of the Security
Council.

In October 2005, the Council adopted its first
resolution on regional organizations, expressing its
determination to take appropriate steps to promote
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. Since then, the Council
has engaged in activities aimed at stepping up such
cooperation, culminating in the adoption of resolution
1809 (2008) which, while focusing on specific
measures to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, expresses its
determination to take effective measures to further
enhance the relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the Organization.

ASEAN shares belief that there is a need to take
stock of all the discussions and activities in this respect
with a view to carefully considering the development
of an effective mechanism that facilitates the fullest
contribution of regional organizations to the work of
the United Nations, including the appropriate capacity-
building assistance to regional organizations in the
performance of their roles.

To further strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, ASEAN is
convinced of the following.

First, cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security should take advantage
of the complementary capacities and comparative
advantages of all organizations, making full use of
their experience, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and the statutes of regional organizations.
Indeed, regional organizations can play an important
role in promoting and maintaining peace and security
in their respective regions, through, inter alia, regional
dispute settlement mechanisms. Within ASEAN, for
example, we have the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation
l0-20793
in Southeast Asia as such a framework. Such regional
dispute settlement arrangements should be
complemented by political, financial and physical
support from the international community, as
appropriate.

Secondly, regional initiatives have flourished in
every part of the world, launched at different scales
and covering different fields, depending on their
regional particularities and needs. Such initiatives
encourage dialogue and consultation, reduce
misunderstanding and create channels for cooperative
projects. International organizations, including United
Nations agencies, should work with these initiatives,
strengthen their regional capacities and encourage
mutual learning.

Thirdly, enhancing information exchange,
delineating clear areas of responsibility, respecting
local ownership of any arrangement for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
and ensuring their full implementation are also
important conditions for fostering effective
partnerships.

As an important mechanism for strengthening
peace, friendship and cooperation in South-East Asia,
ASEAN has attached great importance to fostering its
institutional framework. A historic milestone was
reached in the evolution of ASEAN when its charter
entered into force in December 2008. Besides giving
ASEAN a legal personality, the charter will enhance its
institutional accountability and decision-making
mechanism, and transform ASEAN into a more
effective, cohesive and rules-based organization.
ASEAN is striving to become, by 2015, a community
with three main pillars: political-security, economic
and sociocultural. At the ASEAN summit in early
2009, ASEAN leaders adopted a road map for an
ASEAN community 2009-2015, which consists of
blueprints for realizing goals and targets for all three
pillars.

The ASEAN Political-Security Community
(APSC) contributes to promoting peace and security in
the wider Asia-Pacific region. The APSC seeks to
enhance peace and security through an effective
conflict prevention and resolution mechanism and
peacekeeping activities. In this context, it is pertinent
to have systematic cooperation between ASEAN and
its member States and the United Nations system. In
the face of strategic gaps in international support to
peacebuilding, enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional actors to draw on each
others' comparative advantages is key.

ASEAN has worked actively to foster good
relationships with other countries and groupings by
developing dialogue partnerships with the latter. Within
the Asia-Pacific region, ASEAN is at the centre of
various important regional organizations, such as the
ASEAN+3 process, the East Asia Summit and the
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), all of which serve to
promote a region of peace and stability. In particular,
the ASEAN Regional Forum is the primary forum for
enhancing political and security dialogue and
cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region. The recently
adopted ARF Vision Statement 2020 envisions the ARF
developing partnership and networks of cooperation
with various security organizations and forums and
with international organizations in order to create
synergies among them.

ASEAN was granted observer status in the
General Assembly on 4 December 2006. The two
organizations have also signed a memorandum of
understanding on cooperation, which provides an
important framework for further enhancing ASEAN-
United Nations relations and cooperation and allowing
ASEAN to make greater contributions to the work of
the United Nations and to the promotion of peace,
stability and development in the world.

As proudly proclaimed in its charter, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations is a regional
organization committed to international cooperation for
peace, security, stability, justice and development. With
deep gratitude for all the assistance, partnership and
cooperation rendered to ASEAN over the years, all of
us in ASEAN share the determination to work with
each other, with other countries and with organizations
like the United Nations to solve the many problems
presently faced by the world and advance the cause of
international peace, security and development.

