The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium, documents S/ 1996/472 and Addendum 1.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1996/500, which contains the
text of a letter dated 28 June 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, in accordance with
paragraph 6 of resolution 1037 (1995), has considered
the report of the Secretary-General of 26 June 1996

(S/ 1996/472) submitted pursuant to this resolution on
the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES).

"The Security Council notes that the
implementation of the Basic Agreement on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (S/l995/951, annex), signed on 12
November 1995 (the Basic Agreement), is
proceeding according to the timetable established by
this Agreement. In particular it notes with
appreciation that the demilitarization proceeded
smoothly and was completed on 20 June 1996. It
expresses its satisfaction at the cooperation that both
parties have shown in this respect. It calls upon both
sides to refrain from any action that might raise
tension and to continue to cooperate closely with
UNTAES on all aspects of the Basic Agreement to
maintain peace and security in the Region. It
expresses its readiness to consider favourably the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
military observers in UNTAES as recommended in
the report.

"The Security Council expresses its satisfaction
with the work already achieved by UNTAES, in
particular through its operational joint
implementation committees, for the re-establishment
of normal conditions of life for all the inhabitants of
the Region. The Council welcomes the efforts now
in train to begin the return of displaced persons and
refugees to their homes in the Region. It notes that
it is equally important that persons who fled from
their homes in Western Slavonia and elsewhere in
Croatia, in particular in the Krajina, should be
permitted to return to their homes of origin. The
Council calls upon both parties to cooperate fully
with UNTAES in that respect.

"The Security Council recalls the statement of
its President of 22 May 1996 (S/PRST/l996/26).
The Council regrets that the Government of the
Republic of Croatia has not yet taken steps to adopt
a comprehensive amnesty law concerning all persons
who, either voluntarily or by coercion, served in the
civil administration, military or police forces of the
local Serb authorities in the former United Nations
Protected Areas, with the exception of those who
committed war crimes as defined in international
law. The Council urges that this action should

 

betaken as soon as possible and calls on the Croatian
Government to cooperate with UNTAES to that end.

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the worsening economic situation in the Region,
particularly since the closure in April of the Djeletovci
oilfields, which constitute the Region's most important
economic resource, and at the subsequent lack of
revenue available to the local administration to meet
salaries and other operating costs of the Region. The
Council urges the Government of the Republic of
Croatia to cooperate closely with UNTAES to identify
and provide funding for the local administration and
public services. It also underlines the importance of
economic development in stabilizing the Region.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the efforts of UNTAES to establish and train a
Transitional Police Force which will have the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of law and order,
operating under the authority of the Transitional
Administrator and monitored by the United Nations
civilian police. The Council also supports the efforts
of UNTAES and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to facilitate mine
clearing for humanitarian purposes. It calls upon
States and others concerned urgently to contribute in
support of such activities.

"The Security Council commends the
Transitional Administrator and all the personnel of
UNTAES for the impressive results they have
achieved so far and expresses its full support for
them.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.rn.

