Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French):
France associates itself with the position that will be
stated by Ambassador De Ruyt on behalf of the
European Union. I would just like to make several
comments from our national perspective. First, we
thank Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno for the briefing he has
just given. I would like to focus on two issues: the
elections and security.
As regards the elections, we are 90 days away
from election day. The election stems from the
Constitutional Framework promulgated by
Mr. Haekkerup. It is thus a new and important stage in
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We are
gratified by the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). These two organizations are doing their best
to make the elections a success and to ensure that the
transfer of power to the institutions of provisional self-
government takes place in an orderly fashion.

But as the date draws near, the commitment of all
the inhabitants of Kosovo, whatever their ethnic origin
may be, is indispensable. All the parties concerned
have responsibilities in that connection. As regards the
registration of members of the Kosovo Serb
community, momentum has developed; we hope that it
will accelerate in the coming days and weeks, and that
the Serb community will decide to participate in the
vote.

By voting on 17 November every Kosovar citizen
will make his or her voice heard. Every vote counts,
every vote has weight. To influence the decisions of the
future autonomous institutions and to promote respect
for their own interests all electors should participate in
selecting their representatives in a democratic manner.
We wish to echo Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno's appeal to
all ethnic communities to participate, including, of
course, the Serb community.

We also salute the appointment of the Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, as head of the
Serb coordination centre for Kosovo. That has been
followed in recent weeks by talks between Mr. Covic
and Mr. Haekkerup. These meetings are a very positive
development. We encourage the intensification of the
dialogue.

Secondly, as regards security issues, we are
gratified that UNMIK is promulgating a series of
regulations to combat terrorism and organized crime in
Kosovo. The new police and justice pillar of the United
Nations Mission will promote the smooth
implementation of those measures. We must make sure
that the regulations in force leave no weak spots that
could be exploited by criminals.

The Kosovo Force (KFOR) too must remain
vigilant. We are gratified that its troops along the
border with Macedonia have recently been reinforced.
The situation in Macedonia requires that increased
attention be paid to illegal activities along the Kosovo
border. In that regard, we read with interest the
Secretary-General's reply to the President of the
Republic of Macedonia on this issue, among others.

The European Union has become deeply engaged
in the search for a political solution in Macedonia.
Mr. Solana, the High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy and the Special
Representative of the European Union in Macedonia,
Mr. Francois Leotard, have been vigorously engaged in
the field, along with Mr. James Pardew, to facilitate
dialogue among the parties. This contributed to the
signing by the Macedonian factions in Skopje of the 13
August agreement which provides a foundation for a
thorough reform of the Macedonian State.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is now
engaged in collecting the arms that the National
Liberation Army of Macedonia has agreed to turn over.
Five hundred and thirty French soldiers are
participating in this operation, which springs from the
goodwill of the parties. France is also supporting
European Union efforts to achieve lasting stability in
Macedonia, in particular through a donor conference
and strengthened humanitarian and macro-economic
aid.

Finally, I would like to return to the issue of
resolution 1160 (1998). In harmony with what Russia
and the United States have already stated, France, too,
feels that the conditions have now been met for the
unrestricted lifting of the arms embargo on Yugoslavia.
We hope that the Council will take up the lifting of the
embargo as soon as possible.

