The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) does not distinguish between peoples or recognize borders. Although the pandemic affects some groups more than others, no group is immune to its devastating outcomes. That is why a global response is required to contain, mitigate and defeat COVID-19 - one based on unity, solidarity and increased international cooperation. We must all work together to bring this pandemic to an end by offering assistance and support to one another, including the exchange of medical knowledge and best practices. This is not a time for politics, but rather for cooperation. I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm Israel's commitment to and solidarity with all countries that are fighting this pandemic and to send our best wishes and prayers to people who have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and their families. Israel will continue to work with Governments from around the world to help bring this crisis to an end. In times of crisis, both people and regimes show their true colours, and, while we have witnessed examples of extreme kindness and goodwill the world over, some have resorted once again to their notorious behaviour. They have contaminated the global fight against the pandemic with their petty political interests. Israel has chosen to put politics aside and embrace the spirit of cooperation. We have strengthened our work with the United Nations and the Palestinian Authority in order to mitigate the disastrous effects of the pandemic in our region. We have joined the effort to fund the emergency plan presented by Mr. Mladenov and Mr. McGoldrick. Israel is also assisting the Palestinian Authority to counter the economic toll of the crisis. Israel has granted thousands of permits to allow Palestinians who work in Israel to continue to do so. Additionally, the flow of goods has continued in order to ensure the adequacy of supplies. In the past few weeks alone, over 600 tons of medical supplies, 25,000 tons of food and 60,000 tons of building materials have entered the Gaza Strip. In terms of medical assistance, Israel is also collaborating with the Palestinian Authority to conduct professional medical training for Palestinian workers, helping to ensure that they have the tools and knowledge they need. In addition to sharing best practices, coordination and training, Israel has also donated large amounts of equipment to the Palestinian Authority, including testing kits, protection kits and other medical supplies. Last month, Israel's Head of State, President Rivlin, and Chairman Abbas discussed coordination to fight the virus. I wish to remind the Security Council that at its 30 March meeting at which Special Coordinator Mladenov briefed the Council, he and Council members praised the far-reaching measures that Israel has taken (see S/2020/263). Unfortunately, in sharp contrast to our efforts, the Palestinian Authority has chosen a different path. Instead of joining Israel and the rest of the international community in promoting unity and solidarity, it has chosen hatred and libel. At the same time that it receives Israeli aid and assistance, the Palestinian Authority spreads lies and incitement against Israel in the media and in official letters to the Security Council. Members have received those letters. Although there is never a time to shamelessly lie and seek to incite, there is no doubt that an international crisis the likes of which the world has never seen is an extremely inappropriate time to do so. Yet, even now, the Palestinian Authority cynically works to promote a false narrative. This, of course, is nothing new. During times of crisis and disease, anti-Semitism has always raised its ugly head. For centuries, Jews have been used as scapegoats for the outbreak of diseases. As the Black Death ravaged Europe in the fourteenth century, rumours spread that Jews conspired and poisoned wells, extending the epidemic's wide reach. In the eighteenth century, the Jews were blamed for the plague in Algeria. In every generation, for every calamity that befalls our societies, people blame the Jews. We are witnessing this again today. I ask the representative of Palestine how he could dare slander our efforts. How dare he lie about the brave soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces? How dare he blame them for spreading the virus? These soldiers risk their lives to contain the outbreak for Israelis and Palestinians alike. The Palestinian accusations are not only shameless lies; they are anti-Semitic. Mr. Mansour should be ashamed of himself. He should apologize for what he has said and what he has written. He has made it clear that he prefers hating Israel to helping the Palestinian people. The Palestinian Authority would like to have its cake and eat it too. It happily accepts any and all assistance from Israel and expects it to continue to provide that help even as it incites hatred against us and spreads anti-Semitic libel. This outrageous and destructive behaviour cannot and will not be tolerated. The Palestinian Authority must decide if incitement against Israel is more important than the fruitful cooperation intended to save Palestinian lives. It is absurd for the Palestinian Authority to be willing to sacrifice the important international solidarity that all members of the General Assembly have supported, in order to score a few cheap political points. These actions are shameful and should be met with contempt by the entire international community. These actions will have consequences. Unfortunately, the Palestinian Authority is not alone in taking advantage of the crisis to try and promote the achievement of destructive goals. The Iranian regime has asked for the lifting of the sanctions that were put in place to stop its nuclear and malign regional activities so as to allow them to care for their citizens. However, the regime's sudden interest in the well-being of its citizens should not be mistaken for actual compassion. It is just another ploy for the regime to profit from its people's suffering. There is no need to lift sanctions to provide the Iranian people with the medical and humanitarian assistance they need. President Rouhani said so himself at his Cabinet's economic meeting on 2 April. In reality, the sanctions have no real impact on the regime's ability to combat the pandemic. The Iranian regime's attempt to launch a military satellite on Tuesday proves that it chooses to focus on military aggression rather than on dealing with the COVID-19 outbreak. The regime continues to develop advanced missile technologies instead of caring for the tens of thousands of Iranian citizens who have been affected by the virus. Israel calls upon the international community to condemn this latest launch and impose further sanctions on the Iranian regime. To be clear, Israel, as always, stands with the Iranian people. At the same time, we must not allow the regime to take advantage of this crisis nor permit the establishment of a nuclear-armed terrorist regime. A crisis is not the time for cynical political agendas. 33/99 34/99 Israel will continue to work tirelessly to find a vaccine that will serve the entire world. We will continue to offer assistance to all who need it, no matter their race, gender or religion. The COVID-19 pandemic has presented the world with an unprecedented crisis, but it has also presented us with an opportunity to come together. The pandemic has forced us to learn that in the globalized world of the twenty-first century our fates are very much dependent on one another and that there is more that unites us than divides us.
