Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): Permit
me, Sir, to congratulate you in French, a language that
you wield so admirably. I believe that every member of
the international community and of the Security
Council duly appreciates your linguistic talents,
particularly in this language, which you imbue with
undeniable poetic grace. I wish to express my joy at
seeing you in the presidency of the Security Council
and also to thank your predecessor, our friend
Ambassador Stefan Tafrov of Bulgaria, for his
excellent work as President of the Council last month. I
wish you every success in your undertakings and in the
difficult tasks that await you this month.

(spoke in English)

In the year since the horrific events of 11
September, the international community, and
particularly this Council, have worked with great
resolve and determination to adopt measures that will
substantially hinder the ability of terrorist
organizations to perpetrate their evil acts.

Israel continues to strongly support and cooperate
with the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and extends its congratulations to its Chairman,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, for his most capable leadership.
We fully support the counter-terrorist measures that the
Council has established, as well as the CTC's efforts to
monitor their implementation. Much important
progress has been made and much more remains to be
done.

As a country that has endured the perpetration of
countless acts of terrorism on its soil and which
continues to deal with that threat on a daily basis,
Israel is acutely aware of the dangers terrorism poses to
free and open societies and of the need to combat it
uncompromisingly and without fear. Israel also
understands the challenges facing certain States that
have little experience in battling terrorism. Israel
stands ready to assist those States by sharing the many
strategies and techniques it has developed in its
decades-long struggle against terror.

The tragic events of 11 September have taught the
world many important lessons about terrorism and the
threat it poses to all civilized nations. First and
foremost, the world has recognized the fact that
terrorism does not exist in a vacuum, but can survive
only with the support and complicity of States.
Resolution 1373 (2001) was predicated on the
conviction that if we deny terrorists the safe harbour
and financial and logistical support they currently
receive from States, we will have dealt a serious blow
to the global terrorist infrastructure. These States and
others that support terrorism must be targeted no less
than the terrorists themselves.

Without the training areas and safe harbour that
Al-Qaeda enjoyed in Afghanistan, the attacks of 11
September would likely have been impossible. In the
Middle East, many terrorist groups receive training and
funding from States in the region, including payments
of tens of thousands of United States dollars to the
families of suicide bombers. We have also learned that
the amount of money and training required to
perpetrate a massive act of terrorism is frighteningly
small. Just as only a few determined individuals and a
relatively small amount of money succeeded in
shocking the world on 11 September, it takes only one
country granting safe harbour and financial and
logistical support to terrorists to sustain a large,
complex and deadly organization.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee must therefore
insist on full compliance with resolution 1373 (2001)
by every United Nations Member State. Whereas the
cooperation of 180 or 185 Member States on issues
such as sustainable development or combating
HIV/AIDS is generally considered an extraordinary
achievement, the failure of even one State to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) could
portend widespread disaster.

The CTC must look carefully and
comprehensively at each country's report. It must
scrutinize and draw attention to gaps, failures and
oversights. It must possess the will, determination and
courage to expose and confront those States that have
failed to fulfil their responsibilities under resolution
1373 (2001) - a resolution adopted under Chapter VII
of the Charter in recognition of the threat to
international peace and security posed by terrorists.
The consequences of failure are potentially so severe
that to turn a blind eye to even one State's failure to
abide by its responsibilities is to threaten the security
of the entire world.

Another lesson we have learned is that, even in
the face of overwhelming evidence, certain parties
continue to fabricate distinctions between different
types of terror in a deliberate attempt to obscure and
divert the international community's fight against
terrorism. These parties maintain that differences exist
between so-called good terrorism and bad terrorism,
between the justifiable targeting of civilians and the
unjustifiable targeting of civilians.

Israel believes that such distinctions are not only
wrong and contrary to the most basic principles of
international law, but that they are also profoundly
dangerous. Accepting that terrorism can be legitimate
under certain political conditions threatens to severely
undermine those parties willing to resolve disputes
through peaceful means. If the international community
tolerates any act of terrorism as a legitimate tactic, it
risks discouraging the very methods it has championed
for the peaceful resolution of disputes.

Furthermore, accepting that there are different
kinds of terrorism will weaken the international
community's war on terrorism by allowing States to
take shelter behind the argument that the type of
terrorism they support is of the "justifiable" kind. We
must defend the principle that no cause or grievance
ever justifies the deliberate and indiscriminate
targeting of civilians. We must define terrorism on the
basis of what one does, not what one does it for.

As the Secretary-General declared in the
aftermath of the attacks of 11 September, and as he has
emphasized on other occasions,

"There can be no acceptance of those who would
seek to justify the deliberate taking of innocent
civilian life, regardless of cause or grievance. If
there is one universal principle that all peoples
can agree on, surely it is that." (A/56/PV.]2, p. 3)

The cause of terrorism is fundamentally the
success of terrorism. If terrorist organizations and their
patrons see that they can engage in morally abhorrent
tactics without losing sympathy or international
standing, it will merely embolden them and those who
emulate them. If terrorist tactics succeed in
intimidating the international community and
extracting concessions from it, we are only inviting
further terror and run the risk of destabilizing vast
regions of the globe.

The success of any terrorist organization serves
as an inspiration to terrorist organizations elsewhere.
Conversely, the defeat of terrorism anywhere, and our
collective refusal never to succumb to its threats, will
send a clear message to terrorists everywhere. If we are
to be victorious in our campaign to rid the world of
terrorism, we must clearly demonstrate our resolve
never to reward terrorism or to allow terrorists to
succeed in their goals.

Those who trample our most fundamental values
by targeting innocent civilians, and those regimes that
do not act to prevent such atrocities by failing to fulfil
their obligations under resolution 1373 (2001), must be
made to pay a price. It is the responsibility of the
Security Council to set a high price for such actions
and to take the steps necessary to exact it.

