Mr. Toure (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Egypt on its successful presidency
of the Security Council during the month of August.

It is indeed my honour to introduce the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) (8/2017/695). I would like to provide my
analysis of the most recent developments in the process
to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the immediate
steps to be taken, as well as the role that the member
States of UNOGBIS should continue to play in order to
ensure long-term stability and realize the country's full
economic and social development potential.

In that regard, I would like to underscore that the
Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) road map remain
the keys to resolving the current crisis and to helping
Guinea-Bissau address the structural causes of its
political instability and the recurring institutional
deadlocks the country has faced since its independence.
The implementation of the Agreement and the road
map will require political will from within Guinea-
Bissau, as well as long-term commitment from the
international community.

(spoke in English)

The political situation in Guinea-Bissau has
evolved since my last briefing to the Security Council
in February (see S/PV.7883). Three months ago,
tensions had reached a new peak, leading the Guinea-
Bissau base group of international partners to publicly
express, on 26 May, its concern about increasing
inflammatory rhetoric and the threats of violence
through demonstration, and to reiterate the calls for
restraint made by ECOWAS and the Security Council,
among others. By contrast, in recent weeks the tone
of media coverage in the country has quietened down
and dialogue aimed at resolving the political impasse
within the framework of the Conakry Agreement has
resumed between the parties to the crisis.

In July, for the first time since the start of the
crisis in 2015, bilateral discussions took place among
the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of the People's National Assembly and leaders
of the main political parties. I congratulate Bissau-
Guinean political actors for that positive development.
I must also acknowledge the continued efforts of the
international community to convey the need for urgency
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement, the
commitment of the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS to maintain their focus and engagement
on the crisis, and their determination to impose, if
need be, targeted sanctions on those who obstruct the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, as well as
the intense facilitation efforts led by the group of women
facilitators with advisory, technical and operational
support from UNOGBIS.

Next month, the three-month extension by
ECOWAS of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) to enable political actors to
fully implement the Conakry Agreement will expire.
The resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, in the
framework of the Conakry Agreement, requires our
continued engagement and support. As I brief the
Council today, I believe that essential conditions exist
for the implementation of the Agreement. To capitalize
on recent positive developments and on considerable
concerted international efforts, I call upon the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of States and Government and on
the Security Council to jointly urge the President of the
Republic to abide by his commitment to implement the
Conakry Agreement within the time frame provided
by ECOWAS; urge the leadership of the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
(PAIGC) and the remaining members of the group
of 15 parliamentarians expelled from the PAIGC to
complete their effective reintegration into the party;
and encourage the leadership of the PAIGC and the
leadership of the Party for Social Renewal, as well the
three other parties represented in Parliament, to reach
an agreement on a stability pact to ensure the stability
of the inclusive Government.

As we enter a sensitive electoral period, with the
legislative and presidential elections scheduled for
2018 and 2019, respectively, requisite measures must
be taken to establish an environment conducive to the
holding of free, peaceful and credible polls. I therefore
urge Member States to consider ways to financially
support the continued presence of ECOMIB through
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the completion of the next electoral cycle.

Recent positive developments include the
continuation of processes involving national
reconciliation with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS); combating drug trafficking and serious
organized crime, withjoint support from UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; as well
as mainstreaming the issues of women's human rights
and gender equality. Progress on the implementation of
reform of the security sector has been slow, although the
process has seen some positive developments, including
the recent endorsement of an ambitious three-year joint
programme on police, justice and corrections, which
focuses on building the capacities of national law
enforcement agencies and strengthening the capacities
of the national justice system. I have called on the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission to kindly
support resource mobilization efforts to ensure the
timely implementation of that programme

On the economic front, economic growth is forecast
to reach 5.2 per cent owing to another robust cashew
harvest in the context of favourable international market
prices. According to the International Monetary Fund,
the country has made notable progress in improving
the macroeconomic framework and the management of
public expenditures.

(spoke in French)

The long-term and concerted commitment of
ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations remains crucial in
supporting the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. Only by meeting the minimum
requirements of the Agreement will the country be
able to move forward in the reform process, organize
credible and peaceful elections, channel national
resources and mobilize the necessary international
assistance to support its socioeconomic development
for the well-being of its people. I encourage ECOWAS
to carry out an assessment of the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement as soon as possible through
its high-level ministerial committeee, in accordance
with the most recent decision taken at the fifty-first
ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State and
Government . That will allow the Authority to take
stock of the challenges that remain and to recommend
the appropriate measures to be taken.

I also encourage the ECOWAS Heads of State to
organize a meeting on Guinea-Bissau on the sidelines
of the upcoming session of the General Assembly.
Moreover, the realization of the visit envisaged by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in
Bissau during this year, with a view to monitoring the
implementation of the decisions of the African Union

and ECOWAS, would be an important contribution
to maintaining the commitment of the international
community alongside Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, in
so much as possible, it would be desirable for such a visit
to be made in conjunction with the Security Council.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my
sincere thanks to the Council for the unflagging interest
that it has taken in the development of the situation
in Guinea-Bissau, as evidenced by the meetings and
press statements on the subject. It is important that
the Council maintain its commitment. In that regard,
a special session of consultations could be devoted to
Guinea-Bissau on the sidelines ofthe upcoming General
Assembly session so as to agree on the next steps to be
taken so as to ensure the resolution of the crisis.

I congratulate ECOWAS and its new Chair,
President Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, and the ECOWAS
Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Conde'
of Guinea, for their tireless commitment to seeking
stability in that country and for their mediation efforts.
My thanks also go to all regional and international
partners, including the African Union, the CPLP and
the European Union, with whom UNIOGBIS will
continue to work closely so as to help the country stay
the course towards sustainable stability and prosperity,
which are the hallmarks of peace and regional and
international stability.

The President (spoke in Arabic) I thank Mr. Toure
for his briefing.

I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.

