Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 12 members of the Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS), namely, Kiribati, Fiji, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Papua New Guinea, Palau,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own
country, Tuvalu.

First, let me convey the Pacific's warmest
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to the
Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
convey the appreciation of the Pacific family for the
convening of this debate on how climate-induced
disasters are impacting our stability, peace and security.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Belize on behalf of
the Alliance of Small Island States. We align ourselves
also with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Nauru on behalf of
the Pacific Islands Forum members represented at the
United Nations.

Climate change is a global threat to peace and
security causing severe water stress, more prolonged
droughts, more frequent floods, and more severe and
intense cyclones. The devastating effects of more
frequent and intense natural disasters are being
experienced by all countries.

While the recovery and rebuilding aspects of
extreme weather events are well understood, although
still far from being adequately addressed, the peace and
security elements are less so. As Pacific small island
developing States (SIDS), we have long advocated for
due recognition to be given to the security implications
of climate-induced disasters and the existing threats to
our very way of life. These threats are the realities that
our Pacific peoples face on a daily basis.

We draw the Security Council's attention to the
increasing frequency of climate-induced disasters. In
the last month alone, the Pacific region has faced a
number of tropical cyclones and depressions, causing
severe rain and seawater flooding and damaging vital
infrastructure in Kiribati, in the Republic of Marshall
Islands, in Solomon Islands and in Fiji.

When small economies such as ours face sustained
damage year in and year out, our economies struggle to
have enough breathing space to recover. Climate-induced
disasters harm our economic stability, and without
urgent and serious efforts economic instability has the
potential to harm stability in governance and within the
wider society.

Our Pacific leaders, including those of Australia
and New Zealand, in 2018 reaffirmed that climate
change was the single greatest threat to the livelihoods,
security and well-being ofthe peoples ofthe Pacific. Our
leaders recognized the contributions of climate change
to a growing complex regional security environment
with the potential to harm both national and regional
stability and create extreme fragility.

The Pacific SIDS have spoken about the impacts
of enhanced fragility in numerous forums, and we
reiterate those sentiments. The Pacific is now the global
epicentre ofillegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
(IUU). International networks use IUU for money-
laundering, illicit drug trafficking and the illegal
movement of peoples across the oceans.

We are addressing the Security Council to appeal
to it to recognize the grave international security
dimensions of the issue. For this, the Security Council
needs to track and receive a clear analysis of the
ongoing security implications of climate-induced
disasters; the United Nations needs to focus attention on
climate-security issues through a special representative;
and preventive interventions need to be supported to
protect small States from falling into prolonged cycles
of instability.

We want to highlight the need for proper
assessment and analysis. An assessment is needed on
the capacity of the United Nations system to respond
to the security implications of climate change. We need
more information on the potentially dangerous points at
the nexus of climate and security. We need assessments
on ways in which we can improve our monitoring
and response. We need a climate-related security risk
analysis and information so that the Council is better
equipped to make more informed decisions. Such
information, assessment and analysis will allow the
Council and the system as a whole to better position
itself and allow for a targeted response that provides the
necessary assistance to vulnerable countries.

It is for this reason that we have been calling for
the appointment of a special representative on climate
and security. Such an appointment could ensure the
provision of a proper analysis and address the gaps and
issues of coordination among the various bodies of the
United Nations system. We reiterate our call for such a
special representative, and we seek the support of all
members of the Council.

Looking ahead, the challenges that are before us can
be achieved only through new modes of operation. We
therefore urge the Security Council not to turn a blind
eye to the very real security challenges that climate
change poses but to heed our call for action now.

