Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): It is ironic for us to be
addressing the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security at a time
when the ability of this Council to play it has been dealt a
devastating blow as a result of a unilateral action
undertaken without due debate and authorization from the
Council. Perhaps this underlines how deep is the need for
the reform of the working methods of the Security Council
and of its members in order to bring them into line with
the aspirations and expectations of the general
membership of the United Nations, as incamated in the
General Assembly.

The very first Article of the Charter outlines one of
the purposes of the establishment of the United Nations
as the maintenance of international peace and security.
While the General Assembly was empowered to consider
the general principles of cooperation in the maintenance
of international peace and security and to discuss any
questions brought before it by any Member State or by
the Security Council, the primary responsibility in this
regard was conferred on the Security Council itself. This
arrangement was devised with a view to ensuring prompt
and effective action by the United Nations.

Since the establishment of the United Nations, the
General Assembly and the Security Council have
attempted to work more or less in tandem in addressing
this subject. Meanwhile, the broader parameters of peace
and security have expanded in recent years. As the
Secretary-General has mentioned in his annual report to
the General Assembly, there exist
"many other threats to human security, such as
natural disasters, ethnic tension and human rights
violations" (A/53/1, para. 27)

which may also be sources of conflict. The United
Nations therefore needs to adopt an integrated approach
in addressing the issues concerning the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In the post-cold-war period, the dimensions of
United Nations activities have changed significantly. A
range of new concepts has emerged in the process of
dealing with the new challenges, including preventive
diplomacy, peace-building and peace enforcement. Some
of these concepts were thoroughly discussed by the
Member States in the Working Group on an Agenda for
Peace and its four sub-groups with a view to reaching
common understandings. While the two sub-groups on
coordination and on United Nations sanctions have
concluded their work, the sub-groups on preventive
diplomacy and peacekeeping and on post-conflict peace-
building could not conclude their deliberations for lack of
consensus. In the case of post-conflict peace-building,
only one country opposed the adoption of the
recommendations of the sub-group, and this led to a
deadlock. Hopefully, the recommendations of that sub-
group can move forward now.

 

In the immediate post-cold war period, there was a
surge in the peacekeeping activities of the United Nations.
In 1994, the total number of United Nations troops and
observers deployed went up to about 73,000 in 17
peacekeeping missions, but this was followed by a period
of relative decline. At present, there are only about 14,000
troops and observers deployed in 17 peacekeeping missions,
including the two new missions set up over the past year in
the Central African Republic and in Sierra Leone. The
decline in United Nations involvement cannot be taken to
indicate that the number of conflicts or disputes has
decreased. In fact, the decline is to be attributed only to the
reluctance to engage in new operations for various reasons,
including financial constraints. In some cases, this
responsibility has been conveniently shifted or sub-
contracted to regional organizations. We agree with the
Secretary-General that United Nations peacekeeping offers
unique advantages not to be found elsewhere, including the
universality of its mandate and the breadth of its
experience. The United Nations must therefore continue to
play its primary role in maintaining international peace and
security. The role of the regional organizations must be
strictly governed by Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.
The pitfalls of the United Nations undertaking half-
hearted peacekeeping operations are enormous, and stand as
a sad commentary on the actual capacity of the United
Nations to deliver. The J ammu and Kashmir dispute, one of
the very oldest on the agenda of the Security Council, is a
case in point. The failure of the international community to
fulfil its commitment to the people of J ammu and Kashmir
has brought India and Pakistan to conflict several times in
recent decades. Unfortunately, no determined and sustained
efforts have been made by the United Nations to resolve
the root causes of the conflict.

In View of the heightening tensions in the region in
recent months, we have requested the Secretary-General to
further strengthen the United Nations presence along the
line of control for effectively monitoring cross-border
violations along the disputed territory of Kashmir. A
request has also been made to the Secretary-General to
appoint a special representative to coordinate the efforts of
the United Nations in this volatile region. No follow-up has
been recorded so far.

This is particularly important because of the need to
defuse the new and heightened tensions that arose in South
Asia after the nuclear tests conducted by India, and then by
Pakistan, early this year. The Security Council, in its
wisdom, adopted resolution 1172 (1998) on 6 June 1998 in
an attempt to enforce non-proliferation, contrary to the
letter and the spirit of various international instruments
and treaties, rather than ensuring the implementation of its
own resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir, a dispute of
which the Security Council remains seized, and which is
the root cause of the tension between India and Pakistan.
We believe that the prime responsibility of the Security
Council should continue to be peace and security and
ensuring respect for its own resolutions.

The conflict in Afghanistan is another example of
the failure of the United Nations to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter. The international
cormnunity lost all interest in Afghanistan soon after the
withdrawal of the occupying Soviet forces from that
country. Afghanistan was allowed to be plunged into civil
strife, resulting in the further destruction of the war-
stricken country. Consequently, over 1.5 million Afghan
refugees still reside in Pakistan. Because of donor fatigue,
we are providing succour to them almost single-handedly.
The international community must accept the blame for
its inaction and should remedy the situation by playing its
due role in bringing peace to the Afghan people and by
contributing towards the reconstruction of that devastated
country.

The conflicts in Africa constitute almost 60 per cent
of the issues currently under consideration by the Security
Council. The best way to prepare for the emergencies in
that continent would be to develop an efficient early
warning system and to build appropriate capabilities to
effectively respond to simmering crises in Africa, as in
other parts of the world.

The key to a better management of peace and
security lies in a shared responsibility between the
General Assembly and the Security Council, balancing
what we expect of the latter, with its smaller membership,
with what we expect of the former, with its undoubted
democratic weight. On too many occasions the Security
Council has been unwilling or unable to fulfil its
responsibilities, either because of blockages created by the
veto or the unilateral actions of one or another of its
permanent members, or because it has lacked the
collective courage and verve to implement its own
resolutions.

For its part, Pakistan remains committed to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and will continue
to contribute in every possible way to achieving our goals
of collective security and peace and prosperity.

 

