Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate today. The International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and share
our experience in connection with persons deprived of
their liberty.
In 2018 alone, the ICRC visited more than 1 million
persons in places ofdetention. In our activities we come
across programmes whose aim is to prevent or eradicate
violent extremism and we see policies described as
prevention of radicalization and deradicalization.

Some measures targeting detainees accused or
convicted of offences related to terrorism can have
harmful consequences not only for the detainees
themselves but also for the wider detained population
and society as a whole. Such measures include
placing detainees assessed as radicalized or at risk
of becoming radicalized in isolation; grouping them
together in special wings or placing them under strict
regimes; reducing access to services and rehabilitation
programmes; or submitting them to frequent or
repeated transfers. The potential consequences of such
measures contradict the aim of protecting the public
from acts ofa violent nature. Today I will highlight five
key safeguards that, when included in policies, can help
to counter or prevent violent extremism or to prevent
radicalization in places of detention.

First, we should respect the rule of law and treat
detainees humanely. Respect for the law and the dignity
and protection of the physical and psychological
integrity of detainees are the basis of any successful
programme in detention. Moreover, they are imperative.

Secondly, making an individualized risk and
needs assessment and coupling it with a tailor-made
response and follow-up would help to minimize the
stigmatization of some groups of detainees.

Thirdly, we must ensure that restrictions are legally
based, necessary and proportionate. All detainees have
the right to essential services and goods such as daily
access to the open air, water, food, sanitation facilities,
health care and meaningful human interaction,
including contact with the family.

Fourthly, we should put in place high-quality,
trained, supported and supervised detention staff.

Fifthly, we must ensure good order and security
in detention for all detainees, not just specific groups.
To have a positive impact and avoid discrimination,
material or financial support must benefit the whole
detention system. That also applies to any external
interventions, such as bilateral and intergovernmental
cooperation initiatives.

Above all, detainees must be treated humanely.
Inhumane conditions and treatment contradict State
obligations and are counterproductive to preventing
radicalization and violent extremism. The ICRC stands
ready to work with States to ensure humane treatment
and conditions for all detainees.

