The United Arab Emirates thanks the Niger for convening this open debate and furthering the Security Council's consideration of the nexus between security and other critical items on the United Nations agenda, such as environmental challenges. The United Arab Emirates views environmental degradation as an umbrella concept, inclusive of climate change, and believes, as we expressed in July's open debate (see S/2020/751, annex 50), that it is an amplifier of conflict and violence. Environmental degradation - from pollution to deforestation to topsoil loss - can drive displacement, loss of livelihoods, resource competition, hatred and resentment of other groups and recruitment by extremists, among other impacts. Conversely, environmental conservation and climate action can have the opposite effect, with clear security benefits. Environmental degradation can simultaneously be a product of conflict and violence - sometimes intentionally in violation of international humanitarian law. Da'esh's literal use of scorched-earth tactics in Syria and Iraq is seared into many of our memories. Most recently, the Council has seen the Houthis in Yemen use the threat of a massive oil spill from the FSO SAFER oil tanker as a political and security bargaining chip, blocking United Nations technical teams from the site in violation of Council instructions. The Security Council's consideration of environmental issues is therefore a necessary part of maintaining international peace and security. In this context, the United Arab Emirates would like to make four recommendations to improve the Council's action on environmental degradation. First, we believe that the Council would benefit from greater and more standardized analysis of the security implications of environmental degradation in situations on the Council's agenda. Personnel in peacekeeping and special political missions could be trained to assess environmental and climate threats to security and to draw attention to zones of ecological importance and fragility. Existing in-country United Nations staff, such as from the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Development Programme and humanitarian agencies, could also contribute their analytical capacity to these exercises. On the basis of this information, Council members could take action to prevent or address concerns with the security-environment nexus. Secondly, we see potential to address environmental degradation through the precedents set - as far back as resolution 1625 (2005) - in the Council's commitment to taking action against illegal exploitation and the trafficking in natural resources in areas where it contributes to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of armed conflict, including through the assistance of Council-backed missions. Practices such as unregulated mining, logging and poaching instigate both conflict and environmental degradation in a perverse cycle. Operationally, the Council should accordingly continue to include the illegal exploitation of natural resources as a designation criterion in sanctions regimes, leading to the inclusion of the appropriate expertise in the terms of reference for panels of experts. Furthermore, the Council should continue, where appropriate, to empower missions, as it has in resolution 2463 (2019), on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to seek political solutions to stop the cross- border flows of conflict resources and provide technical and political support for resource management. We believe that such mandates could contribute to reducing environmental degradation. Thirdly, the Council could ensure that field missions do no harm to the environment and adhere to the United Nations Climate Action Plan. For example, missions should in particular consider their impact on ground water and ground cover. Missions could also consider replacing diesel generators with renewable energy, which would have significant cost-saving potential. In addition, investments in green infrastructure and practices would provide post-deployment benefits for local communities. Lastly, we must mobilize environmental expertise in other parts of the United Nations and the international system to work in tandem with security responses. It would be practical to have environmental experts within humanitarian and stabilization teams, where relevant, to identify and start addressing environmental concerns, in order to reduce risks of worsening insecurity. The United Nations Environment Assembly recently adopted resolutions on conflict, and the United Nations Environment Programme regularly conducts post-conflict assessments. These are positive examples of a holistic approach that Member States can encourage through their role in governance bodies. In conflict situations, environmental degradation does not fall neatly under the mandates of United Nations institutions. It is incumbent upon Member States to enable and spur our institutions to work together toward collective outcomes. The security-environment nexus is no exception, and the United Arab Emirates looks forward to engaging with Council members and other stakeholders to ensure the coherence and greater impact of our work and resources.
