Ms. Rodriguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure for Guatemala to participate
in this debate organized by the Spanish presidency. We
wish Spain every success during its term throughout
October. I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the presence of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Sandra Honore,
and thank her for her detailed report (S/2015/667).
She knows that she can count on the full support of
Guatemala. I also wish to thank the representative of
Haiti for his valuable statement.

We are pleased to hear that Haiti is experiencing
a period of general stability, which presents a window
of opportunity for the country to move to a more
sustainable path of economic growth and political
development. A week ago we listened with great
interest in the General Assembly to President Martelly
(A/70/PV.22), who told us that progress in his country,
as Ambassador Regis just emphasized, was made
possible in large part thanks to the support of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
He also said that the electoral process - initiated on
9 August and due to continue until 25 October - was
a good indicator for measuring the performance and
success of the Mission over the past 11 years. It is an
assessment that we share, because these elections are
an opportunity for the Haitian authorities, including the
Haitian National Police, to show their ability to manage
this complex national electoral process without relying
on MINUSTAH, and, similarly, because they will result
in the third democratic transfer of power in Haiti.

This historical experience also reminds us of the
need to establish and make operational a permanent
electoral council to keep a record of the many best
practices evidenced during this election cycle, taking
into account the frequency and regularity with which
elections are held in Haiti, as required by its Constitution.
It is also important if Haiti is to gradually reduce its
dependence on international electoral assistance.

Looking to the future, elected officials must be
held to account in terms of the tangible results hoped
for by the people who chose them as their leaders. .
The progress and achievements made to date will make
a difference in Haiti so long as they are significantly
reflected in the standard of living of the entire
population. Accordingly, we must continue to invest
in socioeconomic programmes aimed at reducing
inequalities and providing humanitarian assistance to
the most vulnerable populations. We view with great
concern the recent humanitarian appeal launched
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in August highlighting the triple threat that the
country is currently facing: mixed migration flows, a
cholera epidemic and food insecurity and malnutrition.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we have the opportunity to redouble our
efforts to ensure that nobody is left behind and that all
populations enjoy a better future.

On the issue of safety, we believe that strengthening
the Haitian National Police remains central to
guaranteeing security and stability throughout the
country. The key aspects of fulfilling this task are
are increasing the number of troops in 2016, fully
implementing the current plan for the Haitian National
Police and developing the next five-year plan with
a view to fostering the protection of human rights,
accountability and the maintenance of beneficial
cooperation with MINUSTAH.

We look forward to the results of the strategic
assessment to be carried out by the Secretary-General
next year. This should only be done once the new
Government has been installed, in order to allow
for a period of stability and provide an opportunity
for deciding how the United Nations should support
the country's institutions in the future. It is our
expectation that the process will focus on consolidating
achievements and will take into account the realities on
the ground.

In conclusion, Guatemala supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
extension of the MINUSTAH mandate for a further
year. We assure the Permanent Representative of Haiti
of the full support of Guatemala for his goals and for
the increasing stability and development of his country.

