Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative Kubis for his briefing and for
his dedication and energy in leading the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) as it seeks to
fulfil its important mandate in what remains a very
challenging environment. The recent suicide attacks in
Baghdad and Basra remind us once again that the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism continues and
must be one of our foremost priorities.

We reaffirm our support for Prime Minister Al
Abadi, and we welcome the continued progress made
by the Iraqi forces in the Mosul campaign, with the
assistance of the coalition against Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and thanks to the continued
positive coordination between all the various units on
the ground.

The humanitarian needs in and around Mosul
remain unprecedented and are increasing, given the
ongoing large-scale flows of internally displaced
persons from the old city. We commend the United
Nations and its partners, as well as the Iraqi authorities,
for their remarkable work in providing emergency
assistance and shelter quickly and effectively. Italy will
continue to support their efforts. We remain extremely
concerned about the many innocent civilians still
trapped in areas controlled by Da'esh militants, who
continue to use them as human shields and prevent
them from escaping. It is therefore crucial that security
forces maintain their focus on minimizing civilian
casualties and upholding international law during their
conduct of military operations.

The reports on the continued enslavement and
sexual abuse of women, especially Yazidi women, by
Da'esh are also appalling. We welcome the commitment
of the Iraqi authorities to addressing the issues of
conflict-related sexual violence by ensuring the full
implementation of the joint communique signed with
the United Nations last year. We will continue to
provide financial support to psychosocial-assistance
programmes for victims. Accountability for those acts,
as well as for the many other heinous and systematic
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by Da'esh, is a priority. Prime Minister Al Abadi's call
for a Security Council initiative in that regard is an
important step forward. Italy stands ready to work with
all partners to advance the cause ofjustice and prevent
impunity, while keeping in mind the importance of
national ownership.

As the military defeat ofDa'esh in Iraq draws closer,
we must not forget that the fight against terrorism is
long-term and requires a strategic and preventive
focus, as well as the determination to address the
root political causes of the terrorist phenomenon.
The unity of purpose that was developed in the
fight against Da'esh is an opportunity to strengthen
national reconciliation. The concept of universal Iraqi
citizenship based on democratic participation and
human rights offers a compelling route out of religious
and sectarian intolerance and tribalism, and towards
national reconciliation.

In order to prevent the resurgence of Da'esh, the
focus must be on providing stability in liberated areas.
As a coalition leader in the training of Iraqi police
forces, my country attaches the highest importance
to that objective. An effective and professional police
force that ensures security and promotes the rule of law
by forging a solid partnership with local communities
will be essential to avoiding the resurgence of the
terrorist threat.
Our Carabinieri have already trained more than
7,200 local and federal police units, and efforts are
underway to increase that capacity. Furthermore,
Italy is ready to engage with the Iraqi Government in
order to preserve and consolidate the results achieved
thus far with a view to broadening security-sector
reform efforts. That includes specific training on the
protection of cultural heritage and the prevention of
illicit trafficking of artefacts.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
mentioning Council resolution 2347 (2017) in his report
(S/2017/357). That resolution, ajoint initiative ofFrance
and Italy, will provide a helpful tool for integrating the
cultural dimension into post-conflict recovery efforts.

Stabilization also means ensuring adequate
socioeconomic conditions in liberated areas so that
returning IDPs can see hope for the future in their
communities of origin. Italy supports the excellent
work being done by the United Nations Development
Programme in coordination with the Iraqi authorities.
We also reaffirm our appreciation of the zero-tolerance
approach to corruption. Achieving results on political
reform is equally crucial. We encourage the Iraqi
authorities to make progress on a legislative package
aimed at good governance, including an updated
framework to ensure fair and transparent provincial
and parliamentary elections.

Success in advancing the reform agenda will be key
to building momentum towards national reconciliation
among the various ethnic and religious groups in
Iraqi society. Italy will lend its support to an inclusive
political process, under full Iraqi ownership and
facilitated by UNAMI, leading to a national settlement
where all ethnic and religious components can find their
place. In order for reconciliation efforts to succeed,
they must also address the role and status of Iraq's
minorities. Those groups are an integral component
of the country's history and society. We are closely
monitoring the situation of each community in Iraq, and
they have repeatedly expressed to the Iraqi authorities
their hope and ours that equality, mutual respect and
freedom of religion will be guaranteed for all groups
and confessions. That principle should apply at both
the national and the local levels, especially in Mosul
and Ninawa, where good governance and encouraging
inclusion and coexistence will be crucial.

Italy's commitment to Iraq's long-term peace
and stability is steadfast. As the Secretary-General
underlined during his visit in March, this is an historic
moment for the country, where all stakeholders in
the international community, including neighbouring
countries and regional partners, must come together in
the spirit of solidarity to help Iraq chart its path towards
a stable, democratic and prosperous future.

