Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you to New York, Sir, to preside over today's
meeting. China highly appreciates the initiative of the
Dominican Republic to convene this open debate. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Administrator
Steiner, Mr. Kabat and Ms. Getschel for their briefings.

Climate change is a major challenge that affects
the future and destiny of humankind. Climate change
induces natural disasters, wreaks havoc in many parts
of the world and poses grave threats to food security,
water resources, the ecological environment, energy,
human life and property. These issues have even become
disruptive factors in certain regions, undermining
peace and stability.

Easing the impact of climate-change-related
disasters obviously serves global stability. In facing
this global challenge, the international community
needs to step up cooperation and respond together.
In this regard, from the perspective of maintaining
international peace and security, I would like today to
share with participants the following three points.

First, it is necessary to uphold multilateralism
and foster a sense of community and shared future for
humankind. In the face of climate change, no country
can stay aloft by itself. Countries should strengthen
exchanges and cooperation on climate change, adhere
to multilateral mechanisms and earnestly fulfil their
international obligations. It is important to increase
funding and technical support to developing countries
to assist them in coping with climate change and
improving their ability to adapt to it. The relevant
United Nations agencies should properly address and
respond to climate-change-related issues in line with a
division of labour and their respective functions.

Secondly, we need to explore green and low-carbon
transitional and sustainable development pathways
tailored to national specificities. Peace and development
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing. The
international community needs to embrace a Vision of
global governance hinged on consultation, contribution
and benefits-sharing and advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development across
the board, give priority to poverty reduction, and tackle
development imbalances and inadequate development.
We need to pursue sustainable development and its
drive to address through common development such
climate-change-related issues as food insecurity,
humanitarian crises and mass migration.

Thirdly, we should acknowledge and respect
countries' differences, especially in developing
countries, and take seriously the daunting challenges
facing small island developing States and least
developed countries. The international community
should implement in earnest the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and uphold
the principles of equity and common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities. Developed
countries should continue to spearhead emission
reductions and help developing countries, in particular
small island developing States, to upgrade their capacity
in adaptation, mitigation, management and financing.

China has been actively engaged in the global
response to climate change. We have been a contributor
to this cause. We have been earnestly fulfilling
our international obligations under, inter alia, the
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, while making
active contributions to the global fight against climate
change to the best of our ability and on the basis of our
national conditions. China will continue to implement
our South-South cooperation commitments on climate
change and support developing countries in addressing
related challenges. China stands ready to work with
the international community to build a word of lasting
peace, universal security, common prosperity, openness
and inclusiveness - a world that is clean and beautiful.

