Mr. Darwish (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): What the representative of Israel said in his
most recent statement before the Council reflects very
clearly the fact that falsification and distortion are part
and parcel of the nature of that occupying regime,
which unfairly established its state on the land of
others, carried out murder and destruction and
practised the most brutal forms of collective crime in
modern history. The words of the representative of
Israel do not cover the horrific nature of the criminal
practices of his regime. The statements of most
delegations that spoke at this important meeting made
it crystal clear that condemnation is only the minimal
reaction to the Israeli regime. The Security Council
must effectively stand up against all forms of terrorism,
murder and massacre carried out by that unjust regime,
which rejects opportunities for peace, while using
pretexts of which it is often the main cause. Without
occupation, murder, deportation, destruction, the
uprooting of trees and the most brutal forms of tyranny,
we would not be witnessing what is happening now.

Resolving this problem in a just and
comprehensive manner will spare us all this endless
controversy, which is due to Israel's obstinate refusal
to accept the olive branch that has been extended to it,
because its political doctrine is not, apparently,
consistent with the essence of a just and
comprehensive peace.

What the representative of Israel said has become
a tedious rumination. The offices of Hamas in
Damascus are press offices, and Hamas, as everybody
knows, is a Government elected by the Palestinian
people, who are waging resistance. As to what he said
about Lebanon, we would like to ask: who benefits the
most from what happened in Lebanon? I believe that
the answer is clear and easily understood.

The best evidence of the brutality of Israel's
current action is the anger that it has caused on the
Arab street, and even on the streets worldwide. As the
Security Council meets, a demonstration is now taking
06-61024
place in front of the Israeli Mission, condemning the
behaviour of the occupying state and exposing its lies
and consistently false claims.

