President Erdogan (spoke in Turkish; interpretation provided by the delegation): I should like to start
by thanking my friend Barack for enabling such an
important discussion to take place at the highest level.
The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is no doubt a very
important issue, one that is the reflection and a symptom
of a bigger problem. The collapse of State structures
in our southern neighbourhood and the resulting
atmosphere of chaos and instability has created today
a field of operations for terrorist organizations and,
unfortunately, the region has become a magnet for
terrorist fighters.

Turkey, given the emergence of instability in Syria,

has repeatedly issued all necessary warnings to the
international community about this threat. The inertia
of the international community, despite the policies of
violence towards the Syrian population by the regime,
has prepared the ground for Al-Qaida to re-emerge in
Syria and grow stronger under the name of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), with the support of
the regime.

The spread of the ISIL threat towards Iraq is
the result of conditions on the ground and has been
nurtured by the earlier sectarian policies of the previous
Government.

Under these circumstances, the international
community has to work together, because all problems
can be overcome if it does. We have to take a
comprehensive, realistic, long-term approach in order
to overcome this threat. Turkey has been taking a
leading role in this direction and has been working to
prevent the flow of foreign fighters towards the region
for quite a long time.

But this fight cannot be carried out solely by
Turkey. The threat of foreign terrorist fighters starts the
moment such individuals depart from their countries
of origin. Thus the combat against those individuals
should start in the source countries, and our initial goal
is therefore to prevent their entry into Turkey. For a long
time we have been calling on the countries concerned to
cooperate with us on this issue. Unfortunately, a timely
reaction has not been shown on this issue either; with the
deterioration of the situation, we have finally witnessed
in recent times an increased flow of information from
the source countries. Thanks to this, and within the
scope of our struggle against foreign terrorist fighters,
around 6,300 individuals have been included in the
no-entry list and close to 1,000 foreigners have been
deported. We have also established risk-analysis groups
at the airports.

I should like to stress once again that we can stop
this flow of foreign terrorist fighters only if our friends
and partners who await our cooperation themselves
show a spirit of cooperation. Another important issue
we must touch upon is that neither exploitation of these
measures by Islamophobic circles or damage to our
common civilized values should be allowed.

Turkey has suffered for years from the scourge of
terrorism, which has claimed the lives of thousands
of its children. We are among the best-placed to know
the pain that terrorism brings and therefore would be
among the first to try to ensure that we can prevent
young people throughout the world from falling into
the hands of terrorists. With that understanding, in 2011
Turkey, together with the United States, launched the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.

Turkey is taking all possible national, regional
and international steps to counter this threat and is
committed to taking enhanced measures in this regard.

ISIL is a terrorist organization with blood on its
hands. Since the very beginning, our Government has
taken all necessary legal measures in this respect. In
our fight against terrorism, all measures necessitated
by our national interests will be taken with due regard
for regional stability and humanitarian needs. There
is tremendous pressure on Turkey's borders; since
the beginning of the conflict in Syria we have taken
in 1,300,000 Syrians from every ethnic and sectarian
group. Only last week, more than 140,000 Syrian
Kurdish refugees fleeing ISIL found shelter in our
country, and we are also temporarily housing 70,000
Yazidis from Iraq.

Despite our sacrifices and our expectation of
solidarity, we have not received the kind of support
that we have been looking for from the international
community and have also been the target of unjust
criticism in this context. This is really very sad for
us. Turkey's determination in this regard cannot be
questioned; the international community is going
through a historical test of sincerity. If we go deep to the
roots of the conflict and ensure the desired solidarity
and cooperation, we can get results.

Our goal should be to create an atmosphere of
peace, democracy and stability in which millions of our
Syrian brothers can safely return home and our Iraqi
brothers can feel that they are part of Iraq. That should
continue to be our goal, and Turkey will continue to
carry out its efforts in that regard.

