Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We,
too, welcome the presence in the Council of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of Timor-
Leste.

We also express our thanks to Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for presenting the Secretary-General's end-of-
mandate report on the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL).

The United Republic of Tanzania has closely
followed the impressive progress Timor-Leste has
made in capacity- and institution-building and in the
area of governance, and would wish to sincerely
commend the people and its leadership for their
perseverance and determination to succeed.

As Timor-Leste prepares to confront the
challenges ahead and to engage in the long-term
development of the country, account needs to be taken
of the reality that the country's institutions are young
and fragile, requiring considerable support. Of
particular concern to us are the forthcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections in mid-2007,
which will mark a significant step in the process of
strengthening a delicate democracy and in the overall
political growth of the country.

The United Nations and other international actors
need to assist Timor-Leste in all aspects of the conduct
of the elections to ensure success. Special attention
should be paid to the overall organizational aspect of
the elections, especially the logistical element, which
has so often disrupted and crippled elections
elsewhere. The electoral needs of the country have to
be known well in advance and, in that regard, we
appreciate the fact that UNOTIL is already engaged in
assessing Timor-Leste's requirements.

Given the importance of the preparatory work for
the electoral season, we fully support the establishment
of a smaller Council-mandated United Nations office
for 12 months beyond 20 May 2006 to handle the
elections and address other unfinished business. The
transparency of the electoral process and the credible
manner in which the elections are conducted, with the
maximum participation of the Timorese electorate, will
directly impact on the legitimacy of the outcome.
Equally, we urge the Government to make progress on
pending issues related to human rights and transitional
justice.
The riots in Dili last week, which left five people
dead, houses burned and other property destroyed, are
a source of grave concern to us, as they came at a time
when all of us had seen Timor-Leste as a success story
and a model of transition from conflict to stability. It is
regrettable that this potentially destabilizing incident
should come at a time when the United Nations
mission is coming to an end after five and half years of
fruitful work. It illustrates the fragility of the security
situation and the reforms of the security sector. It also
confirms the need for continuing support, especially in
the police and judicial sectors, as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report.

A backslide into violence would mar what has
otherwise been a very successful process. The
Government ought to restore confidence among the
civilian population in order to encourage it to return
and help civilians to recover their property.

It is in that regard that we consider that, apart
from ensuring free, fair and credible post-independence
national elections, the follow-on office will have to
continue monitoring the still fragile security situation,
as well as other ongoing activities, including training
members of the police force, judges, prosecutors,
human rights officials, civil society leaders and
customs officials; conducting seminars and workshops
for the media on account of their pivotal role in the
development of the country as purveyors of
information; facilitating meetings between Timorese
and Indonesian community leaders to discuss issues of
common interest, including security, economic and
cultural concerns; raising awareness amongst the local
population on the agreed border area, including the
remaining segment of unresolved border, together with
working on other cross-border issues, such as family
meetings, cross-border market activities and illegal
border crossings; and working on plans and strategies
for a final smooth handover from the United Nations to
a sustained development framework.

We finally wish to underscore once again the
importance of continued international post-UNOTIL
support for Timor-Leste for the reconstruction of the
country. It must be emphasized again that a critical
requirement for peacebuilding is the need for the
continuing attention of the international community to
a country in transition in areas defined by the country
concerned. That is what Timor-Leste needs at this
juncture. We should robustly support its modest
requests.

