We thank the Russian Federation for convening this important debate and the briefers for their briefings. We welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who are with us this morning. At the outset, we would like to emphasize our deep appreciation for the Gulf region's diversity, cultural plurality and undisputed place in the historical heritage of humankind. Despite this, we are convinced, with great regret, that ideological differences have imposed a kind of system of regional geopolitical rivalry that has, on more than one occasion, placed the Gulf region at the centre of the world's attention as the axis of threats to international peace and security. While recognizing the efforts made to reduce tensions, strengthen relations and combat extreme violence throughout the region, including terrorism, there remain destabilizing elements that influence and stubbornly deepen this regrettable dynamic. We would like to highlight the fact that years of conflict, violence and terrorism have had a devastating impact on a large part of the region's population, where poverty and inequality prevail despite the region's indisputable wealth. To achieve peace and development, we must redouble our efforts aimed at bringing to the forefront good governance, non-tolerance of corruption and impunity, and unwavering respect for human rights and international humanitarian law. By addressing these issues as root causes, we prevent crisis situations from arising or being defused before they escalate. The influence of illicit arms transfers and missile proliferation at the margins of Security Council resolutions encourages violence, insecurity and reduces the chances of arriving at lasting solutions. Furthermore, respect for the right of maritime navigation is a determining factor in maintaining the security of the Gulf. It is imperative to prevent a recurrence of the hostile actions that have taken place in the Strait of Hormuz, considering that this strait is key to international trade. A crisis in this area could thwart the world financial order. Finally, in relation to the current challenges to the fulfilment of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), we stress our concern about Iran's gradual reduction of its nuclear commitments, the violations of the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) relating to conventional weapons, and its involvement in destabilizing activities in the region. We reiterate our call on Iran, as a key actor in the geopolitics of the Gulf and the Middle East, to return to full compliance with the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) and avoid hostile actions and inflammatory rhetoric. The full implementation of the commitments agreed by all parties to the Plan of Action is vital to ensure its preservation and reduce existing tensions. We hope that the parties will, in turn, refrain from taking any action that might further undermine the JCPOA. Failure to do so would have detrimental effects on non-proliferation, security and stability in the region, as it is the only mechanism to guarantee the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. While addressing and resolving these aspects is the responsibility of the States of the region, the collaboration and assistance of the international community, the United Nations and regional organizations is paramount. In this respect, we must use all the tools at our disposal, including Mr. Naumkin's suggestion on bilateral dialogue in the absence of relations between two nations. The countries of the Gulf possess great natural and cultural resources and human qualities, so they hold the key to achieving a peace that will enable them to provide their inhabitants with a dignified and prosperous life and to become in turn agents of change for those countries that find themselves in situations of acute conflict. Confidence-building and dialogue leading to the cessation of hostilities and the strengthening and normalization of ties of cooperation and good-neighbourliness must be the gateway to the promotion of joint mechanisms for addressing common problems and challenges. We advocate a peace without discrimination that extends to all corners of the Middle East and offers development opportunities to all its inhabitants. Finally, we call for a coronavirus vaccine and other health technologies needed to address the disease, which must be made equitably accessible and with their worldwide distribution being ensured. To this end, the role of the World Health Organization, donor countries and the private sector is essential to achieving this goal, based on cooperation, solidarity and justice.
