Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend to you,
Mr. President, our congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council this month and to
wish the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan every success.
I am also pleased to congratulate the Jordan on its
membership of the Council, as well as the other new
members. I wish to emphasize our absolute support
for you and our preparedness to extend all possible
support to bring about the success of your mission. I
also thank you for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, and wish to express my
delegation's support for the statements to be made on
behalf ofthe League ofArab States, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
I would first like to welcome the designation of
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. It expresses the solidarity of the
human conscience and international will with the
Palestinians' rights to equity andjustice. The Palestinian
people have been deprived of those rights for more than
six decades. Israel continues to dash the remaining
hopes towards achieving a just and comprehensive
peace that would end the occupation and give rise to
the birth of an independent State of Palestine within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital.

Peace-loving peoples still cherish the hope that
solidarity with the Palestinian people will translate into
a tangible reality, to be experienced by the Palestinians
in security, freedom and peace, thereby fulfilling the
resolutions of the Security Council. Unfortunately, they
are still trampled upon by the Israeli occupation forces
with no fear of any deterrence or punishment.

As we move into 2014, is it possible that we forget
the hopes attached to the advent of last year, 2013, and
the efforts deployed to revive negotiations to achieve
a just and final resolution to the Palestinian question.
Despite the impetus, endeavours and anticipation,
Israel continues to flout the will of the international
community, defying all international resolutions,
including those adopted by the Council. We are
now witnessing the expansion of the settlements, in
contravention of international law. There is also the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the continuing
collective punishment of the Palestinian people and the
blockade against Gaza.

While the forces of the occupying Power have
released some Palestinian prisoners, they have at the
same time continued to detain hundreds of others,
including some aged between 15 and 18 years. That is
in addition to the recurrent attacks by settlers against
the Palestinians. At the same time, in some cases the
victims are being urged to absolve the culprits of
responsibility.

The coercive policies of the occupying Power have
deprived the Palestinian people of their basic right
to live in peace, dignity and freedom and exercise
their right to self-determination. Any attempt to
hold the Palestinians responsible for the increased
tensions - by resorting to the flimsy pretexts for the
continuing blockade policy or for the preparations
for further attacks - is completely unacceptable. No
one should be deceived by such distortions of reality.
The occupation is the crux of the matter. Ending the
occupation will allow peace, justice and stability to
prevail. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Custodian of
the Two Holy Mosques, strongly deplores the recurrent
attacks and provocative actions in Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound.

We condemn all attempts to alter the historic and
religious identity of the holy sites and call for the
immediate cessation of any attempt to demographically
alter East Jerusalem, including the campaign to
destroy Palestinian homes, strip Palestinians of
citizenship and evict them by forceful measures that
violate international humanitarian law. We deplore the
declaration to build 1,400 more residential units east of
occupied Jerusalem and in other occupied Palestinian
territories, including the construction of settlements
in southern Al-Quds, which cut off historic lines of
continuity between Jerusalem and Bethlehem.

Will 2014 witness the long-awaited moment of
truth, namely, the two-State solution? I recall the
statement made by the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, that the
continuation of settlement activities does not conform
with the two-State solution, as well as the statement
made by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, that the situation has
become very complex in the light of Israel's continuing
settlement activities. He emphasized that the United
Nations cannot reconcile settlement expansion with
achieving the two-State solution.

Achieving the two-State solution may be impossible.
We have only to recall and heed the statements made
by the Prime Minister ofIsrael in December 2013, that
Israel would not stop, not even for one moment, its
ongoing settlement project.

Saudi Arabia emphasizes the statement made on
behalf of the League of Arab States and its resolution
7719 of21 December 2013, underscoring the importance
of abiding by the Arab Peace Initiative and of holding
the Israeli Government responsible for hampering the
progress towards peace. The resolution also called on
the United States, as the sponsor of the current peace
negotiations, and the other permanent members of the
Security Council to compel the Israeli Government to
halt settlement activities and to fully lift the blockade
against Gaza. We also emphasize that final status issues,
including Jerusalem, the borders, refugees, security
and water, must comply with relevant United Nations
resolutions and not violate any rights guaranteed by
international law.

Incomplete sovereignty over any part of the
occupied Palestinian territories, including the Jordan
Valley region, is unacceptable. We call for an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan,
the Sheba'a farms area and the remaining occupied
Lebanese territory. An agreement that is not based on
justice and equality will lead to a vicious cycle of failed
negotiations.

We have carefully listened to the statements noting
that the decisions required by the peace process demand
courage on the part of decision-makers. That does
not apply selectively to one party, but not to another.
It also applies to the peace process sponsor. The
international community must not allow the Council's
resolutions to be undermined by efforts to apply the
law of force, which leads to flimsy results dictated by
internal affairs and narrow-minded interests. We call
for courageous leadership that demands the recognition
of rights, without circumventing international law or
legitimacy. In that context, justice and equity will lead
to the achievement of peace.

The current situation of sisterly Syria represents
the greatest humanitarian tragedy of the century.
The Syrian authorities are subjecting their people to
genocide, using all types of weapons, both conventional
and non-conventional, including chemical weapons,
indiscriminate bombings, Scud missiles and barrel
bombs. The regime is antagonizing its people and
cannot protect them. The international community
must accelerate efforts to protect the Syrian people.

Eyewitnesses from Syria have visited the United
Nations and the Council to provide testimony about
acts of terrorism to which they had been subjected.
It is a war of starvation and subjugation that seeks to
humiliate, while farming the fuel of sedition and sowing
malcontent. They described the situations of those who
are starving in Damascus, Al-Hasakah, Madamiya and
Yarmouk, which contain more than 20,000 Palestinian
refugees. We are wondering, as are the refugees, how
it is possible for the Council to remain unable to adopt
even one statement deploring the gravest violations of
international humanitarian law.
We emphasize the need for foreign combatants to
leave the Syrian territory. The spread of foreign armed
groups is of grave concern. My delegation emphasizes
the fact that States that have influence on the Syrian
regime must focus such pressure on it, in order to halt
the massacres and pogroms it has been perpetrating for
the past three years.

My delegation appreciates the strenuous
efforts undertaken by the United Nations organs to
unconditionally deliver humanitarian assistance to the
Syrian people. The Security Council must hasten to
adopt a decisive resolution on delivering humanitarian
assistance to all parties in need, wherever they may be,
and to impose deterrent sanctions on those who impede
such actions.

We are about to convene the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, based on the hope that the
Secretary-General's call to convene the meeting will
continue, based on the framework of the first Geneva
Conference, to form a transitional Government with
broad competencies covering the State facilities,
including intelligence, security and political affairs
sectors, and to realize the aspirations of the Syrian
people and its ambitions for freedom and dignity, in a
manner preserving the territorial integrity, safety and
rights of the Syrians, with respect for their various
factions, creeds and categories.

No one should forget the main goal of the second
Geneva Conference on Syria. All those invited must
agree to the requisites of the invitation and officially
declare their acceptance, first and foremost to the
establishment of a transitional Government. We
therefore believe that inviting Iran is out of the question,
in particular as it has military soldiers hidden by the
regime. Its participation is thus invalid at this juncture.

The international community must not waste this
opportunity saving face, and the States sponsoring the
Conference and the United Nations must respond to the
appeal to rescue the sisterly Syrian people. Those with
the blood of the Syrian people on their hands must not
participate in shaping their future. Furthermore, they
must not be granted impunity for their crimes against
humanity.

