Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): This is the first time that Cameroon is
participating in a wrap-up meeting of this kind. The
remarks I shall be making will therefore be of a general
nature.

First of all, Sir, my delegation wants to reaffirm
our hearty congratulations on the extremely
constructive way in which you presided over the work
of the Council in January 2002. You proposed a
programme of work that was balanced and covered
many items; it enabled us to consider the thorniest of
the issues facing us in the realm of international peace
and security. Some of those issues concerned specific
regions, such as Africa, Asia, Europe and the Middle
East; others concerned more general matters, such as
terrorism.

We thank you, Mr. President, for having ensured
in your programme of work that Africa would remain
at the centre of the Council's concerns. The Council
considered national and regional conflicts, and even, in
the case of Madagascar, anticipated an evolving
situation. The Council also considered the overall
situation in Africa, and did so in a high-level public
debate. Your preparations for that debate were
painstaking, Sir, which enabled us to focus our
discussion on formulating specific proposals for action.
One of those proposals was to establish a Security
Council working group with a mandate to monitor the
implementation of the Council's recommendations on
Africa and to find ways to improve cooperation with
the Economic and Social Council. It was also proposed
that a focal point should be designated within the
Secretariat to enable us to centralize the Secretariat's
multisectoral activities on Africa.

The most important thing concerning that debate
is to now highlight the different problems that Africa
faces. We have made much progress since the first
interactive debate of 1999. Now we have to go deeper,
and this is why we appreciate the proposal and the
decision to create the working group. We must now
delve more deeply by no longer taking the situation in
its entirety but by dealing with specific points of
particular issues. I think that it is in this direction that
the United Kingdom will be orienting itself. In any
case, it is towards this end that Cameroon is gearing its
preparations for its presidency in October 2002.

The question of Afghanistan was also the subject
of a specific follow-up. The Council thus contributed
to the restoration of peace and stability in that country,
and also showed its support for the new authorities.

The question of terrorism was the subject of a
constructive public debate that allowed all Members of
the United Nations, whether members of the Council or
not, to give an account of their efforts in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). We said at the time that the
interactive formula used for that debate was a wise one,
and we hoped that it would serve as a model.

On the whole, this first month in the Security
Council has left a very positive impression on us. We
have benefited from the support and cooperation of our
colleagues from other delegations and we have worked
in a cordial atmosphere, which you were able to create
and maintain, Mr. President.

The situation in the Middle East is of great
concern, and we would have hoped to see more
attention devoted to it. We are glad to note that this
will be the case from now on. Significant and real
progress has been made in the sphere of transparency,
thanks to the regular briefings of Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, and thanks to the presidency, which has
made all information on our work available to
Members through the web site.

Once again we would like to extend all our
congratulations, Sir, for the way you have conducted
the proceedings this month. Thank you for having
given Africa the attention that its particular situation
deserves while of course also attaching as much
importance to other situations in which peace is
threatened.

