Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): At the outset, I thank the
delegation of France for convening this debate on a
subject of great importance within the context of the
well-being of children. I also thank the Secretary-
General and other distinguished briefers for sharing
their insights. We acknowledge the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, to strengthen the effectiveness
and credibility of the United Nations in the promotion
of the well-being of children affected by conflict.

Conflict situations put children at great risk,
especially where non-State armed groups are involved.
Children risk being killed, abducted or maimed. They
are also vulnerable in other ways. They face sexual
abuse, recruitment as child soldiers, trafficking, slavery
and other atrocities committed by armed groups. That
situation underscores the need for States, the United
Nations, regional organizations and other stakeholders
to take urgent measures to enhance the protection of
children affected by conflict.

It is obvious that armed non-State actors are active
in armed conflict situations around the world today.
It is also becoming increasingly clear that they are
responsible for grave Violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Their activities
show that they indeed pose a serious threat to the well-
being of children.

Nigeria condemns, in the strongest terms, the mass
abductions of children by non-State armed groups,
including those carried out by Boko Haram and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). We call for
the immediate and unconditional release of all abducted
children. We demand that parties to armed conflicts
immediately cease unlawful attacks and threats of
attacks against schools, students and teachers. For our
part, we have launched a safe schools initiative aimed
at providing a safe and secure learning environment
for children.

The proliferation of non-State armed groups, their
unorthodox methods of operation and their connection
to transnational criminal networks make it particularly
difficult to enforce legal provisions to protect children
in situations of armed conflict. That situation may, to
some extent, explain the lawlessness and utter depravity
that characterize the activities of armed groups and
make them such a grave danger to the well-being of
non-combatants, especially children. That is clearly
seen in the case of ISIS and Boko Haram.

Regional and subregional organizations have
an important role to play in addressing the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. In that regard,
we welcome the growing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. That important
partnership is anchored in the September 2013
agreement between both organizations, aimed at taking
measures to protect African children from the impact
of armed conflict. Nigeria urges both organizations to
continue to strengthen their win-win collaboration on
that important issue.

At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong
commitment to promoting the well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration on
War-Affected Children in West Africa, adopted in April
2000. The Declaration commits ECOWAS member
States to take a broad range of measures to protect and
rehabilitate war-affected children. In order to live up
to their commitments under the Declaration, ECOWAS
member States must continue to enhance their domestic
competencies and capabilities to respond effectively to
the varying needs and vulnerabilities of children in
conflict situations.

The reprehensible acts committed by Boko Haram
not only rob Nigerian children of their innocence, but
also constitute grave violations of international and
domestic laws, which provide guarantees for the rights
and interests of children during periods of hostilities
and armed conflict. As a consequence of the actions
of that group, the Nigerian Government issued an
advisory, sending a strong message to the Boko Haram
terrorists that they will be held accountable for their
ongoing Violations of domestic laws and international
conventions to which Nigeria is signatory.

Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflicts, as well
as the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of
the Child. Those instruments have been incorporated
into the laws of our country. They contain extensive
provisions against the abuse of the rights of children,
and we are determined to enforce them.

More importantly, Nigeria has just concluded the
drafting of a national policy on civilian protection and
harm mitigation. The policy sets forth the Government's
commitment to protecting civilians and to the mitigation
of harm to civilians, while adhering to international
humanitarian law, international human rights law,
constitutional principles and domestic law during the
planning and conduct of all security operations, and
to the better protection of civilians from the actions of
armed non-State actors.

Nigeria believes that the Council should continue to
pay attention to the issue of children and armed conflict.
It is a growing problem that requires a collaborative
approach involving multiple stakeholders 4 States,
international organizations, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations - in order for it to be
addressed effectively.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the protection of the rights of children
in conflict situations. We are taking all necessary
measures to meet the threat posed to the welfare of
children by Boko Haram. Together with our neighbours
and international partners, we are winning the war
against the terrorists, and we are resolutely determined
to bring them to justice.

