Mr. Doss (spoke in French): Three months ago, I
presented to members the twenty-seventh report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) (S/2009/160) (see S/PV.6]04). Since then,
significant progress has been made in the two main
processes under way since the beginning of the year:
the integration of Congolese armed groups into the
national army and the operations against foreign armed
groups. It must be recognized, however, that those two
processes have also been accompanied by grave
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.
Under our mandate, their protection is at the heart of
our concerns. MONUC has thus enhanced its efforts to
improve civilian protection in a conflict that extends
over vast areas of operation.

We are working closely with the Government to
resolve serious problems regarding logistics and the
command, training and discipline of the troops
involved in the operations against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). Those problems
are the cause of many abuses against civilians by
elements of the army and are reducing the effectiveness
of the operations against those foreign armed groups.
But the fact that these operations are increasingly being
carried out in areas to which it is difficult to gain
access has disproportionately increased the logistical
needs not only of MONUC, but also of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), whose material and financial means are very
limited.

(spoke in English)

The international community has consistently
advocated action to dismantle armed groups operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Such action is now under way, but the
humanitarian impact has, understandably, raised many
concerns. A spate of reprisal attacks by the FDLR and
the LRA have caused new population displacements
and serious human rights violations by those armed
groups, as well as by undisciplined FARDC soldiers,
which has created growing apprehension in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
international community. We take those concerns very
seriously and have addressed them with the
09-39962
Government at various levels. MONUC conducted a
joint evaluation of Operation Kimia II with the FARDC
in June, and the Force Commander is working with the
FARDC commanders to resolve problems identified
during that evaluation.

These problems have to be considered in the
context of the understandings reached between the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda. Those agreements led to the end of the
rebellion by the Congres national pour la defense du
people (CNDP) and to the commitment to determined
action against the FDLR. While those developments
offered the prospect that the recurring cycle of violence
in the Kivus could be ended, they obliged the
Congolese Government to quickly integrate into the
army large numbers of untrained and inadequately
equipped troops and to launch a campaign of
considerable complexity to capitalize on the early gains
of the joint Rwanda Defence Forces-FARDC operation
against the FDLR in February of this year. Without this
continuity between operations Umoja Wetu and Kimia
II, the FDLR would have been able to reorganize and
to reoccupy areas that they had been pushed out of.
That has been prevented in North Kivu. In South Kivu,
operations have just started, but already the FDLR has
been dislodged from some of its traditional
strongholds.

As a key part of the strategy to deal with the
FDLR, we have sought to enhance the protection of
civilians. MONUC has established 35 military bases in
North Kivu, many of which are in very remote areas
where operations against the F DLR are ongoing. Those
bases have allowed for close monitoring of the
operations and rapid intervention in a number of
instances. However, the manning of so many bases also
means that our resources are stretched thin, and the
capacity of the force to send significant reinforcements
to new trouble spots is limited. That imposes
increasingly difficult choices about how and where to
respond to new threats. The arrival of the additional
forces authorized under resolution 1843 (2008) will
help alleviate the pressures. Some of those troops will
be used as a reserve force to enable the Mission to
respond to multiple crises in various locations.

In the meantime, we have reinforced our North
Kivu brigade by redeploying units from Ituri and
Katanga. Currently, two thirds of our troops are in the
Kivus. Another 20 per cent are in Orientale province,
essentially in the districts of Ituri, Haut Ue'le' and Bas
09-39962
Ue'le, where we are still facing security challenges
from residual elements of the militia of the Forces de
resistance patriotiques en Ituri and the LRA. Additional
troops are now being redeployed from Kinshasa to
bolster the operations against the LRA.

In the two Uele districts, we have seen a number
of attacks, with renewed abductions of civilians,
although at a lower level than a few months ago.
MONUC has established new bases in those districts to
better support the FARDC in its operations against the
LILA. We have created coordination mechanisms with
humanitarian actors on the ground with a view to
facilitating access and the delivery of assistance. We
are escorting humanitarian convoys on key roads and
securing zones for air drops. The FARDC has increased
its presence in the area to more than 6,000 troops. With
the assistance of military intelligence provided by
Uganda and information gathered from local sources,
Operation Rudia - the operation against the LRA -
aims to reduce the threat posed by that group to
civilians. The goal is to track down the last of these
Ugandan rebels before they can regenerate their forces
with new abductees.

I have already reported to the Council on the
deployment of Joint Protection Teams (JPTs) composed
of civilian personnel from various sections of the
Mission. Those teams have now undertaken a total of
30 protection and assessment missions, mostly but not
exclusively in North Kivu. Civil-military cooperation
has improved significantly with the assistance of these
teams, which have helped create awareness of local
and ethnic dynamics that contribute to violence.
Despite limited civilian personnel and logistical
capacities, the JPTs have also been instrumental in
anticipating and preventing attacks and in improving
the rapid response capacity of MONUC, as well as that
of the FARDC.

Furthermore, MONUC has established an early
warning and rapid response cell in the Mission. This
cell systematically monitors operations and their
humanitarian consequences. It analyses the patterns of
FDLR and LRA attacks, and tracks human rights
violations by FARDC soldiers in order to better
identify particularly problematic commanders or units
and to advocate for disciplinary action. This
monitoring also allows us to obtain information on
units that perform well and provide them with more
targeted support.
3

Overall, cooperation between the FARDC and
MONUC has deepened and joint operations centres are
now functioning relatively well in Goma and Bukavu.
Joint coordination centres have been established in the
three operational zones within North and South Kivu.
The FARDC itself is making an effort to improve its
public outreach so as to create a better understanding
in local communities of the rationale for operations.

We continue to stress the critical importance of
integrating the protection of civilians into the planning
of operations at the strategic and tactical levels. This
was a key feature of the joint evaluation meeting held
in June with the Minister of Defence and the FARDC
chief of staff. They presented a candid assessment of
the impact of FDLR reprisal attacks, as well as
exactions by undisciplined FARDC soldiers, which
they acknowledged. Some of the FARDC discipline
problems stem from delayed salary payments. Others
are due to the fact that many integrated ex-
combatants - especially those from militias -
maintain loyalty to their former commanders. I am
very pleased to report, however, that the Government
and the army command have taken measures to
reinforce military justice, and that several FARDC
soldiers accused of crimes in the course of the current
operations have now been tried and sentenced.

We have pressed for the removal of notorious
commanders within the FARDC, including those on the
list that the Council presented to the Government
during its visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in May. I can report that President Kabila has
given instructions for their immediate removal from
command positions, while the Defence Minister has
instructed the military prosecutor to initiate legal
procedures against them. We shall continue our
advocacy on this issue, and we have made it very clear
that we cannot engage in or support operations with
units that show blatant disregard for international
humanitarian law, or where there is a significant risk
that they may do so.

A particularly important aspect of the protection
of civilians is the fight against sexual and gender-based
violence. This scourge has accompanied the conflicts
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
we have also seen violence against women and girls in
provinces that have been at peace for some years. The
Government and international partners have adopted a
comprehensive strategy on which I reported in my last
presentation. We now have to ensure that all relevant
actors implement it through decisive action, including
through the judiciary and corrections systems. The
military must sanction soldiers found guilty of crimes
involving sexual violence, and hold commanders
responsible for the behaviour of their troops. President
Kabila has declared a zero-tolerance policy in this
respect and has instructed the Minister of Defence to
personally meet with all commanders in the field to
underline their personal accountability for troops under
their command.

While I do not want to downplay the problems
faced by Operations Kimia II and Rudia II, we should
not overlook the fact that many FARDC soldiers are
conducting challenging operations in particularly
difficult circumstances, often with minimal support and
with remarkable determination. More than 50 soldiers
have lost their lives in the campaign against the FDLR,
and more than 30 have been seriously wounded.

It is too soon to make a definitive assessment of
the ongoing operations against the armed groups, but
we can draw some initial conclusions. Operation Iron
Stone and the long struggle to dismantle the remaining
armed groups in southern Ituri, seem to be approaching
the home stretch. Most of Ituri, which was the most
troublesome area of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from 2003 to 2005, when many thousands died
and when 2 million were displaced, is today largely
pacified. The remnant militia in southern Ituri
represent more a form of localized banditry than a
serious challenge to State authority. We are hopeful
that combined military pressure and community
dialogue will resolve that problem once and for all.

In North Kivu, the FDLR has been reduced to
fairly isolated pockets in Rutshuru and Masisi
territories, but significant numbers of combatants are
still present in Walikale and Lubero territories where
we have seen a string of particularly vicious attacks
around Kanyabayonga and surrounding villages.
Operations in those areas are complicated by illegal
trading networks, in which some FARDC elements and
their dependents may be involved. Some FARDC
elements have also carried out exactions in those
communities and local populations therefore often
distrust the newly integrated brigade.

Targeted military pressure, allied to an enhanced
effort to attract new defections of FDLR cadres, is
needed to further reduce the capacity of the FDLR and
to diminish the accompanying threat to civilian
populations. We are currently reviewing our approach
to disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,

reintegration and resettlement in order to encourage
further defections, especially among young soldiers
who were not implicated in the genocide. Altogether,
almost 10,000 Rwandans have been repatriated since
January 2009, of whom 1,206 were combatants. That is
a significant increase over 2008, when 1,300 FDLR
combatants and dependents in total, were repatriated
by MONUC during the course of the whole year.

In South Kivu, the FARDC has deployed as many
as 24,000 soldiers into areas where an FDLR presence
has been reported. Cordon and search operations and
offensive actions began in June, in Kalehe and
Shabunda territories. During the Kimia II deployment
phase, the FDLR has, however, launched reprisal
attacks against civilians and raided defensive positions
of the FARDC. In some areas, ex-CNDP units were
deliberately targeted, and some of those units got
embroiled in local conflicts, with unfortunate ethnic
connotations. This has tended to undermine the
cohesion of the FARDC troops in those areas, and
some former Mayi-Mayi combatants have left the army
and reactivated community protection militias.

The FDLR is apparently trying to divide FARDC
loyalties and seek new alliances with remaining or re-
emerging local armed groups. It is taking advantage of
the fact that many commanders of Operation Kimia II
are ex-CNDP officers, some of whom may have
committed serious human rights violations in South
Kivu and are consequently viewed with suspicion by
local populations. This is a threat not only to operation
Kimia II, but also to the integration process. It would
be advisable, therefore, for the FARDC to rotate some
of those commanders and troops from those areas, so
that they are less likely to be associated with past
events.

All these developments are an indication of the
challenges faced by Operation Kimia II in South Kivu,
which will be the decisive arena in the campaign
against the FDLR. The bulk of FDLR combatants are
present in seven out of eight territories in South Kivu.
Dismantling the FDLR will require a multidimensional
approach, comprising a combination of sustained
military pressure and enhanced efforts and incentives
to induce the younger elements of the FDLR to
surrender or defect.
09-39962

More determined action against the FDLR leaders
in exile is also essential in our view. As members have
seen from the most recent report of the Group of
Experts which is monitoring the arms embargo (see S/2008/832), those leaders, operating from abroad,
continue to maintain contact with commanders on the
ground. We have reports from FDLR defectors that
they are involved in planning operations. MONUC is
currently exploring legal options for Member States to
prosecute those leaders for illegal acts committed in
the DRC. While the FDLR has not launched any
serious attack against Rwanda for several years, it
continues to commit atrocities against Congolese
civilians on a large scale.

Several LRA commanders have been captured or
killed since the beginning of Operation Rudia. LRA
bases in the Caramba National Park have been
destroyed, and the logistical support structure has been
disrupted. According to FARDC figures, 109 LRA
combatants were killed and 115 arrested as of late
June.

While these are significant achievements, it will
be some time before the LRA threat is completely
neutralized. We are particularly concerned about the
fate of hundreds of children and young men and
women who have been abducted by the LRA, not only
in the Democratic Republic of Congo, but also in
Central African Republic and Southern Sudan since
late last year.

Accounts from escapees indicate that the LRA is
training some of them to fight and to replenish their
ranks. The LRA has also extended its presence over a
vast area from Ituri to the western Central African
Republic and into Southern Sudan. In some areas, that
has provoked the emergence of local self-defence
groups akin to the Mayi-Mayi in the Kivus. The LRA
therefore remains a serious security challenge that will
require the sustained commitment of all Governments
and United Nations missions in the subregion, if the
group is to be effectively contained and neutralized.

We therefore welcome the initiative of the
Ugandan and Democratic Republic of Congo chiefs of
defence staff to invite their counterparts from the
Central African Republic as well as MONUC and the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) for
regular consultations on operation Rudia. MONUC has
established informal contacts with our sister missions
UNMIS and the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) to
exchange information on LRA activities on a regular
basis.

We have also reinforced and continue to reinforce
our presence in the LRA-affected areas, but the
effectiveness of military operations would be greatly
enhanced if we could get access to better intelligence
on these armed groups. We invite Member States to
share such intelligence with us.

The implementation of the 23 March agreements
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Kivu armed groups is proceeding
steadily if somewhat slowly. The Government has
promulgated the amnesty law, a first group of civilian
prisoners related to the CNDP have been released, and
the CNDP has been registered as a political party.
MONUC has conducted an assessment of the CNDP
war wounded and has provided emergency assistance
to some of them. However, the military integration of
CNDP, the Coalition des patriotes re'sistants congolais
(PARECO) and the Mayi-Mayi militias continues to be
hampered by delayed salary payments and difficulties
in streamlining the command structure. Some of these
armed groups complain of unequal treatment. We will
continue to work closely with the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, former President Obasanjo, to facilitate
the implementation of the other provisions of the
23 March agreements.

While we are supporting the current army
integration process, I would like to underline once
again the critical importance of comprehensive security
sector reform, including the vetting of security forces.
The Government circulated a new draft for army
reform earlier this year, and presented a revised
proposal enriched with comments and
recommendations from international partners. This
revised plan has been approved by the Conseil
supe'rieur de la defense and submitted to parliament.
The Minister of Defence has informed me that he will
convene shortly a meeting of international partners to
discuss the way forward on military reform. Personally,
I believe a consortium of the willing will be essential
to assist the Government in this reform process, which,
of course, will extend long beyond the life of MONUC
itself.

In the meantime, I have conveyed a set of
proposals to the Minister of Defence for immediate
action to consolidate the integration of armed groups in

the Kivus. We would discourage, however, the
integration of additional militias into an already
plethoric FARDC. I believe that we have reached the
point of saturation. The Government cannot afford or
successfully integrate a huge number of new
ex-combatants, which in turn would tend to create new
demands for integration from other groups that emerge
as a result.

The FARDC chief of staff has informed us that,
on instruction from President Kabila, he will send two
brigades for training by MONUC at our centres at
Luberizi and Nyaleke, starting in October. A third
training centre for an additional brigade is to be opened
near Kindu in January 2010. Another two brigades
could enter the training cycle in May 2010.

I am grateful to the Government of Tanzania for
agreeing to send 200 military trainers to join MONUC;
they will provide six-month training courses for the
FARDC. The Congolese army therefore aims at
training 15 battalions with the help of MONUC up to
the end of October 2010, which I hope will greatly
facilitate the integration process. If this can be
achieved, and depending, of course, on some other
developments, it would facilitate the downsizing of
MONUC's own forces, as the FARDC could then
progressively take over security tasks now carried out
by MONUC.

We are also encouraging the Government to
submit to parliament, without further delay, the
framework law on police reform, without which the
ongoing reform of the police will be unable to progress
much further. Reforms are also urgently needed in the
justice and penitentiary sector, especially to improve
prison conditions, which generally are deplorable.

The Prime Minister formally presented the
stabilization plan for the East to international partners
on 9 June in Kinshasa, and we are awaiting a
presidential decree establishing its steering committee
and provincial coordination mechanisms, which
subsume the previous structures of the Amani
programme. The plan builds on and incorporates the
earlier work done by the United Nations Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy, which the Council had
mandated us to prepare, and is the result of a
substantial joint planning exercise involving
Government ministries, international agencies and
bilateral partners.

The plan is an important tool for the Government
to mobilize critical resources to consolidate security,
expand State administration and create employment in
areas most affected by past and sometimes ongoing
conflict. The plan has been costed at $1.2 billion, of
which $400 million has already been made available
through the United Nations Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy and the Humanitarian Action Plan.
Additional resources can be expected as soon as our
international partners begin to see results of the
implementation of existing programmes. This is
extremely important at a time when the Government is
struggling with serious budgetary constraints, and we
hope that this opportunity will not be lost.

I am pleased to report that several aspects of the
Stabilization Strategy are already at an advanced stage
of implementation, notably the rehabilitation of six key
transport routes in the Kivus and Ituri; training and
deployment of the police, including the proximity
police requested by CNDP, and the judiciary; and the
preparations for the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, with the support of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. I
would like to take this opportunity express my sincere
appreciation to all donors and partners that are
contributing to the stabilization plan and the
Humanitarian Action Plan.

Unfortunately for the country as a whole, the
economic situation remains very difficult. Several
partners, including the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank and the European Union, have
extended emergency assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to help it weather the current
financial crisis. However, in order to effectively
capitalize on this support, the Government should take
decisive action to improve the management of public
finances and to address the continuing lack of
transparency and accountability, which has seriously
hampered socio-economic recovery. In his
Independence Day address this year, President Kabila
openly criticized corruption and mismanagement and
signalled a new resolve to tackle these major obstacles
to the country's development and its reform agenda.

The Independent Electoral Commission started
the voter registration update as planned, on 7 June in
Kinshasa. This event led to a considerable mobilization
of the major political parties, including at least one that
boycotted the electoral processes of 2005 and 2006.
Despite this growing momentum, national authorities
still have not provided the Commission with an official
list of constituencies, which puts into question the
timely launch of the voter registration update in the
rest of the country, which is scheduled to start in
August.

The Electoral Commission and MONUC are
currently exploring administrative options that are
politically acceptable to obtain provisional territorial
delimitations in order to move ahead, while waiting on
passage of the law by parliament. We are aware,
however, that in some provinces this territorial
delimitation is a politically sensitive issue and has
already provoked some local tensions. MONUC
continues to monitor these developments, both at
national and provincial levels.

While the delayed adoption of the enabling
legislation is unfortunate, it does not yet mean that the
local elections cannot be held in early 2010.
Nevertheless, the time frame is narrowing, which in
turn makes it increasingly difficult to ensure that the
necessary logistical support will be available on time.

To assist the Government in curbing the illegal
exploitation and export of natural resources, MONUC
has trained military and civilian staff to carry out the
tasks mandated by resolution 1856 (2008). MONUC
continues to provide considerable support to the Group
of Experts monitoring the arms embargo, as mandated
by the Council, and the Mission has participated in
several workshops with bilateral partners where
options to tackle illegal exploitation have been
explored.

MONUC has also reinforced its deployment and
patrol activities in and around the Kahuzi-Biega and
Virunga National Parks in the Kivus, where poaching
and illegal charcoal-burning, as well as the presence of
armed elements, threaten those World Heritage
sanctuaries. The FDLR is the main culprit, but it is
apparent that the lucrative charcoal trade also benefits
from the complicity of elements in the FARDC and
local authorities in the Kivus. It should be noted that
Rwanda is one of the main importers of this charcoal.

I want to express my gratitude to Bangladesh,
Egypt, Jordan and Tanzania, which are to deploy the
additional troops and police personnel authorized
under earlier resolutions of the Council, including
special forces and a contingent of trainers. I also thank
Belgium for providing a C-130 military transport

aircraft and Uruguay for making two military
helicopters available.

We look forward to seeing the additional troops
and police arrive, but it remains necessary for the
troops to have the required aviation, communication
and logistical assets to ensure the effectiveness of their
mission. I therefore repeat our request for 16 additional
military utility helicopters and an additional C-130
transport aircraft. I also want to re-emphasize that
obtaining aerial imaging and signals technologies to
track LRA and FDLR leaders and their forces would be
most helpful to us.

During the Council's visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in May, I provided a
comprehensive briefing on MONUC's planned
reconfiguration, as had been requested by the Council.
The Council is therefore aware that the Mission is
preparing for a gradual transition in the western part of
the country, pursuant to resolution 1856 (2008). An
assessment team comprising Government, MONUC
and United Nations country team participants visited
Bandundu province last month. Similar teams will
make assessments in the other western provinces so
that, by September, we can provide plans and
recommendations for the reconfiguration and, where
appropriate, the handover. That will not be a simple or
easy task. Please remember that the country team and
other partners are not strongly represented in many of
the western provinces either.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, we
will elaborate together with the country team an
integrated strategic framework defining common
objectives for the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, so that we have a cohesive
vision and approach to the transition and beyond. That
framework will detail the progressive handover of
MONUC tasks in the western part of the country on the
basis of the recommendations that I have just referred
to. I expect that the outcome of the reconfiguration
exercise will be fully reflected in that framework.
8
(spoke in French)

We are now at a critical stage in our support for
the simultaneous efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to integrate
Congolese armed groups and to neutralize the threat
posed by foreign groups. We are well aware of the
stakes involved. Given new acts of violence against
civilians, in particular sexual violence, we are forced to
adapt our strategy and to do everything possible to
strengthen our role in the protection of civilians. To
that end, I have reached an agreement with the
Government to carry out a second assessment of
Operation Kimia upon my return to the country.

Nevertheless, it is critical that we not lose sight
of our goal, namely, neutralizing once and for all the
threat posed by armed groups destabilizing the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
causing tremendous suffering to the inhabitants of the
Kivus and Orientale province. Backing off halfway
through could have devastating consequences, both for
the provinces concerned and at the regional level,
where foreign armed groups have been a major factor
in tensions and even instability.

We should pool our efforts to complete that task
as part of a comprehensive and coordinated strategy
that takes advantage of all the tools available; military,
diplomatic, legal, socio-economic and political.
MONUC has an important role to play in that strategy
to support the Government. However, without the
Council's material, political and diplomatic support,
we will not be able to succeed. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUC count
on the Council's support in the weeks and months to
come to re-establish lasting peace in the eastern part of
the country and throughout the region.

