I thank the President of the Security Council for having convened this open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. It is an unfortunate reality that the interlinked and mutually reinforcing challenges faced by the people of the Middle East have not yet been resolved. Political instability, long-festering conflicts, sectarian divides, the issue of refugees and terrorism continue to plague the region. The coronavirus disease pandemic has only exacerbated the threats posed by those challenges. India wishes to highlight the fact that Palestinian aspirations to a sovereign and independent State are yet to be fulfilled. India has been unwavering in its commitment to the Palestinian cause and remains supportive of a peaceful, negotiated resolution of the Palestinian issue. India has supported the two-State solution as a just and acceptable solution to the conflict. The establishment of a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security with Israel, within mutually agreed borders, should be achieved through negotiations directly by the two parties. Any stalemate could strengthen the hands of extremists and shut the door to cooperation, thereby jeopardizing the security, stability and prosperity of the peoples on both sides and the region. Accordingly, India urges Israel and Palestine to resume direct negotiations at the earliest. The international community is called upon to take concrete steps towards resuming and facilitating those negotiations quickly. India has always welcomed and has actively participated in various international initiatives on the Middle East peace Process. India also appreciates the efforts made by the Secretary-General's Special Coordinator, Nickolay Mladenov, the Middle East Quartet and other countries in the region to kickstart the stalled negotiations. In that regard, India supports President Mahmoud Abbas's call for an international conference organized by the Secretary-General to engage all concerned parties in a meaningful peace process. India appreciates the agreement between Fatah and Hamas for the holding of parliamentary and presidential elections and also elections for the Palestinian National Council, which will help fulfil the democratic aspirations of the Palestinian people. Similarly, the truce between Israel and Hamas has eased the humanitarian situation in Gaza. India hopes that the temporary truce will be converted into a permanent ceasefire, which can save precious human lives on both sides and create a conducive environment for talks. We welcome the agreements for the normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. India has always supported peace and stability in West Asia, which is our extended neighbourhood. The decade-long armed conflict in Syria has claimed more than 400,000 lives, displaced 6.2 million people internally and compelled another 6.3 million people to seek shelter in neighbouring countries. Some 2.5 million children have been deprived of schooling, and 50 per cent of the infrastructure has been destroyed. Surging inflation, a near-halt in economic activities and severe sanctions have accentuated the humanitarian crisis. While we are heartened to see the return of normalcy to major parts of the country, we are also reminded of the enormous resources that would be required to provide urgent humanitarian aid, rebuild the infrastructure, enable the return of the refugees and restore a normal and dignified life to all Syrians. India is not only contributing to the return of normalcy and the rebuilding of Syria but has also consistently called for a comprehensive and peaceful resolution of the Syrian conflict through a Syrian-led dialogue, taking into account the legitimate aspirations of the people of Syria. In that context, we remain supportive of both the Geneva and Astana processes. India remains concerned about the security and humanitarian situation in Yemen. The recent exchange by the Governmentof Yemenand Ansar Allah of prisoners who had been detained in connection with the conflict is a welcome development. India hopes that the parties will take more confidence-building measures to provide the necessary impetus for the full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement. India also encourages all parties to engage constructively with the United Nations Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, for the early finalization of the joint declaration, paving the way for a peaceful political transition in Yemen. India also hopes for peace and stability in Iraq, with full respect for Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In the aftermath of the 4 August blast that brought destruction to vast swathes of Beirut and inflicted a heavy loss of life, India stood in solidarity with Lebanon. We sent more than 58 metric tonnes of emergency humanitarian aid to Beirut. We look forward to the swift formation of a new Government that can offer political stability and also tackle the grave socioeconomic challenges being faced by the people of Lebanon. The commencement of discussions on the disputed border between Israel and Lebanon is a significant development. I am hopeful that this will provide an opportunity to resolve the longstanding issue between the two countries. India has invested much in the peace and stability of the region by deploying its personnel as part of United Nations peacekeeping forces, through humanitarian assistance, development cooperation and capacity-building, and will continue its contribution towards peacebuilding in the Middle East. India calls on the concerned parties to completely stop support to terrorist forces such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and others. India also urges all parties in the region to work constructively and in good faith to promote peace, stability and development for the benefit of all people in the Middle East.
