Mr. Serrano (European Union): The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this declaration.

Like others, I would like to greet Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura and his team and thank them for their excellent
work and for the good cooperation with the European
Union. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
presentation.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
(S/2011/120*) before the Council today devotes a good
deal of attention to the transition to full Afghan
leadership regarding security and to the broader Kabul
process, which has gained some momentum in recent
months.

The European Union welcomes the wish of the
Afghan Government to take the lead in the transition
process and the overall development of Afghanistan, as
recently expressed in the letter of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Rassoul, to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon (S/2011/118, annex). We appreciate the fact
that the transition will soon be officially launched by
President Karzai on the occasion of the Afghan New
Year, on 21 March.

1 1-26621
At the same time, we fully endorse that - as the
Secretary-General underlines - the exercise of
sovereignty also implies responsibility, first and
foremost towards the Afghan people. In the face of
significant security incidents, many of which affect or
target an alarming number of civilians, we remain
committed to calling for and assisting in a sustainable
transition process. While we are pleased with the
continuing build-up of Afghan security institutions, we
still need to see them develop a stronger capability to
protect the population against violence and hence
support training efforts to that end.

Together, we all subscribed to a comprehensive
vision of security for Afghanistan that encompasses
good governance, human rights and development. We
did so because it is our common understanding that a
successful and sustainable transition is also predicated
on an inclusive political process and on tangible,
country-wide improvements for the Afghan people. In
view of that, we hope that the political institutions can
soon focus on the actual challenges at hand and thereby
gain further legitimacy in the eyes of the population.
We believe that it is time to resolve the current
disagreements over the composition of the Parliament
while respecting the mandate of the electoral
institutions and the separation of powers.

On a more general note, building strong and
credible institutions capable of delivering justice and
other services to the people is a key priority. Also, we
cannot stress enough the importance of improving the
capability to ensure the human rights of all Afghans,
including women, children and persons belonging to
religious or ethnic minorities, and to protect them from
violence and abuse. Moreover, the European Union
firmly believes that all countries stand to gain from the
greater involvement of women as important actors in
post-conflict development- as stated in resolution 1325
(2000) - and in public life in general.

The Kabul process has made some headway since
the Kabul Conference in July last year, but more
remains to be done to respond to the basic needs of the
Afghan people. For its part, not only has the European
Union further increased its assistance package, but it is
also on track regarding the alignment of its
programmes with Government priorities and the
channelling of assistance through Afghan Government
structures and multi-donor trust funds.

11-2662]
Afghan ownership and leadership is indeed
essential for a sustainable transition and needs to be
matched with accountability, strengthened financial
management and effective institutions. That is also
indispensable for the success of the national priority
programmes and for continued international assistance
in times of greater scrutiny by the domestic
constituencies of Afghanistan's partners. Moreover, it
has become apparent that economic governance
requires particular attention, including improving
oversight of the financial sector, with the assistance of
international financial institutions where necessary.

As the transition gradually proceeds, UNAMA
continues to play a critical role in the coordination and
management of international assistance, as well as in
support of the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process, which must respect human rights and
transitional justice. A balanced UNAMA presence
throughout the country, including through United
Nations funds and programmes, is needed for that
purpose, all the more so because we believe that
United Nations field offices carry out essential tasks.

We also endorse a continued United Nations role
in long-term electoral reforms, the importance of
which was underlined in the Kabul communique, in
particular as regards the sustainability of the electoral
process. Efforts in that field should build on the lessons
drawn from the 2009 and 2010 electoral cycles.

In conclusion, we support the proposed extension
of a strong UNAMA mandate so that the Mission can
continue to contribute to and steer the creation of an
enabling environment for successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. For its part, the
European Union recently reaffirmed its strong support
for transition and the importance of long-term
cooperation with Afghanistan, also beyond 2014, in a
meeting with President Karzai.

