Mr. Matussek (Germany): I would like to align
myself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of France on behalf of the European
Union. I would also like to join my colleagues in
extending my thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, for introducing the
comprehensive report (S/2008/617) and for today's
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. In addition, I
would like to thank our Afghan colleague for his
comments.

The report provides a very substantial analysis
and, most important, conveys a sense of urgency. We
fully share the observation that it is imperative for the
Afghan people to see and experience, in a more
concrete manner, the results of the reconstruction
efforts undertaken both by the Afghan Government and
by the international community. In our view,
acceleration is required in the translation of the Paris
commitments into concrete political action. In that
vein, I would like to thank Special Representative Kai
Eide for his untiring efforts to enhance coordination
and to move all actors forward on our joint agenda.

As one of the major international partners in
assistance to Afghanistan and a major contributor to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
Germany is strongly committed to continue its
comprehensive support for the international efforts
under the umbrella of the United Nations.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly draws
a mixed picture of the current situation in Afghanistan.
Despite the substantial challenges still facing us there,
we should not forget that only seven years ago
Afghanistan was a country where the population did
not generally have access to basic health services,
where human rights were violated and where women
were denied access to education and public office.
Against that background, we can clearly acknowledge
the positive achievements of the Afghan Government,
supported by the international community.

In the words of German Foreign Minister Frank-
Walter Steinmeier: "Every strip of land that is
cultivated by a farmer again, every child that can attend
school again, every new hospital and every kilometre of
new road is a small victory for humankind".

In 2009 and 2010, the election process will, in
our View, be an important step towards a stable
democratic Afghanistan. Germany will assist
Afghanistan in preparing for those elections.
The Paris Declaration provides the strategy and
the road map for renewed and strengthened efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in facing remaining challenges. We
strongly support the concept of increasing Afghan

ownership in all aspects of governance, exemplified in
the launch of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, and recall that the Afghanistan Compact will
remain the agreed basis of our work.

Increased efforts on the part of the Afghan
Government are required to improve governance across
the board and in particular to intensify the fight against
corruption. We should encourage the Afghan
Government to take further decisive action in combating
terrorism, corruption and the trafficking and production
of drugs and their chemicals precursors; and to continue
the reform of the justice sector in order to be able to
continue to improve the human rights situation.

We view the recent Government reshuffle as an
encouraging sign of the political intention to strengthen
the reform agenda. We are ready to intensify our
cooperation with the Afghan authorities in order to put
into practice the priority identified in Paris:
strengthening institutions and economic growth, in
particular by focusing on agriculture and energy.

Germany welcomes the leading role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in the coordination of the international civilian effort,
and I would like to take this opportunity to underline
the need to ensure that UNAMA is adequately
resourced to fulfil its extended mandate.

We are prepared to live up to our international
responsibilities and we are firmly committed to
continuing our support to Afghanistan. In that regard,
Germany has recently increased its development aid
for Afghanistan by €30 million to a total of
approximately €170 million in 2008. The day after
tomorrow, the German Parliament will take a ballot on
the Federal Government's proposal to prolong
Germany's contribution to the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) while increasing the
personnel ceiling to 4,500 soldiers through an increase
of 1,000 servicemen and women. At the same time,
Germany is ready to double the number of German
police officers in the framework of the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan, in line with the Union's
efforts to reinforce the Mission. In light of the
imminent food crisis, Germany has made available
additional funds at short notice in order to enhance the
humanitarian capacity of UNAMA.

Germany shares the concern expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General on the issue of civilian
casualties. We note with great concern the number of
civilian casualties, due mainly to the increased violent
and terrorist activity of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremists and their asymmetric tactics. ISAF has
taken efforts to minimize the risk of unintended
civilian casualties and has installed procedures for an
after-action review. We recognize the need for
continued efforts by the international forces to avoid
civilian casualties during military operations.

In line with the Secretary-General's report,
Germany would like to encourage all regional partners
to continue efforts to improve regional cooperation in
all fields. Finally, I would like to express sincere
gratitude to all men and women helping to improve the
situation in Afghanistan. They all deserve our greatest
efforts.

