Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Netherlands and
Belgium.

First of all, I would like to thank India, as President
of the Security Council, for convening this debate and
for preparing, together with Portugal, what we consider
to be an excellent concept note (S/2012/853, annex). We
would also like to express our gratitude to Portugal,
and in particular its representative Ambassador Moraes
Cabral, who organized the previous open debate in 2011
(see S/PV.6672) and has been a driving force behind
this important subject as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.

Belgium and the Netherlands attach great
importance to this open debate, which provides the
wider United Nations membership with an opportunity
to interact with the Security Council members on this
matter. We feel a strong sense of urgency to make
progress on the improvement of the working methods
and on broader Security Council reform, for that
matter. As has been said, we think it is high time to
enhance the Security Council's accountability to the
wider membership and to increase the transparency,
legitimacy and effectiveness of its decisions.

In our view, concrete results on this issue can only
be achieved through a meaningful dialogue between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. That
is the path we should follow, and today's debate is
an excellent example of how we should proceed. We
fully agree with the statement at the very beginning
of the concept note that working methods "concern
the States Members of the United Nations as a whole"
(S/2012/853, annex, para. 1).

Moreover, as is also explained in the concept note,
real and encouraging improvements have already been
made in recent years. The debates on the working
methods have already produced results, and it is good
to remind ourselves that today the Council is operating
under other, better and more transparent working
methods than before. The Netherlands and Belgium
would like to commend both the permanent and the
successive elected members of the Council for their
efforts in that regard.

The Netherlands and Belgium want to stress that
fact because we do not want the further development
of better working methods to become hostage to a lack
of progress on the wider debate about Security Council
reform. In May, we witnessed the withdrawal of the
initiative of the group of five small nations (S-S) on the
improvement of the working methods of the Security
Council. At that point in time, the permanent members
of the Security Council indicated that they were ready
to seriously consider the recommendations put forward
in the 8-5 draft resolution (A/66/L.42/Rev.2). Belgium
and the Netherlands hope that they will do so.

We studied the Indian-Portuguese concept note
that was sent to us in preparation for this debate, as it
contains an interesting overview of recent events and
repeatedly stresses the right principles. This debate
should lead us to real and concrete measures that
simultaneously enhance transparency, efficiency and
interactivity within the Council and with the wider
membership.

In the concept note, Mr. President, you invite the
wider membership to come up with a range of practical
suggestions that could make a real difference in the
day-to-day business of the Security Council. You, Sir,
then sum up a list of concrete and operational ideas
and suggestions, some of which were actually been put
forward by the Netherlands and Belgium during the
previous debate in November 2011, and I thank you for
that.

We welcome those different suggestions in the
Indian-Portuguese paper aimed at increasing the
involvement of States and other parties non-members of
the Security Council in the Council's work, especially
the suggestions aimed at enhancing the participation
of the chairs of the country-specific configurations of
the Peacebuilding Commission and of the troop- and
police-contributing countries in relevant debates and
discussions. We also support the proposal of a more
flexible use of available meeting formats, such as Arria
Formula meetings or informal interactive dialogues.
Furthermore, we support the suggestions on increasing
the transparency and inclusivity of the work of the
Security Council's subsidiary bodies.

We would also like to repeat our plea to improve
country-specific debates by inviting the country at stake
in the discussions. Countries that are being debated, but
that are not members of the Council, should be given
the opportunity to contribute to Council debates at the
moment when they really matter and under a formula to
be decided on an ad hoc basis. By doing so, the Council
would give a fair and decent chance to countries to put
their points of view forward. After hearing from such a
country, the Council could still discuss the issue at stake
in a restricted debate among its members, without the
country concerned being present. We also see merit in
the proposal to promote more and more interactive open
debates. The suggestion to invite non-Council members
to speak among Council members is noteworthy.

At the same time, we would like to receive further
clarification on some of the other suggestions. The
suggestion to enhance the role of the Military Staff
Committee is thought-provoking. It would be interesting
to explore whether the Military Staff Committee could
provide military advice when the Security Council
considers the mandate of a military operation.

Belgium and the Netherlands truly appreciate
the efforts that have been made so far to improve the
working methods of the Security Council. The long list
of ideas and suggestions in the concept note deserves
our careful attention; some of them could, and should,
be swiftly implemented. Let me add that, in addition to
those ideas, we would like to underline the importance
of the Council giving continued attention to the cases
it referred to in the International Criminal Court and to
improve its cooperation with the Court, as has just been
argued by our colleague Ambassador Ulibarri.

We count on the Security Council members, in
particular the permanent members, to make a joint
effort together with the wider membership to continue
enhancing the transparency, legitimacy, effectiveness
and interactivity of the Security Council.

