Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the statement
of the current Chairman of the Arab Group, Ambassador
Olhaye of Djibouti, which he delivered on behalf of the
Group, and, moreover, to echo my delegation's full support
for the position of the Arab Group outlined in that
statement.

The primary purpose of convening this open debate
today is to address a critical and urgent issue regarding the
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem, which are undoubtedly impeding the
efforts that have been made to restore peace and security
through the ongoing peace process in the Middle East.

Israel's policy and practice of building and expanding
the settlements in the occupied Arab territories will have
negative consequences for the ongoing peace process and
undermine Israel's credibility in meeting its obligations. It

 

is true that there are some stumbling blocks in the
Israeli-Palestinian track, but we would like to emphasize
the fact that the continued construction of such
settlements by the Government of Israel will not only
jeopardize this track, but also threaten and jeopardize the
overall peace process in the region. In our View, there can
be no potential breakthrough in the course of the peace
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israel, nor in
the course of other tracks, unless Israel brings these
practices to an immediate end and resorts to resolving the
question of the existing settlements through peaceful
negotiations.

The Government of Israel, as an occupying Power,
is required today, more than ever before, to take positive
steps towards peace by refraining from constructing new
settlements anywhere in the occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem, and by complying with the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. We
are of the View that these matters should be resolved
through bilateral negotiations and within the context of
the ongoing peace process. However, and in accordance
with the peace efforts exerted in this regard, my
delegation believes that the Council can play an effective
role in enhancing the ongoing peace process in the region,
particularly given that the Madrid process is based on the
very relevant resolutions of this Council.

In conclusion, my delegation calls upon the
Government of Israel and the Government of Palestine to
accelerate the implementation of the Declaration of
Principles signed by the two parties on 13 September
1993, and to abide by its pertinent provisions.

