Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation has repeatedly
emphasized that the very serious humanitarian situation in
Iraq urgently dictates the need for the adoption of speedy
measures to relieve the grave humanitarian situation of
the Iraqi people. We must observe that the humanitarian
operation in its current form is not in keeping with the
broad-scale tasks it was called upon to carry out.

In Iraq the socio-economic infrastructure is
continuing to crumble. Goods and equipment crucial to
civilian life are not being delivered within the framework
of the humanitarian programme. These problems are
aggravated by the blocking of a significant number of
contracts within the sanctions Committee.

In connection with the need for carrying out urgent
measures to correct the situation, two weeks ago the
Russian Federation proposed the adoption of a draft
resolution extending the United Nations humanitarian
operations. The terms of that draft resolution reflected the

 

recommendations of the Secretary-General and the
conclusions of the humanitarian panel chaired by
Ambassador Amorim regarding the improvement of the
United Nations humanitarian programme. First and
foremost, the draft resolution addressed the removal of the
oil ceiling, an increase in quotas for delivery to Iraq of oil
spare parts, a simplification of the procedure for reviewing
contracts in the sanctions Committee, and a solution to the
problem of air links with Baghdad. Unfortunately, our
approach was not taken into account by a number of
delegations.

We are compelled to observe that the resolution just
adopted by the Security Council providing a one-week
extension of phase VI of humanitarian operations is not in
keeping with the current realities of the grave humanitarian
situation in Iraq. The practical implementation of such an
artificial decision is fraught with many obvious difficulties
of a technical nature. These will lead to serious
interruptions in the entire humanitarian operation. Bearing
in mind the fact that the authors of the draft resolution did
not find it possible to take into account even the simple, but
extremely logical amendment proposed by France for a
longer "technical" roll-over - which would have allowed
the humanitarian programme to remain in operation - the
Russian Federation was not able to support the resolution
in its current form.

In this connection, we would like to state clearly that
we in no way link consideration of priority humanitarian
issues with continuing work on the comprehensive
resolution on Iraq. We would like once again to emphasize
that the decision adopted by the Council in no way
establishes the timetable for concluding work on an
omnibus resolution, and we do not assume any
responsibilities in this regard. In order to find a way out of
the Iraqi deadlock we need to reach agreement on the
remaining serious problems, and this we are still lacking.
Attempts to establish any kind of artificial time limits in
this regard are totally inappropriate.

