Allow me to start by thanking the Estonian presidency for having convened today's Security Council open video-teleconference meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Let me also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer; and Nobel Peace Laureate, member of The Elders and former President of Liberia Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their insightful briefings on this matter. As a country affected by protracted conflict and imposed wars, Afghanistan is deeply aware of the devasting, long-lasting impacts that conflict has on civilians. For more than four decades, my country and people have endured the severe social, economic and psychological impacts of war. As a result, we have seen increases in poverty and instability, and millions of Afghans have been forced to migrate, becoming internally displaced, while countless others have lost their lives. Owing to the surges of violence perpetrated by the Taliban, the Afghan people are not safe at sports fields, hospitals, mosques, weddings and funeral ceremonies, or now, as a result on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, at home. The Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and their affiliate terrorist groups continue their indiscriminate attacks on all segments of Afghan society, targeting civilians and even using them as shields. The last few months have seen a series of heinous and inhumane crimes that have further exemplified that disregard for innocent lives. Just last week, in a mosque attack, 12 worshippers lost their lives while waiting to break their fast. Three weeks ago, terrorists linked to ISIL and the Taliban attacked a maternity ward at a hospital in Kabul, killing 24 people, including nurses, newborn babies and their mothers, while a further 24 people were killed in a suicide strike at a funeral in Nangahar, in eastern Afghanistan. On 25 March, another brutal terrorist attack took place on the Dharamshala Sikh Temple in Kabul, in which 25 people from our Sikh community lost their lives while a dozen others were injured. Those acts not only constitute war crimes and flagrant violations of international human rights law but also are deep and profound losses that have shattered families and communities. And they are only examples from a long list of acts perpetrated by these groups. As reflected in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366), in 2019 Afghanistan accounted for the largest number of recorded civilian casualties, having seen 10,392 civilians killed or injured, with women and children representing 42 percent of the victims. The most recent United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) quarterly report recorded 710 civilian casualties by anti- Government elements between January and March 2020, with 39 per cent of those being attributed to the Taliban alone. Following a brief period of reduction in violence, attacks by the Taliban increased after the signing of the peace agreement between the Taliban and the United States. The situation has been further exacerbated by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, which requires immediate preventive, curative and humanitarian measures in conflict-affected areas to protect and safeguard vulnerable people. In line with the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire, the Government has been insistent in calling for a lasting ceasefire with the Taliban that could effectively create an environment that is both conducive to peace talks and that could allow us to effectively address the humanitarian situation created by the pandemic. On that note, we hope that the recent three-day Eid al-Fitr ceasefire can lay the foundation for a more sustainable cease of hostilities. The Government of Afghanistan is committed to the protection of civilians in conflict and to avoiding the ultimate collateral damage from operations and expects the same of our partners from the international coalition. In 2017, we adopted a national policy on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation, and the Government continues to exhaust efforts to ensure that such incidents do not take place. Efforts have included strict rules of engagement in our armed forces and the establishment of the post of Deputy National Security Adviser to oversee civilian-protection issues. Violence against humanitarian workers and the targeting of medical personnel in the face of COVID-19 are egregious acts that must be stopped. Of the 18 attacks that were recorded by UNAMA over the past few months, 17 were attributed to the Taliban. The group has ignored all calls from the Government to enter into a ceasefire to effectively address this pandemic, thwarting not only our ability to end the pandemic but putting further strain on our health-care systems and resources, which we must divert to addressing their repeated attacks. Most recently, on 22 March, the Taliban abducted a group of health workers and their driver as they were on their way to evaluate a health facility, releasing them two days later. The Government of Afghanistan underlines the role of the Security Council in the resolution and prevention of conflicts and the protection of civilians through the implementation of recommendations of the Secretary-General and of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on the matter, as well as the effective implementation of sanctions regimes. We welcome the three-day ceasefire agreed by the Taliban and the Government and will continue to implement confidence-building measures, such as our pledge to release 2,000 prisoners to finally bring peace to our country and ensure we can respond to the new challenges brought by the pandemic. The people of Afghanistan are war-weary and eager for peace. My Government understands that now is not the time for continued conflict. Now more than ever, it is important that Afghans come together to address the various impacts of the pandemic so that we can create a peaceful, secure and stable future. I would like to reiterate the commitment of my Government to ensuring the safety and security of our people, in line with our national and international obligations, and our strong belief that resolving conflicts remains the most effective way to ensure the protection of civilians. To that end, we remain committed to working towards reaching a long-lasting resolution of the conflict in Afghanistan and hope that the United Nations and our international partners will continue to support us in achieving an objective that is desperately longed for and deserved by the people of our country.
