Before delivering my statement, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome to today's meeting Ambassador Barbara Woodward, the new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations. I also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Arias for their briefings. China has always opposed the use of chemical weapons by any country, entity or individual under any circumstances and for any purpose. Allegations of the use of chemical weapons should always be investigated and addressed with impartiality and objectivity, based on facts and guided by the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC). Regarding the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, I would like to emphasize the following three points. First, all parties should encourage the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to maintain good communication and cooperation with the Syrian Government and take an objective view of Syria's efforts. The Syrian Government and the OPCW Technical Secretariat recently held their twenty-third round of technical consultations, during which they discussed all outstanding issues concerning Syria's initial declaration, three of which were closed. Syria once again expressed its readiness to maintain communication and cooperation with the Technical Secretariat. Syria's constructive attitude and the outcomes of those exchanges should be recognized. China understands that the proposed plan for this dossier has been postponed owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We hope that Syria and the Technical Secretariat will resume the relevant deployment and activities when conditions permit, so as to ensure positive progress on the remaining issues. The Permanent Representative of Syria recently wrote to the President of the Security Council to submit detailed information about an Idlib terrorist organization's attempt to carry out a chemical attack, and we hope that the OPCW will give that matter due attention. Secondly, all parties should approach the issue of chemical weapons in Syria with openness, transparency and inclusiveness, while respecting the facts and the science. In the past few years, the OPCW has released a number of reports on the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. Many independent experts have raised doubts about this from a technical standpoint and highlighted contradictions in the reports, to which the OPCW should provide professional, science-based and convincing responses. China opposes jumping to conclusions or even rushing into action at a time when many question marks still remain. Certain members of the Security Council simply refuse to listen to divergent views and are determined to apply pressure and place attribution. They want to label anyone with a view different from their own as undermining the authority of the OPCW. Such conduct is irresponsible, unconstructive and politically motivated. Thirdly, all States parties should help to bring the issue of accountability for the use of chemical weapons back within the framework of the CWC and should safeguard the authority and integrity of the Convention. Some nations have weaponized the OPCW in order to undermine and suppress other countries, substituting votes for dialogue, which has led to deep divisions among OPCW States parties. The working methods of the Investigation and Identification Team, which was established by those countries, are opaque, and its reports do not reflect the integrity of the chain of custody, meaning they are highly controversial. Pending a solution to those problems, at the ninety-fourth session of the Executive Council those countries once again pushed for a vote on a draft decision concerning the Syrian chemical-weapons issue. That approach is not at all constructive, and if it continues, the OPCW's work is bound to become further politicized over time. China calls on Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat to take steps to conduct their work in an impartial, objective and independent manner, promote dialogue and communication among States parties, return to consensus- based decision-making and truly safeguard the authority of the Convention and the long-term interests of the OPCW. The statement by the representative of the Russian Federation includes a number of specific questions. We hope that Mr. Arias will provide a timely response to them.
