Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, at the outset, I should like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I am confident that you
will guide the proceedings of the Council during the
current month effectively. I should also like to express
our appreciation to the Permanent Representative of China
for the excellent manner in which he conducted the
deliberations of the Council during the month of March.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss a
subject of paramount importance to the security of the
entire international community. The continued production,
stockpiling and testing of nuclear weapons by nuclear
Powers endanger the security of non-nuclear-weapon

 

States, which believe that the only effective security
assurance against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons lies in the total elimination of such weapons. It is
regrettable to note that not only have the nuclear-weapon
States refused to undertake a programme of action for
nuclear disarmament within a time-bound framework, with
a target date, but they have also chosen not to finalize a
comprehensive test-ban treaty. It is the considered view of
the non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty (NPT) that, pending the achievement of
universal nuclear disarmament, effective measures should
be taken to ensure the security of these States against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.

The non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT
believe that nuclear-weapon States should extend the
negative security assurances granted to the States Members
of the Tlatelolco Treaty to all non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the NPT. These assurances must be in the form
of a negotiated, legally binding international instrument,
with, inter alia, the addition of a protocol embodying
legally binding nuclear security assurances to be annexed to
the NPT. The Group of non-nuclear-weapon States parties
to the NPT in the Conference on Disarmament, including
my delegation, have presented a draft protocol on the issue,
which is an important step towards strengthening the
Treaty. Anything short of that would not allay the concerns
of non-nuclear-weapon States regarding the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons.

Bearing in mind that any act of aggression involving
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a
threat to international peace and security, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to take immediate measures
under the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter in the
event of aggression with nuclear weapons or the threat of
such aggression against a non-nuclear-weapon State Party
to the NPT. These measures should include action on the
part of the Members of the United Nations, particularly the
nuclear-weapon States, individually or collectively, to
suppress aggression. In other words, besides providing
technical, medical, scientific or humanitarian assistance to
the victims of an act of aggression with nuclear weapons,
the Security Council should be prepared to use all
necessary means in defence of the victims in accordance
with the United Nations Charter. The draft resolution before
the Council, while inviting Member States to act in the case
of the use of nuclear weapons in the form of positive
security assurances, lacks a clear reference to the core of
the problem - that is, the negative security assurances.
Regrettably, following the demise of the cold war, some
permanent members of the Security Council continue to
refrain from committing themselves not to use or threaten
to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the NPT. Moreover, this draft does not go
beyond the very limited scope of resolution 255 (1968) of
19 June 1968, except as regards the wording concerning
technical assistance to the Victim of a nuclear accident
similar to the Chernobyl incident, not a victim of a threat
or use of nuclear weapons.

The current draft before the Council clearly lacks the
following essential principles: first, a prior determination
that threat or attack by nuclear weapons constitutes a
threat to international peace and security; secondly, a
trigger mechanism to ensure a Security Council response
to threats or attacks by nuclear weapons.

The non-nuclear-weapon States have renounced the
nuclear option in return for the fulfilment of the
commitment on the part of the nuclear-weapon States,
including the provision of negative security assurances to
non-nuclear-weapon States through an international
legally binding instrument. The nuclear-weapon States
should uphold their commitments so that the NPT and the
non-proliferation regime can be strengthened.
Undoubtedly, the present endeavour will help create
an atmosphere conducive to the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. As an original signatory of the NPT and
as a Party that has fully complied with all its obligations
under NPT and IAEA safeguards, the Islamic Republic of
Iran is committed to acting in tandem with other peace-
loving countries in this regard.

