Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his briefing and for all his ongoing work. I
especially welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, Mr. Salahuddin Rabani, for attending
this afternoon's meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2017/783), which highlights
the complex situation in the country, and for his special
report (S/2017/696)on the strategic review ofthe United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Uruguay recognizes the work done by the Special
Envoy and the tireless dedication of all the staff of
the Mission.

Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan and encourages it to pursue its efforts
to achieve a lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
It is critical to strengthen democratic institutions to
achieve the stability of the country. In that regard, I
highlight the progress made in the electoral process and
the announcement of the legislative and district council
elections to be held in mid-July next year.

The progress made by the Afghan Government in
its programme of priority reforms, such as the fights
against corruption and impunity, are encouraging. By
the same token, the activities of the Government and its
partners to address violence against women and girls
and the increased representation of women in the High
Peace Council are all positive developments.

Nevertheless, we are concerned by the lack of
progress between the Government and the Taliban
towards a peace process. There is no military solution
to this conflict. Peace can be achieved only through
dialogue and direct negotiations. The best and most
effective way ofweakening the terrorists will be through
dialogue, unity and reconciliation among Afghanis. It
is therefore essential that the maximum efforts be made
to establish talks between the Government and the
Taliban. Without the firm resolve of all parties, there
can be no end to this protracted conflict.

The support of the United Nations and the
international community for the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan remains a critical element
in efforts to address the major political, economic and
security challenges facing the country in its efforts to
build a lasting peace. We wish in that regard to express
our appreciation for the Kabul Process for Peace
and Security Cooperation and the interest shown by
Afghanistan's partners in pursuing this initiative.

Turning to UNAMA, we welcome the initiative
of cooperating with local radio stations in provinces,
such as Kandahar and Kunar, to set up platforms for
dialogue among communities in which tribal leaders,
faith leaders, provincial authorities and women will
participate in fostering dialogue and mediating between
rival groups.

Despite all the efforts made to stabilize and
secure the country, conditions remain unstable and
have deteriorated even further, with serious impact
on civilians, who are already in a difficult situation
and suffering the dire consequences of the conflict.
Uruguay condemns the terrorist attacks on mosques in
the cities of Herat and Kabul in August, resulting in the
deaths of dozens of civilians as they prayed. Uruguay
strongly condemns those and all other terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, fighting continues and is exacting a
heavy toll in civilian casualties, particularly among
innocent women and children. Thousands of Afghans
have been forcibly displaced and to flee the violence
in their communities. According to the Secretary-
General's report, humanitarian access, workers and
health facilities continue to be severely affected.

Uruguay calls on all parties to the conflict to
respect humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law. We also reiterate our
call for full compliance with resolution 2286 (2016)
on the protection of the wounded and sick and medical
facilities and personnel. Attacks on hospitals and
medical personnel violate international humanitarian
law and may constitute war crimes. These crimes
should not remain unpunished and the perpetrators
must be held accountable for their actions. Uruguay
reiterates its appreciation to all humanitarian workers
who have been striving in extremely difficult conditions
to provide care to the Afghan people, and who continue
to fall victim to bloody attacks.

In conclusion, echoing Mr. Yamamoto's simile of
a few days ago, the support of all and at every level,
through understanding and ownership, is needed to
continue weaving this intricate tapestry.

