Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his detailed presentation
on recent events and progress in the development of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I would
also like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

Colombia recognizes and supports the important
role played by UNMIK, and believes that, in defining
its priorities, it must continue to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region through cooperation with the parties
involved and regional and international agencies.

Colombia believes that the regional perspective is
decisive in resolving differences and therefore
expresses its support for the guidance of the European
Union in bringing Pristina and Belgrade closer
together, as well as the involvement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
the process. It is encouraging to see the progress that
Serbia and Kosovo are making with their European
agendas. In March, the European Union voted to grant
candidate status to Serbia, on which we congratulate it.
During the same month, the European Commissioner

for Enlargement launched a feasibility study for a
stabilization and association agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo. I think that is a very
positive step.

In order to move towards a peaceful solution, we
have to work based on the agreements already
achieved, which can support the leadership and
political resolve of the parties. In that regard, we are
concerned that, for various reasons, the confrontation
on the ground continues to threaten progress and to
jeopardize prospects for the process to continue to
move towards reconciliation. We therefore once again
urge the parties to take steps to reduce tension and to
avoid situations of arbitrary arrest, passive responses to
acts of intolerance and bellicose rhetoric. It is a
positive development that during the Serbian electoral
process on 6May, that country's Government held
consultations with UNMIK on the organization of the
local elections in Kosovo and took into account the
Mission's views and recommendations.

The report before us notes a decline in the
number of voluntary returns to Kosovo due to the lack
of available land and completed housing units.
However, we should highlight the support that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and its partners and donor States have given
to the difficult task of aiding voluntary returns by
bringing displaced persons together and through
outreach and information campaigns.

Concerning the allegations in the report by
Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs, we note the work of Mr. John Clint
Williamson, lead prosecutor of the Special
Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. We hope that the recent
contacts and visits will contribute to the speedy
finalization of the investigations.

Lastly, I should like to say that Colombia is
optimistic about the progress that has been made in the
dialogue in Brussels, such as concluding a technical
protocol that builds on the previous agreement on the
integrated management of border crossing points,
aimed at restoring full freedom of movement in the
north. Another development that deserves attention is
the agreement reached between Belgrade and Pristina,
thanks to facilitation by the European Union,
concerning regional representation and cooperation.
Nevertheless, there are differences between the parties
about some aspects of its interpretation. We call on the
parties to continue the dialogue and definitively lay the
groundwork for peaceful coexistence as good
neighbours, according to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

