Mr. Muita (Kenya): I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in today's debate.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their
comprehensive reports, submitted to the Council in
conformity with the respective statutes establishing the
two separate Tribunals.

Kenya strongly supports the international
criminal justice system. We recognize that the ad hoc
Tribunals established by the Council and the

International Criminal Court (ICC) must provide and
protect the proper administration of justice by
prosecuting those who promote impunity. To that end,
the cooperation of Member States is critical if the
Tribunals are to succeed in restoring justice, securing
peace and preventing mass atrocities in the future.
Kenya takes seriously its international obligations to
cooperate fully with the international community in
that regard.

Kenya appreciates the work of both Presidents for
the manner in which they have conducted the affairs of
the respective Tribunals. My delegation, however,
wishes to comment on the work of the Prosecutor of
the ICTR, particularly on the issue of fugitives.

I have listened carefully to the statement by the
Prosecutor of the ICTR concerning a fugitive who is
wanted by the Tribunal for prosecution. In his
statement the Prosecutor mentioned the case of
Felicien Kabuga, who, among other indictees, has not
been apprehended to face justice. He alluded to the
presence of the fugitive in Kenya. These allegations are
not only untrue, but also of grave concern to my
country.

I would like to emphasize that in the Kabuga
case, the Government of Kenya has fully cooperated
with the ICTR officials, as called for by the Security
Council. For the past three years, the Government of
Kenya has been engaged with the Prosecutor's Office,
largely through the Joint Kenya-ICTR Task Force. In
demonstrating our commitment to the cause of the
ICTR, in May 2008 the Government obtained an order
from the High Court of Kenya freezing property
belonging to the estate of Mr. Kabuga.

In the past Kenya has arrested and surrendered to
the ICTR some of the Rwandese fugitives found within
Kenyan territory. In the same spirit, should Mr. Kabuga
ever be found on Kenyan soil, he will likewise be
apprehended and surrendered to the Tribunal. The
nature of fugitives is such that they hide and at times
send those who are pursuing them in the wrong
direction. Therefore the search for Kabuga should be
widened to cover other areas, because we might be
over-concentrating on Kenya, whereas the fugitive
could be living comfortably elsewhere.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council of my
Government's unwavering cooperation with the court
in all respects, and of her continued commitment to the
high ideals of international criminal justice and

eradication of impunity. We will continue to implement
the recommendations of the Joint Kenya-ICTR Task
Force.

