Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for holding this most timely meeting. We
express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov for his informative briefing.

Despite the military pressure and the successful
anti-terrorist operations of the international coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
in Syria and Iraq, which have recovered vast territories
held by the terrorist organization, the activities of
Da'esh are still a major global threat. That is further
aggravated by the return of foreign terrorist fighters
to their countries of origin, who, under the instruction
of their instigators in Syria and Afghanistan, commit
terrorist acts and create satellite networks. The
ideologists of terrorism actively seek safe havens,
potential recruits and religious radicals to conduct
heinous acts directly on the territory of their States.

At the same time, we see a change in the tactics,
forms and methods of actions by ISIL, who, under the
new and changed conditions, are conducting terrorist
attacks outside the conflict zones, with deliberate
attempts to expand and strengthen the network of cells.
Those cells operate undetected, with a certain degree
of autonomy, thereby making it difficult for Member
States to identify them. It is therefore most critical
to establish an effective mechanism for the exchange
of information, at the international level, on foreign
terrorist fighters, returnees and those who relocate.

The transfer of terrorist threats to other regions
and the Security Council measures to counter them
were therefore among the key topics on the agenda of
the visits by the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, to Malaysia and Singapore in August 2017
and to Afghanistan in October 2017.

Notwithstanding the many measures taken by the
international community to identify and block extremist
Internet resources, the fighters and supporters of
Da'esh continue to use the Internet and social networks,
including th Dark Web encryption technology and
communication tools, to disseminate, coordinate and
conduct terrorist attacks and to promote their narratives.
A stricter, well-coordinated regulation of the use of the
Internet is therefore needed to identify and to prevent
the spread ofterrorist content. Complacency is harmful
to our collective efforts to contain the spread of Da'esh
propaganda via the Internet.

While the revenue ofISIL has decreased by 90 per
cent compared to 2015, the group nevertheless continues
to profit from the illegal sale ofoil. Kazakhstan therefore
recommends further comprehensive measures to block
channels for the illegal transportation of hydrocarbons.

We note with satisfaction the special attention paid
by the Secretary-General to Afghanistan. Kazakhstan
is concerned about the emergence of terrorist groups,
particularly ISIL, in the north of the country, which
can pose a security threat to the States of Central Asia
and beyond. We strongly condemn the recent terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad. Kazakhstan fully
shares and supports the Secretary-General's vision,
priorities and efforts to reform the United Nations in
order to prioritize its preventive agenda. That was the
reason behind our initiative in organizing the Security
Council's visit to Kabul last month. We wanted to enable
Council members to get first-hand information on the
current situation and consider the preventive measures
needed to address the root causes of these issues, in
particular, as Kazakhstan has proposed, by linking the
achievement of peace and security with sustainable
development, through regional partnerships with all
of Afghanistan's neighbours and the establishment of
effective collaboration with United Nations agencies
on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Kazakhstan has intensified its interaction with
the relevant authorities of the other States of Central
Asia in order to implement the Joint Plan of Action
for implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. The Action Plan
has also been incorporated into the framework of the
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization's regional
anti-terrorist structure and the Anti-Terrorism Centre
of the Commonwealth of Independent States. We
support Mr. Voronkov's proposal for a summit of heads
of intelligence organizations and hope it will be a step
in the right direction for countering terrorism. We
have achieved real results in pursuing and detaining
people involved in terrorist activities. In 2017 alone,
in cooperation with the special services of Russia,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, more than 40
persons implicated in terrorist and extremist activities,
were found, detained and handed over to partners in
the region. Working together with the border agencies
of our neighbouring countries, we have exchanged
information on the issues of terrorist and extremist
threats and their impact on border security. As a
result of measures taken in 2017, more than 20 people
have been detained for involvement in terrorist and
extremist activities.

Kazakhstan attaches special importance to
implementing resolution 2368 (2017) at the national
level. In accordance with the resolution and our
national legislation on counteracting money-laundering
in order to combat illicit trafficking and terrorism
financing, we have frozen terrorists' assets in our
country, in compliance with the list of organizations
and individuals related to the financing of terrorism
and extremism. The travel ban included in the Security
Council Sanctions Committees' lists is policed and
monitored by INTERPOL through search registries of
regional counter-terrorist structures and Kazakhstan's
relevant ministries. We work diligently to confiscate
weapons, ammunition and explosives from terrorists'
accomplices in order to prevent them from falling into
the hands of radicals.

Kazakhstan is implementing large-scale measures
to neutralize potential risks by strengthening its
national security and thereby preventing extremism
and terrorism in any form. We have updated our
legislative standards on migration and on arms
circulation and security and toughened our criminal
penal code for terrorist and extremist activities. Taking
into account the recommendations of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Security Council's relevant decisions and resolutions,
including resolution 2368 (2017), as well as other
countries' positive experiences, we have drafted a
State programme for countering religious extremism
and terrorism in Kazakhstan for the period from
2018 to 2022 that is currently awaiting approval. The
programme envisages measures for actively involving
the non-governmental sector in the prevention of
religious extremism and terrorism.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Kazakhstan's full commitment to countering
international terrorism as part of broader multilateral
efforts. In that regard, I would like to point out that
recently, with the participation of more than 100
Member States, Kazakhstan launched a code of conduct
for achieving a terrorism-free world, and we hope to
cooperate actively through that initiative in order to
streamline our collective efforts to combat terrorism
internationally, since coordination and collaboration
are still lacking.

