Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him for his
statement. I also welcome Ambassador Valentin Inzko,
High Representative and European Union (EU) Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank
him for his briefing.

We are encouraged by the progress that has been
achieved towards meeting the requirements set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative, particularly the
adoption of a constitutional amendment incorporating
Brcko District into the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We welcome the progress that has been
achieved in the area of entrenchment of the rule of law
and acknowledge the efforts of the Bosnian authorities
to establish the new State-level police bodies, as
provided for in the police reform laws.

We note with appreciation that the European
Union military mission (EUF OR) continues to play an
important role in the overall security situation, in
cooperation with local law enforcement agencies. We
commend EUFOR for its support to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and its cooperation
with the Bosnian authorities on joint military affairs.

Uganda commends the High Representative for
his efforts in facilitating implementation of the Peace
Agreement. We urge all parties, including neighbours
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to uphold their commitments
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the spirit of good-neighbourliness and
peaceful coexistence, as enshrined in the United Nations
Charter.

We have noted the economic challenges facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as reflected in the report. In
particular, we are concerned about the funding deficit
that has impeded the Government's capacity to cover
its obligations. In addition, we are concerned about the
registered unemployment rate, which was 41 per cent
in late 2008 and appears to be rising. We call upon the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus, with
support from their international partners, on addressing
this issue, which has serious implications for the
stability of the country.

Finally, we are concerned about the situation of
refugees and displaced persons. We call on the
authorities to address their plight with a view to
ensuring their early return and resettlement.

