Mr. Mano Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Like previous speakers, I wish to
congratulate you, Madam President, on the wisdom, skill
and great patience with which you have conducted our
work during the month of February.

First of all, my delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report on the
progress achieved during the fulfilment of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), which
describes the main events that have taken place in Haiti
since the submission of the preceding report on 6
November 1995 and which contains an assessment of the
results achieved by the United Nations, as well as
recommendations on the role that the Organization should
continue to play in order to consolidate the gains in that
country.

Allow me, through you, Madam President, to pay a
tribute to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide for the
authority and wisdom with which he committed his
country to the path of democracy. My delegation would
be remiss if it let pass this opportunity to offer President
Rene Preval our best wishes for success in the
accomplishment of his tasks. Our praise and admiration
go also to the Haitian people for their exemplary attitude,
which was a determining factor during the elections. My
delegation also expresses its gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and to the
members of UNMIH for their commitment.

My country welcomes the Secretary-General's
current report, which some contains very positive and
encouraging elements regarding the United Nations
Mission in Haiti and congratulates UNMIH for the
progress achieved during the fulfilment of its mandate, as
set out in resolution 940 (1994), to assist the Haitian
Government in maintaining a safe and stable climate, to
protect international personnel and essential installations,
to ensure the desired conditions for the holding of
elections and to create a new professional police force.

My delegation is firmly convinced that the Haitian
Government and people bear prime responsibility for the
political, economic and social reconstruction of Haiti.
However, it wishes to stress that the continued support of
the international community is essential to ensure that
lasting peace and stability are established in that country.
In this regard, we ask the international community to
continue to provide its support to the Haitian people so
that it can make a real commitment to the way of
democracy, peace, tolerance and prosperity, essential
conditions for any lasting economic and social
development.

We support the Secretary-General' s recommendation
to extend UNMIH's mandate because we feel that now
more than ever the Haitian people needs the presence of
 

the United Nations to consolidate the progress achieved,
and, therefore, the withdrawal of UNMIH could
compromise the process of democratization under way.

Guinea-Bissau will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

