Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Madam, it is not just because you hold the presidency
this month that I want to thank the Jamaican delegation
for its efforts over the past few years to bring a very
distinctive voice to the business of the Security
Council, under your leadership and that of Ambassador
Ward. It has been very important to us, and I think that
we have learned quite a lot from you and from seeing
the Security Council through your eyes, so I thank you
not just for this month, but for the whole two years of
Jamaica's work on the Council.

I would very much like to talk about your agenda,

in the note that you have sent around to us, and to get a
discussion going, because - perhaps particularly since
11 September - there is a growing momentum behind
the work of the United Nations, in which the Security
Council is playing a leading part. But we are not yet
doing enough that is right, even if we are doing more
things that are right.

Madam President, I think that you have put your
finger on it in introducing, as a first item for discussion
after that, the issue of transparency. Perhaps it is a bit
ironic that we are going to have a discussion of
transparency this morning with rather a pathetic
number of non-Council States Members of the United
Nations present with us. I thought that the whole point
of having this discussion in the open was to allow the
membership to listen to how the Security Council
wanted to reflect their concerns about how the Security
Council works.

Be that as it may, the issue of transparency is, I
think, the leading area in which the Council can
increase its authority and its sensitivity to outside
influences, particularly among Member States that are
not on the Council.

Madam President, we should consider whether
there are ways for the Council to interact with Member
States other than the ones we have traditionally had in
our locker. I think that there are, and that we need to
adapt our procedures and the way in which we work.
We are beginning to talk informally more with the
membership outside, and in certain areas I think that it
is beginning to work. I think that the counter-terrorism
Committee is a special item and that it does not
necessarily set a precedent that can be used in other
areas of work.

I have been very struck by the responsiveness of
the membership to the outreach programme of the
counter-terrorism Committee. It is informal, but it is
regular, and it gets a response from Member States.
They have come to the meetings that we have had on
these items, not with complaints about the Security
Council - which they might well have had, given the
unique nature, I think, of resolution 1373 (2001) - but
in order to bring out the questions they have in their
minds about the substance of what we are doing.
Clearly, we cannot do that on every issue, and it is not
on every issue that we need the proactive cooperation
of every Member State. But it is an area which
deserves more consideration.

That may connect with a different proposal that I
have made from time to time: on items where we need
the implementation of our resolutions to be taken
forward in transparency and with cooperation from
Member States, it might help to nominate a member of
the Council to help us drive forward that
implementation. If that can be done transparently with
the membership - and we do not as a Council feel that
every such transparency meeting has to be attended by
every member of the Council - and if we have a
collective approach to this within which we understand
each other, then I think it would be highly useful.

Here is a another feature that I think is beginning
to grow within the Security Council: we like passing
resolutions 15 to nil. I do not know whether that is a
new feeling. Obviously, we all like consensus and
unanimity, but in the past we have driven things
forward even where there were abstentions and
negative votes. But there is something about the
relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly that makes consensus important, and
the nature of our work in this millennial and post-ll
September era is that the Security Council actually
likes to show that it is unanimous on a subject because
its authority is greater if we are unanimous on a
subject. I think we are beginning to understand each
other better on that.

Therefore, perhaps it does lend itself to an
extension of our procedures, whereby we express that
unanimity through what we do outside the Council in
more informal meetings, where individual members or
smaller groups of the Council can represent the views
of the Council on specific issues. You are right, Madam
President, to show that it is a two-way process. I think
we have to be quite careful about groups of friends
coming to brief us on an absolutely regular basis, as
though there were rights to this. Where it is relevant to
an issue, I think there can be that kind of interaction.
But I do not think we should formalize it. I think we
should handle that area in ad hoc ways and ways which
serve the purpose of a subject as it is at a particular
juncture.

On reports from the press, of course we are going
to pay attention to the media; I think we should. But let
us all be responsible about that. I would hate the
Council to respond from time to time to some corners
of the British press, which can be thoroughly
irresponsible. But where the press is credible and
responsible on issues, it is a highly important source of
both factual input and comment, and I think we should
be responsive to it.

On ministers: "yes", to a degree. I think the value
of ministerial discussion is often that it is rare and
gives a particular impetus to a particular subject at a
particular time. I do not think we should regularize it.
Ministerial discussions should always be well prepared,
so that there is a good outcome and not a banal
outcome. The fact of discussion alone is not enough to
take a subject forward.

Here is perhaps another truth about the Security
Council, and about the United Nations generally: if it is
not projecting a powerful message at a particular time,
ministers do not pay attention to it. Our Governments
do not pay attention to the United Nations unless it
directly affects their national interests on a particular
day. So, I think we must careful in our choice of
ministerial debate, but also encourage greater
ministerial interest in the Security Council because we
are doing the right thing and we need our Governments
to cap it with a ministerial response, either from
capitals or in a debate.

On thematic debates, I think we are in danger of
overdoing it. We need to take forward the themes that
we have in a way that produces results. Mainstreaming
these issues needs to be done through the interaction of
the Security Council with the Secretariat and the
Secretary-General. Where we have taken forward a
theme, it is an invitation to the Secretariat and the
agencies of the United Nations to mainstream in their
own work what we have said and to bring them back to
us with questions raised against a specific issue. That is
the importance of thematic debate.

This can be extended to the General Assembly, as
well. Let me give you a very small example. Violence
against civilians has been abhorred by both the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Yet where
in the current draft text on a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine is there any mention of our
abhorrence of violence against civilians in general? It
is not there. So, I think we need the Security Council to
make sure that the themes that we advance are then
mainstreamed into the specific issues where we have a
voice.

If we take all those things forward - and the
many others that will be raised this morning - I think
we will increase the momentum behind an increasingly
operational Security Council, and that that will be good
for us as a Council and good for interaction with
Member States.

