Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is with grave concern that
Norway is receiving news from East Timor of persistent
and devastating acts of violence against United Nations

 

personnel, civilians, international humanitarian workers,
journalists and religious leaders. Since the announcement of
the results of the historic consultation on 30 August, when
the overwhelming majority of the East Timorese people
voted for independence, the situation has deteriorated day
by day.

Norway has repeatedly urged the Indonesian
authorities to fulfil their responsibility in accordance with
the Tripartite Agreement signed on 5 May. We deeply
regret that the Indonesian Government has failed to
maintain order and provide security for the people of East
Timor. According to numerous reports, the Indonesian
armed forces have in many cases played an active and
leading role in the intimidation and violence against the
population. We now seem to be witnessing what can only
be described as crimes against humanity, and we expect
those responsible for these crimes to be held accountable.

Since Indonesia is unable to control the situation and
re-establish the rule of law, Indonesia should immediately
invite the international community to assist. We hope that
reports received this morning indicate that such an
invitation is forthcoming. Norway commends the leadership
taken on by Australia to provide such assistance.

We are also gravely concerned about the fate of the
large numbers of refugees who have been deported to West
Timor, from where it has been impossible to get
information. We insist that the Indonesian Government
allow international humanitarian workers access to those
refugees. Furthermore, we support the Portuguese proposal
to call for a special session of the Human Rights
Commission on East Timor. If the situation does not
improve, it may also be expected of the international
community to introduce economic sanctions.

Finally, what we are confronted with is a severe
situation where a whole population is lacking basic human
freedom. We are also confronted with enormous needs in
terms of humanitarian assistance and reconstruction.
Norway is ready to provide economic support to the efforts
to promote peace, stability and development in East Timor.
Based on lessons learned from similar situations, Norway
would like to call upon the international community to be
prepared for a massive human relief operation once security
is restored.

