Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that my delegation has taken the
floor under your presidency, Sir, I wish first of all to
offer you my warm congratulations on your deserved
assuption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, which you have exercised with brio.
We bore witness this past weekend to your efforts with
respect to a State Member of the United Nations.

Let me also thank the Security Council as a
whole for its constructive contribution to the Burundi
peace process, and especially for its commitment to
the national sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity of my country, Burundi.

I welcome the presence among us of Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi. I take note of the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Burundi (S/2018/89), which
Mr. Kafando introduced, although my delegation does
not agree with all its contents, to which I will revert
later in my statement.

My thanks also go to my colleague Mr. Jiirg
Lauber, President of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his contribution to the
peacebuilding process in Burundi. We again pledge
him our long-standing cooperation.

The purpose of my statement is to share with the
Council the new developments in Burundi since its
previous meeting on this item in November last year
(see S/PV.8109).

At the political level, Burundi is already preparing
for the constitutional referendum of 2018 and the general
elections of 2020. The priority of the Government in
all this is to bring these two major electoral events to
fruition by creating a priori an environment conducive
to the organization of democratic, free, transparent and,
above all, peaceful elections. The registration operation
for both elections was conducted in excellent conditions
from 8 to 17 February throughout the country and in the
diaspora. Provisional figures show that, in total, more
than 5 million Burundians registered on the electoral
roll, with a slightly larger number of women than men,
which we welcome. This morning, the Independent
National Electoral Commission organized a guided tour
open to all - political parties, civil society, partners
and Government - through the data-processing centre
for the establishment of the electoral roll. All of this
highlights the transparency of the process.

The inter-Burundi dialogue, led with the facilitation
ofthe East African Community, is proceeding normally.
At the fourth session held in Arusha, Tanzania, from
27 November to 8 December 2017, participants were
able to make progress because there were more points
of convergence than of divergence. That is what we call
progress. Contrary to what is said in paragraphs 9 and
14 of the Secretary-General's report, as well as in the
section on observations and comments, the dialogue is
not at a standstill.
While the Secretary-General's report speaks of a
dialogue process that has died, the final communique'
of the Summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community, held in Kampala on Friday, 23 February,
expressed appreciation for the excellent work
already done by the mediation and facilitation of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, led respectively by President
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda and former
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin
William Mkapa. This deep gap between the appreciation
of the region, which is close to Burundi geographically,
politically and culturally, and the pessimistic position
expressed in the report and by certain actors outside the
framework of the inter-Burundian dialogue, constitutes
an anomaly that should draw the Council's attention.

The nineteenth Summit of Heads of State of the
East African Community also reaffirmed the continued
regional ownership of the inter-Burundi dialogue
process by the East African Community and reiterated
the commitment to financing and rapidly concluding
the process under the exclusive leadership of the region.

As regards the revision ofthe Constitution, it should
be recalled that the ongoing constitutional reform is the
result of extensive consultations conducted over more
than a year with the Burundian population in all its
diversity. It is an exercise that is undertaken exclusively
in the framework of Burundi's national sovereignty
and that aims - contrarily to the concerns expressed
by some - at ensuring the long-term stability of the
country by the end of the transitional period under the
present Constitution.

It is clear that the United Nations and its Member
States are in no way empowered to discuss the
constitutional affairs of sovereign States. In assuming
the right to comment on the draft constitutional
referendum in Burundi, in paragraph 35 of the report,
the Organization is flagrantly violating the principle of
respect for the sovereign equality of States enshrined
in in Article 2.7 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which states

"Nothing contained in the present Charter
shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state or shall require the
Members to submit such matters to settlement
under the present Charter".

The reference in the report to the review of the
Constitution in Burundi in paragraphs 4 and 8 is a bold
step that interferes in Burundi's domestic affairs. The
Council should take note, since it is at variance with
the Charter of the United Nations and is critical of the
sovereign right of the Burundian people to amend their
Constitution, but, in the past, the United Nations has
not voiced its concerns in similar cases of constitutional
amendments in the region or elsewhere in the world.
The same report breaches Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which stipulates that

"The Organization and its Members, in pursuit
of the Purposes stated in Article 1, shall act in
accordance with the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members".

Such double standards in addressing the various
situations within Member States must be discouraged
so as not to set a dangerous precedent. In addition, in
accordance with article 297 of the current Constitution
of Burundi, the initiative to amend the Constitution
lies with the President of the Republic, following
consultations with the Government, the National
Assembly and the Senate and on an absolute majority
vote of their members. Article 298 of the Constitution
states that "[t]he President of the Republic can submit to
referendum a bill of amendment of the Constitution". In
the light of those articles, it is clear that any request or
comment that is above and beyond those two provisions
violates the Constitution.

Contrary to paragraph 4 of the report, the new draft
Constitution guarantees peace and stability, protection
for the opposition, the protection of human rights and
minorities, the protection of our national sovereignty,
as well as ethnic and gender quotas, as stipulated in
the 2000 Arusha Accords. All substantive articles of
the Arusha Accords have been retained in the draft
amendment. The security situation is generally good
throughout the entire territory, with the exception
of some isolated instances of crime, not exclusive to
Burundi, as underscored by the Special Envoy and
other speakers. This is the real situation on the ground
in Burundi.

The country has taken an irreversible step
forward on the path to peace, stability and national
reconciliation. It must also be underscored that the
mass return of refugees to the country and the fact that
the Government of Burundi will be organizing and
hosting the twentieth summit of the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa, following several
field assessment missions, demonstrates that normalcy
has returned to our country.

In addition to those positive developments, a large
delegation of elected members of the East African
Legislative Assembly (EALA) visited Burundi.
According to them,

"We have seen and can confirm that the
country is peaceful and calm. We call upon all
elected members of the EALA to spread the word
about Burundi's peaceful security environment.
We also call upon investors, not only within the
East African community, but also throughout the
entire world, to invest in Burundi in an effort to
boost its economy".

That statement was made by the elected members of the
region with regard to the security situation in Burundi.

In addition, my delegation rejects paragraphs
20 and 41 of the report, which seek to single out the
youth wing of the ruling party - Imbonerakure - as
being responsible for instances of insecurity, instead
of directly calling for restraint among all young people
affiliated to political parties - ruling and opposition
parties alike because security in Burundi, like
elsewhere, affects us all.

The paragraphs are similar to other parts of the
report that underscore its bias. I stress that there was
no mention of young people in opposition parties,
some of whom fled the country after killing and raping
several innocent people, destroying public goods and
preventing children from attending school during the
2015 elections. That part of the report, which singles
out some young people in Burundi and not others,
breaches the principle of neutrality recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to human rights, I thank my colleague
from Cote d'Ivoire, who drew my Government's
attention to the human rights situation, of which we
took note. Paragraphs 24 to 28 of the report addresses
the human rights situation in the country. It must be
underscored that despite the challenges we face,
which are not exclusive to Burundi, the country has
made significant progress at standard-setting and
institutional levels.

With regard to standard-setting, various legal
texts have been adopted, such as rules governing
public meetings and demonstrations, the establishment
of a special court for land tenure and other goods,
the suppression of human trafficking and protection
for Victims of trafficking in persons, protection for
victims, witnesses and other people in at-risk situations,
preventing and reducing the incidences of gender-
based violence, protecting the victims of gender-based
violence, the press and non-profit organizations.

At the institutional level, Burundi remains
very committed to protecting human rights through
several national mechanisms, including the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, which enjoys a
status compliant with the Paris principles; the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission; the National Observatory
for the Prevention and Eradication of Genocide, War
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity; the National
Council for Unity and Reconciliation, the legal arsenal
that abolished the death penalty in Burundi, as well
as the myriad international conventions that have
been ratified by the State of Burundi, including the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture.
In addition, Burundi has submitted its report to the
Universal Periodic Review, summarizing progress
made and the challenges pending in the area of human
rights. Burundi was on the agenda at the twenty-ninth
session ofthe Universal Periodic Review on 18 January.
During that meeting, Burundi welcomed constructive
recommendations from Member States and regretted
the fact that some were politicized, selective and
demonstrated double standards.

With regard to national reconciliation, during
his message to the nation on 31 December 2017, the
President of the Republic pardoned approximately 2,000
prisoners, many ofwhom have been released. Others are
about to join their families. Gestures of peace have also
been made following the coup d'etat during the 2015
elections. Two private radio stations that were destroyed
within a few hours following the attempted coup d'etat
on 13 May 2015 have been re-opened. Fifteen arrest
warrants issued against leaders of political parties and
of civil society have been cancelled. More than 2,000
prisoners have been released. Such gestures should be
supported and rewarded by the Council.

With regard to the return of refugees who fled the
country in 2015, highlighted in paragraph 23 of the
report, the Government of Burundi and subregional
organizations continue to request that refugees return
home to assist with the reconstruction of Burundi. It
is thanks to the return to normalcy in the country, the
pace of the voluntary repatriation of refugees has been
satisfactory with the return of thousands of citizens
who sought refuge in Tanzania and the wider region.
From 2016 to today, more than 200,000 Burundians
have returned to the country on a voluntary basis,
including 13,000 between August and December 2017,
as my colleague Mr. Lauber noted. In 2018, Burundi
expects more than 60,000 returnees from the region.

In the humanitarian field, my delegation
appreciates any initiative of the international
community to assist those in need, especially those in
emergency situations, be it through the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) or any
other humanitarian organization. My delegation wishes
to note, however, OCHA's lack of cooperation with the
sectoral ministries concerned with humanitarian issues
and the inflation ofnumbers in its preparation ofits 2018
humanitarian response plan for Burundi. As a result of
this lack of cooperation, the Government of Burundi,
through its communique of 21 February, requested
OCHA officials to work closely with the Burundian
side to draw up a consensual report in keeping with the
realities of the situation. The Government is willing to
cooperate fully with OCHA in this regard.

With regard to cooperation with the United
Nations, as many speakers have noted and as referred
to in paragraphs 28, 42 and 43 of the report, Burundi
maintains its desire to strengthen and sustain its
relations with the United Nations and its branches on
the ground. The draft agreement with the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights is under
discussion between the two parties. In mid-January,
Burundi asked the Office ofthe High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Geneva to propose to the Burundian
side new dates for the resumption of discussions.
Bujumbura awaits Geneva's response in this regard.
For its part, the Government of Burundi reiterates its
willingness to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and other partners in a spirit of mutual respect and
mutually beneficial cooperation and in accordance with
the rules of the game enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, allow me to ask the Council to
consider, to the extent possible, removing Burundi
from its agenda since the situation in the country is
generally calm and presents no threat to peace and
international security, which is the main mission of the
Council. I recall that there is no objective criterion that
justifies maintaining on the Council's agenda the item
on the situation in Burundi, a country that - as my
colleague from Ethiopia noted - has more than 6,000
peacekeepers in United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping missions.

