Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by warmly thanking Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme,
for their important briefings. We fully support them.

I would like to firmly reiterate France's full support
for the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. We all pledged
our support in the Council's latest press statement
concerning Yemen (SC/13834). Mr. Griffiths has our
full support and trust.

It is clear today that progress is slow - too
slow - and that much remains to be done. The initial
redeployment of forces in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa began last month. It is imperative
that all parties pursue and accelerate their efforts.
Lieutenant General Lollesgaard was recently on site to
verify the redeployment. We again call on the parties to
fully implement the Stockholm Agreement, in particular
both phases of the planned redeployment and remain
fully engaged, in good faith, in the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and with the Special Envoy.
That is obviously a crucial point. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hudaydah Agreement, whose presence
on the ground is key for observing and facilitating
redeployment, in line with resolution 2452 (2019).

Strengthening United Nations presence on the
ground is vital. It is important in particular for all
observers provided for in the Mission mandate to be
on the ground as soon as possible and for the various
agencies of the United Nations concerned to intensify
their efforts, in line with the Stockholm Agreement. As
has been mentioned, it is up to the parties to ensure
their safety and free movement.

The efforts of the Special Envoy are even more vital

in the context of the recent deterioration of the regional
security situation. Yemen is both a reflection of and one
of the factors of the particularly worrisome regional
instability. The recent attack for which the Houthis
claimed responsibility, targeting the Abha airport
in Saudi Arabia and injuring more than 20 civilians,
including children, is unacceptable. We firmly condemn
that attack. Since then, the Houthis have also claimed
responsibility for other drone strikes, some of which
were intercepted by Saudi Arabia. Such attacks must
end, as must the transfer of weapons, including ballistic
weapons, to State and non-State actors in the region.
Parties must refrain from any escalation that serves
only to jeopardize the Stockholm Agreement, threaten
the resumptions of talks that would lead to a political
solution and further destabilize the region.

The relative respect for the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah
should not make us lose sight of the extreme gravity
of the humanitarian situation, as Mark Lowcock and
David Beasley just recalled. We are deeply concerned
about the deterioration of the humanitarian and security
situation. As tensions continue to rise in Yemen and
the region, it is crucial now more than ever to protect
civilians, including women and children, who are
particularly vulnerable. More than 2 million children
suffer from acute malnutrition. We call on all parties to
do their utmost to protect children and ensure that they
receive the assistance they so urgently need.

Echoing what previous speakers have underlined,
especially my colleagues from the United Kingdom
and Germany, I would like to reaffirm France's full
support to humanitarian actors for their outstanding
and essential efforts in this particularly difficult
context. They too must be protected. Commercial
and humanitarian access, which must be ensured, has
been further complicated and hampered by the closure
of the road between Aden and Sana'a. The floods
have also required an urgent humanitarian response,
and we welcome the work undertaken in that regard.
At a time when, as Mr. Beasley described, the entire
country is at risk of starvation, the parties must do
everything possible to facilitate the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan.

Finally, given the immense challenges and
difficulties that lie ahead, it is important not to forget
the priority objective to be achieved, namely, the
relaunching of the political process as soon as possible.
We all know that that is the only way forward. The initial
results obtained in Al-Hudaydah can help to recreate a
positive momentum towards a political solution. The
military solution cannot, and must not, be an option.

Resuming the talks on a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement that takes into account
the various Yemeni actors, including women and civil
society representatives, is the only real prospect for
putting an end to the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis. At a time when the situation in Yemen is
clearly very alarming, the Council must put its full
weight behind bringing an end to this terrible war and
maintaining the momentum initiated in Stockholm. Our
mobilization and unity are our best asset for moving
forward on this difficult path, which is the only way to
restore the peace to which the Yemenis aspire.

