Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): My
Government warmly congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
during the month of November 2002, and also for the
acumen that you have always shown in guiding the
work of the Council whenever you have presided over
it. We wish also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Martin Belinga-Eboutou, Permanent
Representative of the sister Republic of Cameroon, for
his outstanding leadership of the Council last month.

My delegation would like also to welcome the
Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the sister Republic of Uganda.

You were wise, Sir, to convene this open debate
of the Security Council on the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government would like to take this
opportunity to reject entirely what is stated in the report
with respect to the false accusations against Rwanda and
the Rwandese people, as we stated in the written
response of the Rwandese Government, transmitted
officially in a letter addressed to the President of the
Security Council dated 23 October 2002.

It was a tremendous shock for us to see it stated
in the Panel's report that the Rwandese defence forces
went to the Democratic Republic of the Congo merely
for economic reasons. This is truly shocking and
unacceptable. I myself was in the Government as
Minister for Foreign Affairs in 1996, when we decided
to commit troops to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Therefore I know exactly why and in what
circumstances we went there in 1996, and not before.

The ministries in Kigali, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations were passing
around handmade maps of Rwanda, with bright red
shading along the Rwandese provinces bordering on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, telling
everyone in the international community never again to
enter into any of the four provinces bordering the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This was because
the former Rwandan Army (ex-FAR) forces and the
Interahamwe militia were carrying out savage attacks,
and innocent people were being murdered, including
women, the elderly and children.

I remember that the last straw was the
assassination by the ex-FAR and the Interahamwe
militia of a woman who was the Mayor of one of the
districts of Cyangugu province, which borders on the
South Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It was at that point that we decided to pursue
them in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The second stage of our departure for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - which was
motivated by security imperatives with respect to our
country, our people, and foreign residents on Rwandese
territory - was triggered by the massacre of young
girls in a secondary school in Nyange, in Kibuye
province, which borders on North Kivu province in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The ex-FAR and
Interahamwe attacked the school during the night. They
ordered the girls to split up into two groups - Hutu
and Tutsi - in order to spare the Hutu and massacre
the Tutsi. But the Hutu girls refused to leave their Tutsi
compatriots alone, so they were all shot on the spot by
the ex-FAR and Interahamwe. Today those young girls
have been declared national heroes in our country.

Another event that triggered the departure of our
troops for the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
pursuit of the genocidal rebels was, unfortunately, the
assassination by the ex-FAR and Interahamwe of a
Chinese expert who was working on the Kigali-
Gitarama-Kibuye road - again in a province bordering
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - in the
context of a road-building programme financed by the
World Bank.

The foreign community living in Kigali was an
eyewitness to these events, if not their victim. How can
the Panel of Experts now deny in its report the security
concerns of Rwanda and of its people? How can we
explain this revisionist attitude? It can only be
manipulation and political motivations, the underlying
reasons for which we do not know.

My Government would like to remind the
members of the Council that in 1994 the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe - the planners and perpetrators of the
Rwandese genocide - after having massacred more
than a million Rwandese, fled, taking all of their
weapons, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under the cover of a military operation - "Operation
Turquoise" - which had set up its headquarters in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the cities of
Goma and Bukavu.

The international community, which neither
prevented nor put an end to the genocide in Rwanda,
was not able to disarm the genocidal ex-FAR and
Interahamwe, who took shelter in refugee camps in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. On the contrary,
some members of what is called the international
community continued, with the complicity of the then
Kinshasa Government, to arm and provide political and
financial support to the ex-FAR and Interahamwe -
the authors of the genocide in Rwanda. That was proved
clearly and unambiguously in the Kassem report - the
report of the International Commission of Inquiry on the
sale and flow of arms to the ex-FAR and Interahamwe in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - contained in
document S/ 1998/1096. We do not understand how the
second Kassem report can deny both the findings and
the conclusions of the first. We cannot make sense of
that contradiction, but it is very revealing: it shows that
anything is possible when reports are the result of
partisan political motives rather than of a firm will to
resolve existing problems such as those that we have
just described.

The ex-FAR and Interahamwe are present in great
numbers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
having taken with them a huge arsenal of weapons
from Rwanda and having purchased new weapons with
public funds stolen from Rwanda's commercial banks,
including the Central Bank. Have they, perchance, been
confused with the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo?

General Augustin Bizimungu, Chief of Staff of
the ex-FAR forces; Colonel Renzaho Tharcisse, former
mayor of Kigali; Major-General Ntiwiragaba, who
recently participated in a joint meeting between the
Congolese Armed Forces and the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe at Lubumbashi, under the direction of
President Kabila himself; Colonel Rwarakabije,
Commander of the ex-FAR; Colonel Bigaruka; Colonel
Gasake, who was a member of President Kabila's
protection battalion; Major Mpiranyi Protais, former
Commander of the presidential guard; and many
others: do they constitute the coltan of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo? Is it truly believed that
pursuing those planners and authors of the genocide is
the same as searching for coltan?

The Rwandan Government refutes categorically
any allegation that it sent its army to exploit the mineral
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
army had a clear and precise mission: to combat the ex-
FAR and Interahamwe so as to enable the people living
in the four Rwandan provinces bordering the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elsewhere to enjoy peace and
public order once again and to enable the members of
the foreign community working in Rwanda to carry out
their development assistance activities in those
provinces. We were successful, because our army never
deviated from its primary mission. The exploitation of
mineral wealth has never been a motivating factor for
our armed forces.

The final report adds almost nothing new to
earlier reports; it merely repeats unsubstantiated
allegations that we refuted on 3 May 2001, after the
first report was issued. The report is politically
motivated. Those who promote the idea that there
should be a Panel of Experts decided in advance, as is
well known, that Rwanda should be a target.

The Panel of Experts finished its work on the
ground four months before we withdrew from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and it has not
returned since our complete withdrawal on 5 October
2002. How, then, can it be in a position to write page
after page of the final report claiming that our
withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was not complete? That fact alone discredits its
claim to expertise - a true expert would avoid making
statements about an issue about which he did not have
all the facts and the truth of which he had not
corroborated. Our complete withdrawal was supervised
by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Joint Military
Commission and members of the diplomatic corps
accredited to Kigali, and was properly verified by the
third-party verification mechanism.

We fear that reports such as the one before the
Council today, which any informed analyst or reader
would judge to be politically motivated, have a hidden
agenda: to perpetuate the war between my country and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. You may recall,
Mr. President, that the sceptics were not happy when
the Pretoria Peace Agreements were signed between
my Government and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, calling them unrealistic, too ambitious and a
fool's game. President Kagame of Rwanda addressed
the Security Council on 13 September 2002. Four days
later, on 17 September 2002, our armed forces began to
withdraw from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as we promised the Council. But the Security Council
remained silent during the entire period of our
withdrawal, which was completed on 5 October 2002.
Unfortunately, that silence encouraged President
Kabila to organize a meeting in Lubumbashi bringing
together once again the armed forces of the Congo, the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe, the Mai-Mai and the Front
for the Defence of Democracy of Burundi, so as to plan
the attack on Uvira and other violations of the Lusaka
and Pretoria Peace Agreements.

We are concerned, therefore, about the future of
the Pretoria Agreements, especially given that
President Kabila's main advisers are urging him to
place obstacles in the way of their implementation,
instead of encouraging respect for them and for their
scrupulous and systematic implementation, as Rwanda
has done by withdrawing all of its forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government believes that the report before
the Council is biased, subjective and unprofessional,
because it is not based on genuine and credible facts.
Its authors make only unsubstantiated allegations. In
order to fool the reader, they keep repeating that they
have real and credible facts available to them, but they
do not put them at the disposal of the reader to make
the determination for himself. Why is that? The
Minister for Foreign Affairs of our sister Republic of
Uganda and the Permanent Representative of South
Africa raised that point earlier, and asked why the
Panel had refused to make available the documents in
its possession so that Governments could verify their
authenticity. They may have such documents, but that
does not mean that they are authentic; forgeries exist,
as is well known. My Government is therefore
seriously concerned about the motivation that underlies
the report and about the credibility of its authors.

Although it is clear to us that the intent is to
undermine the Pretoria Agreements, my Government
remains committed to the Pretoria and Lusaka Peace
Agreements, and will do everything in its power to
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the Great Lakes region as a whole. My
Government calls upon the international community, in
particular the sceptical elements, to accept this, to set
aside their national agendas and to help us to fully to
restore peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, my Government firmly opposes the
Panel's idea that a so-called monitoring body should be
established. Reading about how the Panel would define
such a body and its functions, it becomes clear to us
that the so-called monitoring body has no purpose.
Such a body would, like the Panel, merely foment,
rather than reduce, tension and conflict in the region, in
particular because it would be vulnerable to competing
influences and other forms of foreign manipulation.

Such a body would only paralyse the economies
of countries in the region, make transborder trade
difficult, if not impossible, and frustrate both business
people and the population in the countries of the
region. This agrees with the remarks made by the
representative of Belgium with regard to the need for a
normative approach.

Furthermore, such a body would merely
criminalize trade in the region, whereas all regional
countries want trade within a legal framework allowing
free circulation of goods and people. In this region we
have a precious tool available to ensure legal trade in the
region, namely the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes Countries, which the Panel did not even mention.
It is comprised of Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Instead of creating one more
body, which is manifestly unnecessary, we should work
on, rather, financing the revitalization of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries. It dates back
to 1970 and provides a common passport for the peoples
of the three countries. In other words, a passport issued
by the Congolese authorities is valid in the three
countries of Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and likewise for passports issued
in Burundi and Rwanda.

There are also other reliable and independent
competent bodies, such as the World Trade
Organization and the World Bank Group, which have
the capacity to carry out the tasks that the Panel wishes
to entrust to what it refers to as a monitoring body.
There are also regional organizations such as the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries, to
which I have just referred, the Organization for
Planning and Development of the Kagera River Basin,
the East African Community, which the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uganda mentioned, and the
Economic Community of Central African States. All
those existing and operational structures would
contribute to stabilizing the situation and would fit in
better with the regional integration system, which is
one of the key objectives of our African Union.

