Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this meeting today and inviting
my delegation. I would also like to extend my
appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Susanna Malcorra for their comprehensive and
informative briefings.

For the past six decades, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved to successfully
address diverse challenges arising from various
conflicts in a rapidly changing political landscape. The
ever-growing demand for peacekeeping with
increasingly complex and multidimensional mandates
represents the hopes for our peacekeeping operations
and high opinion in which the world holds them.

The overall number of United Nations
peacekeeping personnel in the field has increased
nearly tenfold over the past seven years. The Fifth
Committee has just approved a record high budget of
$7.7 billion for peacekeeping missions for the 2009-
2010 biennium. However, this increasing demand also
means that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
clearly being overstretched, while complex and
multidimensional mandates present a new set of
challenges.

This magnitude and complexity transcend what
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) envisaged 10 years
ago. Considering the ever-growing demand for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, it is clear that this
overstretch will continue to be aggravated in the
coming years, and we need reform to cope with this
trend.

My delegation welcomes the New Horizon
project as one of the answers to the new set of
challenges. Canada, Korea and many other Member
States recently organized brainstorming sessions to
discuss and share views and insights on the future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. My
delegation hopes that these initiatives of the Member
States will steer us forward as we continue our
discussion. In this vein, I would like to highlight the
following points.

First, a clear mandate, priorities and political
strategy should be given to peacekeeping missions. The
importance of clear, credible and achievable mandates
has already been raised in the Brahimi report, but only
a few missions have been given a developed list of
mission priorities. Without clear mandates or priorities,
we cannot expect efficient and effective mapping of
resources through mandates. As the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations grow more
encompassing and complex, it becomes imperative to
establish agreed and clear mandates. In that process,
maintaining the critical balance between consensus and
efficiency will be crucial.

09-3860]

Secondly, we need to set up a clear exit point and
a responsible exit strategy. The necessity for reliable
benchmarks and indicators to determine the exit point
of United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
referred to repeatedly over the years, and overstretch is
evidently generating pressure for early exit by some
missions.

To address that issue, the role and early
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
could be explored. The potential capacity of the
Commission is not being fully realized. Among the
many functions that it has, the country-specific
mechanism of the Commission can work as a
responsible exit. To fully utilize that potential, the
peacebuilding activities should be integrated in the
peacekeeping operations from the earliest stage, and a
strategic partnership between the Security Council and
the PBC should be activated in a more genuine sense.

Fourthly, preventive actions or alternatives to
heavy peacekeeping operations need to be actively
pursued. Although peacekeeping operations are less
costly than other military options, we need to explore
and integrate other more cost-effective means, such as
mediation and preventive deployment. Moreover,
mediation and other political means should be a
complementary and integral part of everyday
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the Mediation Support Unit, recently set up in the
Department of Political Affairs.

Fifthly, partnerships with regional organizations,
civilian partners and private sectors need to be further
developed. Regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union and the European Union,
have become crucial partners of the United Nations,
especially in sharing the burden of peacekeeping
operations. A concrete and comprehensive model or
modality of cooperation with those organizations
should be developed. The Prodi report (S/2008/813)
would serve as a good basis for the discussion, and we
look forward to the relevant report by the Secretary-
General. Regional organizations are not only valuable
as partners to share the overstretched burden, but also
as strategic partners that can engage where the United
Nations cannot because of political complexities.
Sixthly, a global, responsive and rapid
deployment system is key to effective and efficient
operations. The support system should also correspond
to the nature of the peacekeeping operation. The
Government of the Republic of Korea, as the tenth
largest financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, is considering establishing a
standby force that can be deployed in a timely manner.
I hope that that new standby force will help to enhance
our readiness and responsiveness.

On the support side, the creation of the
Department of Field Support (DF S) is one of the major
successes of the reform drives by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and was instrumental in providing
integrated field support. I expect that the strategic
support plan that the DFS is developing will raise the
field support capabilities of the United Nations to
another level.

The points that I have raised thus far are
concerned with how we will enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. However, it is evident that, with growing
demand, a broadening of the contributor base and an
expansion of the partnership with contributors will be
required. Accordingly, the relations and partnerships
between the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and financial contributing countries
need to be strengthened.

In that regard, I again thank the President for
inviting the TCCs and the financial contributing
countries to share our views with the Security Council,
and I believe such opportunities to hold more frequent
and regular consultations on major issues of the United
Nations should be further expanded and institutionalized.

The increasing demand for United Nations
peacekeeping operations represents the high
expectation and support of the international community
for such operations. However, if we cannot effectively
deal with the overstretch issue and fail to meet the
demand, collective support for peacekeeping will be
severely weakened.

We should not and must not fail.

