Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We deplore the fact that almost at the end
of your presidency, Sir, and following the receptions
held on Wednesday and Thursday, we must now call
upon you to exercise the role of president in the light
of today's incident. Given the urgency of the situation,
we thank Kuwait for its initiative and the President for
convening today's emergency meeting in response to
the grave events in Israel and Palestine.

Equatorial Guinea is paying close attention to the
developments surrounding the Great March of Return
organized by Palestinian civil society and political
organizations, which has resulted in the death of 15
Palestinians and left several injured on the Gaza strip.
We deplore the loss of human lives and extend our
deepest sympathy to the families affected.

In the statement made by the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea on the Palestinian question (see S/PV.8214), we
invited the parties to refrain from committing acts that
could lead to violence. We reiterate that same request
today. There must be an immediate and permanent
end to the violence, and each party must comply with
international law, pursuant to the relevant United
Nations resolutions. In that regard, we condemn the
attempt to assassinate the Palestinian Prime Minister.

The solution to the Palestinian question will be
found only through dialogue and politics. It is for
that reason that we call on the parties to resolve their
differences at the negotiating table regardless of how
difficult it might be. It is likely that both parties will
have to make concessions and that not all of their
aspirations and demands will be met - that is dialogue.
Negotiations must take place within the framework of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. The two-State solution, according
to which Palestinians and Israelis shall live in peace
and security, is the only fair solution. Intra-Palestinian
dialogue must continue. Palestinians must be able to
resolve their differences. We would ask the international
community to pursue its efforts to foster dialogue
among the parties and to refrain from actions that could
be counterproductive to peaceful coexistence among
Palestinians and Israelis.

The situation has become very worrisome, given
that the number of people who died as a result of the
demonstrations has exceeded the number of victims
since the end of the war in Gaza in 2014. Since then,
there has been a period of relative calm. In that regard,
we support the idea put forward by Kuwait for the
Security Council to issue a communique calling on
Israelis and Palestinians to put an immediate end to
the violence that could escalate and cause the already
critical and delicate situation to deteriorate.

