Mr. Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
Although you, Sir, have asked us to refrain from
conveying expressions of admiration and gratitude, as
well as statistical analyses, I cannot help but express,
albeit briefly, our admiration and gratitude to your
friendly country for this important initiative, which
reflects the international community's interest in the
situation in Africa and highlights the disastrous impact of
HIV/AIDS on peace and security in Africa. We must also
thank the Secretary-General and those who spoke this
morning.

The very fact that the Security Council is addressing
the issue of HIV/AIDS is in itself a positive step that will
help increase international public awareness of the
dangers of this epidemic and of the need to adopt a global
strategy, mentioned repeatedly this morning, to combat
HIV/AIDS in the context of coordination and
complementarity and through the agency of competent
structures and organizations. We know that poverty,
hunger, debt and natural disasters, along with HIV/AIDS,
undermine African communities and destabilize African
societies. This is likely to lead to the expansion of
conflicts and crises. Tunisia hopes that all these problems
will be taken up by the international community with the
same degree of interest.

I shall not repeat the frightening statistics cited by
speakers this morning, although they clearly show that
HIV/AIDS is a major threat and that we must all act to
halt this crisis, which has touched countless people,
especially in Africa, and has jeopardized their basic right
to life. We feel that the enormous amounts of money and
efforts aimed at achieving peace, security and
development can be fully realized only if all the parties
involved act with resolve and allocate sufficient resources
to control this scourge. Thus, we reiterate the need for the
social commitment of all governmental and non-
governmental institutions and of civil society in order to
lift the veil of silence surrounding this disease and to
prevent discrimination in treating its victims. We would
urge the international community to support the
commitment of African States to combat this epidemic.

As an African country, Tunisia cannot but welcome
the courageous initiatives taken by brotherly African
countries that have adopted effective measures for
prevention and awareness and borne the economic and
social burdens of HIV/AIDS. We welcome the positive
achievements of some of these countries, which deserve
support and encouragement at the national level.

 

At the continental level, we must recall that this
question was accorded early interest by African leaders.
The 1992 Dakar summit of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) adopted a declaration on HIV/AIDS, through
which all the leaders of Africa committed themselves to
mobilizing all the resources necessary to combat and
prioritize this disease. The Tunis summit of 1994 adopted
a resolution recommending that the Secretary-General of
the OAU create a special mechanism to follow up and
ensure the implementation of the Dakar declaration.

At Tunis, the OAU studied this question closely and
the President of the Republic of Tunisia sent a message to
the international community that focused on three factors:
the need to ensure international cooperation; the need to
strengthen international commitment and African efforts;
and the need to support scientific research and to make it
available to all countries. At the 1998 Ouagadougou
summit, the OAU established a fund to combat HIV/AIDS
and its Council of Ministers, at a meeting held in Algeria
last year, adopted a project for cooperation between the
OAU and programmes of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) to ease the suffering
of those afflicted.

The United Nations role in coordinating and
establishing intervention priorities remains important and
desirable if we are to achieve the anticipated goals. The
initiative of the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa, mentioned by the Vice-President of the United
States, reflects the will and determination of the
international community to define an integrated strategy and
to deepen awareness of the enormity of human losses. We
also support the proposal made by the Secretary-General in
his statement of 6 December 1999, which established
priorities for action.

In order to implement these priorities, however,
structures and mechanisms must be created, such as the
international fund proposed by the representative of France
this morning. It is also necessary to have a clear vision of
the future that will allow us to create a better tomorrow for
Africans.

In conclusion, we welcome the United States intention,
announced by Vice-President Gore this morning, to allocate
extra funds to combat HIV/AIDS worldwide, as well as the
measures and projects of the World Bank aimed at
supporting and assisting the Governments concerned. We
hope that these will encourage all parties. We are willing to
coordinate our efforts with those of the international
community and African countries to combat this disease,
which we have been fortunate enough to limit to a
minimum in our country, despite the estimated 5.5 million
tourists who visited our country last year.

