Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the Togolese
presidency for scheduling today's important meeting,
and I thank you personally, Mr. Minister, for your
presence today in the Council. It testifies to your
country's commitment to important African causes, and

we thank you most sincerely. Our thanks go as well to
Ms. Patricia O'Brien and to Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their
comprehensive and lucid briefings.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
today (S/2012/50) presents a series of measures that
could have a positive effect in the fight against and
repression of piracy off the Somali coast. Despite the
reduction in acts of piracy during 2011, that scourge is
still a major cause for concern because of its human
cost, with the taking of hostages and its destabilizing
effects on the society and economy of Somalia, but
also, more importantly, the threat it poses to the
stability of the region as a whole.

To fight piracy effectively and to put an end to
impunity require, as the Secretary-General's report
amply shows, comprehensive arrangements of measures
and actions. Those arrangements should include
strengthening investigation capacities, setting up an
effective, adapted legislative framework and
establishing jurisdiction, with the necessary human and
material means.

The States of the region have not lagged in
deploying considerable efforts to bring to justice and to
imprison those guilty of piracy, and they have devoted
considerable resources to that end. However,
establishing a juridical framework to address piracy
will not have much impact without adequate laws and
sufficient prison capacity. A legislative framework in
keeping with international law in the matter,
particularly the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and international norms of human rights, is
one of the necessary conditions for effectively fighting
piracy.

To ensure the effectiveness of the various
anti-piracy jurisdictions, better training is necessary,
especially for judges, prosecutors, defence attorneys
and other legal professionals. Moreover, it is necessary
to increase prison capacity in Somalia and other
countries in the region to hold those found guilty in
accordance with requisite international norms, in order
to ensure the effectiveness of the entire legal system to
be established for the fight against piracy.

I take this opportunity to commend the support of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in helping
Somalia and other countries of the region in the legal,
juridical and penal fields, with an eye to fighting
impunity for piracy. I also commend the work of the

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
whose contribution is significant in promoting an
effective global response to the problem.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
call to the international community to offer significant
aid to Somalia and other countries of the region to
implement the measures necessary to fight the scourge
of piracy. In that regard, we commend the London
Conference on Somalia, which, among other things,
may spur a coordinated international response to fight
piracy off the coast of Somalia.

As for the judicial responses envisaged,
particularly the establishment of an extraterritorial
Somali court, it is important that the views of the
concerned countries in the region be taken into account
to ensure their ownership of and engagement in the
implementation of those solutions. Moreover, it is
important, given the urgency of the situation and the
threats posed by piracy, that decisions in this matter be
made as soon as possible.

Actions against piracy should also include
pursuing those people suspected of financing, planning
and organizing this type of act. In that context, my
delegation notes with appreciation the initiative to
establish a regional centre in Seychelles to coordinate
prosecution and intelligence, in order to improve
tracking the piracy financing trail.

Finally, I want to underline that while bringing to
justice and imprisoning pirates is necessary to fight
piracy - and especially to fight 0 impunity - it is no
less important to address the root causes of the problem
through political stabilization in Somalia.

