Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
adopt resolution 2220 (2015) today, almost two years
after the Security Council adopted the first-ever
Security Council resolution on small arms and light
weapons (resolution 2117 (2013). It is a pioneering
text, and we should all support it. The new elements
of the resolution will help mitigate the misuse of these
weapons and ultimately advance international peace
and security. It will not change the world, but it will
help shape our collective approach to the issue, and
over time this will make a difference.

The resolution will improve the work of the United
Nations to protect refugees, internally displaced
persons, and women, children and vulnerable groups
from the misuse of small arms and light weapons. It
will enhance the international community's monitoring
of and compliance with arms embargoes in relation
to these weapons. It will improve how disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes take into
account the effects of small arms and light weapons and
it broadens the focus of the United Nations in making
recommendations to address the impact of these
weapons, specifically on children in armed conflict.

The resolution encourages the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to provide
recommendations for actions to enhance the response
to threats from terrorist access to small arms and light
weapons. It encourages the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to provide
plans to facilitate assistance and strengthen Member
States' capacities to respond to the illicit trafficking in
and the misuse of these weapons, and it makes clear the
importance of the Arms Trade Treaty, among other key
international instruments.

Yet despite all of the new, positive and helpful
provisions in the text, it is troubling that some Council
members were unable to support it and risked derailing

it for an ulterior political objective. The resolution
recognizes

"the importance of preventing the illicit transfers
and sales of weapons and ammunition, including
small arms and light weapons, to armed groups and
criminal networks that target civilians and civilian
objects" (resolution 2220 (2015), para. 20).
It also emphasizes that

"the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons can aid terrorism and illegal armed groups
and facilitate increasing levels of transnational
organized crime" (ibid., eighteenth preambular para.)

Furthermore, in the resolution, the Council
reaffirms

"its decision that States shall eliminate the supply of
weapons, including small arms and light weapons,
to terrorists" (ibid., para. 19).

Despite the clear language and several significant
compromises, a few Council members demanded that
certain terms be used that have absolutely no precedent
in the Council's prior resolutions on small arms and
light weapons. We are disappointed that a few Council
members would be willing to throw out a resolution that
they almost entirely agree with and that they know will
make a positive contribution in their own countries in
order to cling to one specific term for political purposes,
a term that is ill-defined and which no delegation in
our negotiations had been able to identify any specific
entity that they would wish covered that is not already
covered by the language in the text.

A good measure of the global support that
the resolution enjoys can be found in the fact that
56 Member States that co-sponsored it. In that context,
we are pleased that the resolution was adopted.
The United States supports it and looks forward to
cooperating with all Member States to implement it.

