Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Ghassan Salame for his comprehensive
briefing. We appreciate the very good work that he
is doing and the close working relationship he has
established with the African Union. We want to see this
continue. Looking back, one can see how useful it is to
take into account the African perspective. We reiterate
our support for his continued diplomatic endeavours to
facilitate a Libyan-led comprehensive political solution
to end the crisis. We also thank Ambassador Olof
Skoog for his report as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

We welcome the progress registered in the
implementation of the United Nations action plan.
Indeed, with the support of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), encouraging actions have
been taken by the Libyans to end the protractedtransition.
The completion of voter registration demonstrates
the strong popular desire of Libyans to participate
in electoral processes. The continued consultation
among the major Libyan actors aimed at forming
a new executive authority and reaching a common
understanding on how to make limited amendments to
the Libyan Political Agreement, which remains the only
viable framework, is also encouraging. The ongoing
local consultations are also creating opportunities to
listen to the voices of all Libyans, which, as the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/429) indicates, could
lead to a successful national conference.

We also commend the ongoing local reconciliation
processes, which not only support the political process
but also address community grievances peacefully
and strengthen national cohesion. To fully implement
the United Nations plan of action and conclude the
prolonged transition, it is imperative to maintain
and build on the positive momentum. This requires
the continued engagement of all Libyan actors with
the United Nations-facilitated peace process, with a
genuine and constructive spirit that is vital to ending
parallel State institutions.

It is also indispensable to create an environment
conducive to holding credible elections by finalizing
the necessary legal architecture, including the
constitutional framework. These are positive
developments, but there is obviously no room for
complacency, as Libya continues to face multiple
challenges. The fragile security situation remains a
source of concern. It is deeply troubling that, owing to
the continued tension and violence, civilian casualties
and displacement continue without letup. Terrorist
groups, including elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, continue their attacks. We condemn
any violence against civilians or civilian facilities,
including the 2 May terrorist attack on the headquarters
of the High National Election Commission.

The continued climate of insecurity is another
reminder of why it is vital to unify Libya's military and
security forces under civilian control and establish the
rule of law. With the continued climate of insecurity, it
is not only Libyans but also migrants and refugees who
continue to suffer. As the Secretary-General stated in
paragraph 94 of his report dated 7 May on UNSMIL,

"The plight of migrants and the abuses they suffer
in Libya continue to call forjoint, concerted and
urgent action."

In that regard, while the efforts of the African
Union, European Union and United Nations task
force are commendable, we hope that the Security
Council will also come together to take appropriate
measures against illegal human traffickers to send a
strong political message that the inhumane treatment
of migrants is totally unacceptable. On this and
other vital challenges, it is critical, as the Special
Representative has stated, to ensure that the Council
sends a unified message. We appreciate the important
role of neighbouring States and regional organizations,
for that will contribute to encouraging all major Libyan
actors to sustain their engagement with the United
Nations-led inclusive political process.

In this regard, we note the series of important
meetings held recently, including the fifth Meeting of
the African Union High-level Committee on Libya, in
Addis Ababa, and the meeting in Cairo last month of the
Quartet on Libya, which underscored the full support
for the United Nations action plan. Representatives of
the countries neighbouring Libya are also meeting in
Algiers today. We believe that neighbours and regional
organizations should continue to work together in a
coordinated and complementary manner to achieve
an inclusive and comprehensive political solution
that would respond to the legitimate aspirations of
all Libyans.

As I noted earlier, the unity of the Council also
remains important to end the protracted transition in
Libya. The Council should continue to send a strong
message to the effect that the only way to address
the multifaceted challenges, insecurity, economic
difficulties and humanitarian concerns is through a
sustained and meaningful engagement on the part of
the Libyan actors in the inclusive political process set
out in United Nations action plan. This is not only in the
interests of the Libyans, who have suffered for so long,
but of the broader region as well, most particularly the
Sahel, for which, as Cote d'Ivoire said a while ago, the
crisis in Libya has had a major destabilizing impact.

