Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I will now speak in my national capacity.

Belgium aligns itself with its European partners
in resolutely defending the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. It is one of the great successes of nuclear
non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. Since its
entry into force, it has made it possible to guarantee
the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Moreover, the action plan is more than a
nuclear agreement. It is a confidence-building tool and
the result of 12 years of intensive diplomatic efforts,
based on dialogue and respect for the parties.

Like the Secretary-General and the majority of the
members of the Security Council, Belgium therefore
regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the
action plan. Belgium also regrets the reimposition
of unilateral sanctions by the United States, their
repercussions and the recent lifting of related nuclear
exemptions. Those measures prevent not only Iran,
but other United Nations Member States as well, from
implementing their commitments under resolution
2231 (2015), adopted unanimously by the members of
the Council and supported by a large majority of the
international community.
Together with Denmark, Finland, Norway, the
Netherlands and Sweden, Belgium has just announced
its accession to the Instrument in Support of Trade
Exchanges, as my country attaches the utmost
importance to the preservation and full implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action by all
parties concerned.

At the same time, Belgium regrets Iran's increasing
failure to honour its commitments under the action
plan. Like our European partners, we reject any less-
for-less approach and call on Iran to return to full
compliance with the action plan as soon as possible.
We also call on Iran to comply with resolution 2231
(2015) in its entirety, including the restrictive measures
in annex B. In that regard, I commend the professional
and impartial work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We have every confidence in the Agency's
work and call on all parties to cooperate with it in full
transparency in verifying compliance with obligations
under the action plan.

We share our European partners' concerns about
Iranian ballistic activities and arms transfers in the
region, particularly following the seizure of equipment
in Aden in December 2018. We call on Iran to refrain
from such activities, which are incompatible with
resolution 2231 (2015). They deepen mistrust and
contribute only to exacerbating tensions in the region.
Regional concerns must be addressed through proactive
dialogue and negotiations with all actors in the region.
Furthermore, all relevant Security Council resolutions
must be respected.

Belgium calls on stakeholders to exercise restraint.
Continuing to dismantle this successful nuclear
agreement, which is working, will not put us in a better
position to discuss regional issues or immediately
resolve the threats that it is already addressing. As we
approach the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, we believe that
it would be wise, on the contrary, to support it. The
action plan is based on the three main pillars of nuclear
disarmament to which the international community
subscribes, namely, non-proliferation, disarmament
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

