Mr. Wetland (Norway): Let me start by
congratulating Haiti on the recent elections and
President Preval for overseeing an orderly transition,
which is unprecedented in the country.

While the process was far from perfect, we hope
that the new President, Parliament and Government
will aim to transform the country by providing
stability, development and justice for all. The main
responsibility for that rests with Haiti's own political
and economic elites. They must be willing, as well as
able, to invest both trust and money in order to make
national institutions stronger and more accountable to
the people. Only if that fundamental willingness exists
will the assistance of the international community,
including the United Nations, be effective.

Much has been achieved since the devastating
earthquake, at least in humanitarian terms. Lives have
been saved and new disasters avoided, even in the face
of cholera and Hurricane Tomas. But much more could
and should have been done, in particular with regard to
the Haitian Government's own capacities. The absence
of a social contract, especially between the rich and the
poor, and the corresponding weakness of State
institutions, unable to fulfil basic political, judicial,
economic, social and cultural functions, is are the core
of Haiti's problems. That fundamental observation
should inform our deliberations, including here in the
Security Council.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has played an important role in
providing security and stability in Haiti. In that regard,
let me pay special tribute to Special Representative
Edmond Mulet for his integrity and outstanding efforts
as leader of the operations since the earthquake.

The time has now come for MINUSTAH to adapt
to new realities. MINUSTAH's heavy military presence
no longer seems proportionate to Haiti's security
challenges. In fact, the heavy military presence may
undermine the country's efforts to normalize and to
attract investment, so crucial to sustainable
development.

While the military component should be visibly
scaled down, other stabilizing capacities should be
strengthened. In particular, MINUSTAH could play a
more central role in law and order reforms, including
police reform. The fight against organized crime, drug
trafficking and gender-based violence is but an
example of issues that require increased attention.
Fewer soldiers in combat gear, fewer armed vehicles
and more police in the streets and in the internally
displaced persons camps will certainly bring the
11-29077

Mission closer to the people, enhance legitimacy and,
ultimately, make it more effective in addressing Haiti's
real security and stability challenges. MINUSTAH
should complement the rest of the United Nations
system, in cooperation and without duplication. The
integrated strategic framework should help the United
Nations act as one in support of Haiti's own
Government.

Norway has pledged substantial and long-term
support for Haiti's development. Our assistance is
based on the priorities of the Haitian Government, as
expressed in its national action plan. We are committed
to staying the course, in close cooperation and
coordination with other actors, including the United
Nations.

