Mr. Krishna (India): I would like to begin by
congratulating Lebanon on its presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to
express my deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this very important event. It
is indeed an honour to participate in the discussions
today and to convey to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council, the good wishes of
my Government. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/552) and his
recommendations on the use of preventive diplomacy
by the United Nations.

If properly used, preventive diplomacy could
become an essential element in the global community's
response to some of the major challenges facing the
international system today, and could help in conflict
prevention.
The adoption of the Charter of the United Nations
was supposed to herald the beginning of a new chapter
in international relations. One of the purposes of the
United Nations, as elaborated in Chapter I, Article 1,
paragraph 1 of the Charter, was to bring about by
peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace.

The Charter therefore stresses the importance of
the adjustment or settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, which include negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement and resort
to regional agencies or arrangements.

Over the last six decades, peaceful interventions
by the United Nations have helped defuse a number of
conflict situations on a number of occasions. These
interventions, wherever they are undertaken with
impartiality, fairness and equity, have earned the
United Nations a reputation for effective mediation.
The challenge before the international community is to
build on this legacy and ensure that peaceful means for
the settlement of disputes remain relevant to current
realities.

Contemporary threats to international peace and
security differ qualitatively from those prevalent six
decades ago. Conventional war has been overtaken by
intra-State and even borderless violence. Low-intensity
conflict, non-State actors and the terrorist-criminal-
drug-trafficking nexus threaten international stability
and progress. It is recognized that such conflicts are
extremely complicated and require complex solutions.
Unfortunately, recent developments seem to indicate a
worrying trend towards increased reliance on the use of
force as a mechanism for resolving some of these
conflicts.

The limitations of using force too frequently and
too quickly are many. Any respite that coercion brings
about in the absence of a political settlement is likely
to be only short-lived. Efforts at peaceful settlement of
disputes may also suffer if force is used prematurely
and without adequate deliberation. Very frequently, a
demonstration of a lack of patience in persisting with
peaceful efforts is also likely to play into the hands of
those who want these conflicts to persist.

The use of force also leads to collateral damage.
Such damage, whether human or material, has
unpredictable effects on political conflict resolution
processes while creating moral or normative dilemmas.
In many places, the use of force has prolonged
conflicts, a situation where the cure turned out to be

worse than the disease itself. The international
community must not show undue eagerness to use
coercive arrangements in its hurry to bring peace.

We are often reminded of the shortcomings and
limitations of diplomacy and the need to intervene. It is
important, however, to remember that the tragic events
of the past that are cited to justify intervention took
place not because dialogue was ineffective but because
of a lack of will on the part of the international
community to act. Such failures do not in any way
detract from the soundness of the principle of peaceful
settlement of disputes or its means as mentioned in the
Charter itself.

Of course, it goes without saying that the
peaceful method is the more difficult one. The great
Indian Emperor Ashoka noted three millennia ago that
to do good is difficult. Preventive diplomacy takes time
and commitment. It requires a clear understanding of
the nature and context of the conflict and the ability to
discern realistic solutions. It requires the involvement
of the various stakeholders affected by conflict. It
needs to incorporate forces for stability and progress
into a particular situation.

The foremost responsibility of sovereign States is
the protection of their populations. It is also their
primary responsibility to prevent conflict. Thus,
actions undertaken within the framework of conflict
prevention by United Nations entities must be designed
to support and complement, as appropriate, the
conflict-prevention roles of national Governments.

India has always opposed and will continue to
oppose the use of force as a primary reaction to
conflict. As the major troop-contributing country to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, we are more
familiar than most with the limitations of force. We
note, however, that peacekeepers, who are also early
peacebuilders, are being asked to do more with less.
This resource gap must be addressed. The inability of
the international community to match its mandates
with resources ultimately affects the credibility of the
Security Council and its authority in resolving
disputes.

There really is no sustainable alternative to
political processes and the principle that the primary
focus of the United Nations should be facilitating a
political settlement. Coercive measures should be
avoided and used as a measure of last resort,
implemented with extreme care and caution. Decisions
to use force should be free of political motives. The
humanitarian imperative of providing succour to the
suffering should not be used to further one's political
objectives. That does humanitarianism and diplomacy a
great disservice. Moreover, there are very good reasons
why international law is based on the principle of
consent. Efforts to circumvent this process are not
prudent and cannot be expected to address the drivers
of conflict on an enduring basis.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
time-tested principles of national consent, impartiality,
fairness and equity in all conflict-prevention activities
that the United Nations may undertake.

