Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Francois Lounceny Fall
for his briefing on the situation in the Central
African region. We also listened carefully to Mr. Sasha
Lezhnev's briefing.

Russia has consistently supported the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
as an important tool for implementing preventive
diplomacy. The challenges facing the countries of
the subregion are unquestionably complex, and in
that regard it is crucial for regional actors to be at the
forefront in matters of crisis prevention and conflict
resolution. We welcome the focus of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) on
achieving the institutional reform that it needs to
strengthen the capacity of an organization that is so
important to the subregion.

Central Africa plays a key role in countering the
spread of terrorism on the African continent. The
penetration by radical and terrorist elements of the
subregion has been accompanied by illegal trafficking
in weapons, drugs and mineral and other natural
resources. We were troubled by the information
that Boko Haram still has military capacities and
is capable of conducting major attacks, and that its
activity in Chad and Cameroon is not decreasing.
Extremists are attacking civilians, United Nations and
non-governmental organization personnel, and military
checkpoints. The significant influx of foreign terrorists
into Boko Haram, including militants from the Islamic
State, is seriously worrying. We believe that regional
efforts to develop coordinated approaches to the fight
against any manifestations of terrorism are extremely
important, and the activities of the Multinational Joint
Task Force are a good example of that. It is crucial
to ensure its adequate financing. For our part, we
are ready to continue working in various formats in
the interests of eliminating the terrorist threat on the
African continent. We are focusing in particular on
identifying sources of financing for local terrorists and
their contacts with other international radical groups.

We are closely monitoring the developing situation
in the Central African Republic. We support President
Touadera's efforts to reform the security sector and
enhance the capacity of the armed forces as soon
as possible. The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed
on 6 February, is an important foundation for the
continuing resolution of the situation in the country.
Russia will continue its full support to the national
reconciliation process by coordinating efforts with all
involved in the quest for ways to normalize the situation.

One of the other factors in the instability in the
Central African region is piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Unfortunately, the criminal raids on foreign vessels,
including hostage-taking, continue. Russia has had a
positive experience of participating in the international
efforts to combat piracy in the north-western Indian
Ocean in the framework ofthe Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. We hope it can be useful for
resolving similar issues in the Gulf of Guinea.
We are concerned about the ongoing activities of
the Lord's Resistance Army, which is still engaging
in illicit looting and robbery in various parts of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, and combating it should
remain a priority for the States of the Central African
region. We hope that the concept developed under
the auspices of the African Union and ECCAS for
eliminating this threat will get results.

We are also closely following the development of
the situation in Cameroon. The issue of the country's
English-speaking provinces has deep historical roots,
and the only way to reach a solution to such accumulated
problems is at the negotiating table, while respecting
human rights and ensuring the rule of law. We urge all
the parties in Cameroon to show maximum restraint
and refrain from the use of any form of violence. In that
connection, we welcome the national dialogue that took
place from 30 September to 4 October and hope that the
recommendations based on its outcome will be put into
practice as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we would like to remind the Council
that the challenges and threats facing Central Africa
are inextricably linked to one another and the States
of the region themselves are interdependent. The
destabilization ofthe situation in one country can bring
down its neighbours' security too, and it is therefore
extremely important not to cross the line between
prevention and interference in internal affairs.

