Mr. Titov: On behalf of Under-Secretary-General
Herve' Ladsous, I am glad to take part in this important
meeting. I wish to thank you, Ambassador ngu, for
this timely initiative and for your special personal
leadership on this strategic issue. We particularly
appreciate the background paper (S/2015/6l4, annex)
circulated by Nigeria for this meeting; it articulates
many important questions, especially those with which
we are dealing.

I would also like to pay special tribute to Slovakia
and South Africa for their long-standing and very
dedicated service as co-Chairs of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform and for
their many efforts in support of resolution 2151 (2014),
including its implementation in the field.
Last year, while briefing the Council, the Secretary-
General said, "The purpose of security sector reform,
simply put, is to make people's lives safer" (S/PV.7l6l, p.2). We could not agree more. Well-trained, well-
supported, accountable and service-oriented police
and military professionals are a country's best defence
against the violence and instability that threaten both
lives and livelihoods. From the perspective of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Council is right to do more to strengthen legitimate
institutions and governance, not only to break cycles
of violence, but also to provide citizen security, justice
and economic growth.

A quick scan of Foreign Policy's 2015 Fragile
States Index demonstrates the strong correlation
between the performance of the security apparatus and
overall fragility. The five most fragile countries in this
index - South Sudan, Somalia, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - are all vivid reminders that a country's
security sector is closely linked with both the perception
of State legitimacy and long-term socioeconomic and
political development.

For this reason, DPKO believes that, depending on
specific circumstances, security-sector management
and professionalization should be at the core of peace
operations' mandates and activities.

Understandably, some Member States express
caution about the United Nations engagement in
security-sector management. However, the philosophy
of the United Nations practice has been simple: security-
sector reform (SSR) can be achieved only if host
countries themselves agree to it. No one can impose or
import a security system. That simply does not work,
at least in the long term. The role of the United Nations
is to support nationally owned SSR efforts when
mandated or requested to do so. At the same time, it is
our obligation to share the best international practices
with recipient States.

Over the past 16 months, the Council has adopted
21 resolutions containing elements of security-sector
reform and management. In 17 peace operations
conducted globally, the United Nations is actively
helping host countries professionalize their security
sector, so that they themselves can better support their
nations in addressing national and regional security
threats, including terrorism, Violent extremism and
organized crime.

In the field, we are focusing on four central
priorities which are explicit in resolution 2151 (2014).
First, the United Nations views SSR as a political
process as much as a technical one. To train and equip
is indispensable in post-conflict situations. But as
demonstrated in a variety of mission contexts, security-
sector management is most effective when it is also
linked to broader reforms.

In Mali, for example, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali provided its technical expertise during the
development of the recently signed Peace Agreement.
The Mission is now helping Malian authorities as they
prepare to integrate armed groups into the national
security forces and revise the presidential decree on the
National Council on Security Sector Reform. Together
with the European Union and other partners, training is
ongoing for the national army, police and gendarmerie,
along with mentoring in the field. We are also engaged
in building the Malian anti-organized-crime capacity,
and, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL, DPKO is actively doing the
same in other West African countries.

In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) helped the
Government to develop its draft Constitution, which, as
a result, now includes defence and security provisions.
In addition, 2,000 members of the Central African
armed forces have been preliminarily vetted, which has
already led to the reinstatement of the First Territorial
Infantry Battalion.

Secondly, the international community must focus
on the need to integrate sector-wide delivery. The
security sector does not only cover defence; it includes
justice and corrections, policing, border management
and other areas. Building the capacity of each of these
services should preferably be balanced and mutually
reinforcing.

In Somalia, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the Government
are implementing a security sector public expenditure
review, which will help develop a sustainable security
architecture. The Mission is also helping integrate
militia forces into the Somali National Army and
to strengthen the capacity of 11,000 officers in the
Somali National Army so that they will able to engage
with the African Union Mission in Somalia. On
policing, UNSOM. has also assisted the Government in
developing a comprehensive plan that includes training,
infrastructure development and equipment for police in
Mogadishu and beyond.
The United Nations provides similar, multifaceted
support in Guinea-Bissau. I know that the has Council
received a briefing from the Department of Political
Affairs (DPA) on the political situation in that
country last Friday. The United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau has advised the
Government to develop a new law on the establishment
of the special pension fund. This legislation will pave
the way for the retirement of almost 1,500 personnel in
the armed forces and security sector.

Thirdly, in the spirit of national ownership, we
support Governments in their efforts to develop State
security plans and convene international partners
around those plans. In Liberia, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has responded to the
requests of the Council by working with the Government
to produce a transition plan that is largely focused on
the security sector. UNMlL has also trained almost
3,000 police officers and supported the review of the
national security strategy, while the bilateral partners
have assisted with the national army and specialized
police.

Meanwhile, the support of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for the vetting of
national police officers has resulted in an additional
1,200 certified national police officers, thereby
making progress towards the goals of the national
police development plan. This effort complements the
training that the United Nations - again, together
with donors - has provided to 14,000 Haitian National
Police officers and over 200 corrections officers over
several years. All of this training is undertaken on the
basis of United Nations standards, human rights law
and due diligence policy.

Fourthly, building strong and accountable security
sectors helps the United Nations to deliver on key
mandated activities, including the protection of
civilians, the prevention of sexual and gender-based
Violence, and others. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for example, United Nations police deployed
recently alongside the Congolese National Police to
mentor, advise and help protect civilians in the troubled
town of Beni, where armed groups were launching
deadly attacks on the population. Colleagues from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo also manage the
prosecution support cells programme, which has helped
the military justice system of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to reduce impunity and address conflict-
related sexual Violence. This is an integral United
Nations activity in many operations.

All of these are only examples, which demonstrate
the concrete action of my colleagues from DPKO in
the field on a daily basis. Yet I must acknowledge that
the whole system could do better. In South Sudan, for
example, the United Nations did not manage the security
dialogue properly or effectively, which contributed
to the unravelling of peace. The lack of success in
this context demonstrates the political imperative for
sustained and well-resourced efforts towards SSR in
peace operations.

Within the framework of the inter-agency Security
Sector Task Force, DPKO's special unit dedicated to
security sectormanagement has also carried out anumber
of other system-wide initiatives, including - again, as
only one example - support to DPA in its efforts in Iraq
and earlier in Libya. With colleagues from the United
Nations Development Programme, who will also speak
this morning, we hope to increase our engagement with
other partners, including the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the World Bank.

Meanwhile, DPKO has also undertaken mapping
initiativeswithregionalpartners,includingtheEuropean
Union and the African Union (AU). Over the past five
years, the Department has built a serious, strategic
partnership with the African Union Commission. This
has resulted in the adoption of the first and unique
African Union policy framework on SSR. As stressed in
resolution 2151 (2014), we need to enhance cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
regional economic communities, in order to ensure the
compatibility of approaches and closer coordination.
Through all the initiatives we have mentioned this
morning, DPKO is also trying to address a number
of persistent challenges. Therefore, we would like
to propose a few recommendations for the Council's
future consideration.

First, SSR is sometimes viewed as a technical
process, while it could and should provide crucial
solutions to some political engagements. Moreover,
there are instances when United Nations support to SSR
comes too little and too. Security sector management
should obviously concentrate on post-conflict
situations, but it could also be used for prevention
purposes in some specific contexts. Furthermore,
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
should be empowered and indeed encouraged to take
initiative and ownership on security sector management
issues. I stress that this should be done from the earliest
days of the mission onwards. This should not be seen
as a second- or third-tier activity, and progress towards
security sector benchmarks should be embedded into
any mission's entry and exit strategies.

Secondly, commitments to strengthening the
security sector, whether on the part of international
partners or host States, are often difficult to formalize,
especially when they come at the later stages of United
Nations intervention. The Council could consider
requesting that host States and the United Nations
agree on special compacts - which the Council has
already discussed informally - in the security sector
and wider governance areas. That should be done at the
time when operations are being established, and could
help in implementing specific reforms and allocating
national resources in a sustained manner and based on
national commitments.

Thirdly, I believe that we in DPKO could better serve
the Security Council by increasing our engagement with
its members on SSR. Already, having had two briefings
in two years dedicated to this strategic topic is a step
in the right direction, and the Council should perhaps
encourage us, through the Secretary-General's reports,
to provide more detailed information on national and
international efforts in this vital area, as well as on the
whole issue of peace sustainment.

Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate that any
peace operation should ideally leave behind at least
a basic functioning security and rule-of-law system.
From our perspective, this should be considered a
strategic priority goal for most of our operations, so
that the Council will not be seized over and over again
with relapsing conflicts, human suffering, impunity
and instability.

