Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General, Deputy Prime Minister Guterres
and Ambassador Wittig for their thoughtful briefings
today.

The only way to truly end a war is to successfully
build a peace. Old embers left to smolder can ignite
into new flames. Old weaknesses left to languish can
summon new risks. So we face an important challenge
here today - to sharpen all the tools at our disposal in
order to do an essential job better. We meet today at the
initiative of our colleague from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who has rightly drawn the Council's
attention to our topic today. This is fitting. Countries
that have themselves endured and overcome the horrors
of war are particularly suited to providing leadership -
leadership that rests on hard-won wisdom.

In 1995, the Dayton Peace Accords ended a
shattering conflict that claimed more than 100,000
lives and drove more than 2 million people from their
homes. Through more than 15 years of dedicated
effort, Bosnia and Herzegovina has built up national
governmental institutions one by one and made them
stronger and more effective - from the Ministry of
Defence to the customs service, the tax agency and the
central bank.

The United Nations, together with a wide range
of other actors, has been involved in helping post-
conflict countries grapple with their most pressing
needs now for more than 20 years, and Virtually every
conflict-wracked country currently on the agenda of
the Council - from Haiti, to Liberia to the Sudan to
Afghanistan i seeks effective international assistance
to rebuild its institutions.

We have learned important lessons over the past
two decades in this field, but we also have work to do
in putting them into practice. We all agree that national
ownership of the processes of rebuilding and renewal
is indispensable, but we still struggle to assist fragile
post-conflict Governments so they can set and
implement their own priorities. We recognize that
women need to play a more active role in
peacebuilding, but we still lag in ensuring that women

have an equitable stake in making post-conflict
decisions and a full voice in running key institutions.
We know that the sustainability of a peace process
often hinges on strengthening key national institutions,
but we still grapple with how best to mobilize effective
and timely international assistance in such vital areas
as the rule of law and security sectors.

Fortunately, we have collectively acknowledged
the challenges and resolved to make headway on them
in the year ahead. For example, we have turned to the
Peacebuilding Commission to help the democratically
elected Government of Liberia to extend State
authority beyond Monrovia by establishing regional
hubs that will help deliver fair and timely justice in
rural communities and make trained police and
magistrates more accessible to the population as a
whole. We have established new mechanisms and
pledged considerable financial assistance to help Haiti
consolidated the impressive progress it has made since
the terrible earthquake struck a little more than a year
ago.

But as many of us said in the Council yesterday,
Haiti will continue to face steep challenges unless the
international commitment to recovery remains strong
and sustained and unless all parties redouble their
efforts to strengthen Haiti's critical governing
institutions. The country's recovery depends on its
ability to find a way to move ahead, even amid
complex challenges, including the continuing turmoil
surrounding the November 2010 election.

The effectiveness of international assistance to
institution-building in Liberia, Haiti and other
countries emerging from conflict depends on the
United Nations and other multilateral and bilateral
actors being able to quickly identify and deploy
qualified civilian expertise. We therefore look forward
in the coming weeks to the findings of the international
review of civilian capacity. We appreciate the briefings
to the membership by the Senior Advisory Group, and
we hope that the review will emphasize the question of
core national capacities in post-conflict States.

We look forward to reviewing specific proposals
to make the United Nations own civilian capacities
more timely, relevant and flexible and more open to
deeper partnerships. Our approach to this review will
be guided by our own recent national efforts, as laid
out in my Government's first quadrennial diplomacy
and development review.

We continue to value the Secretary-General's
ongoing efforts to make United Nations field missions
more effective, particularly his work to ensure that the
top leaders of missions are selected carefully and held
accountable.

This meeting is a timely reminder of how
essential the work of peacebuilding and institution-
building is. There are no easy solutions for societies
recovering from conflict, but we must persist in
working together to try to craft and implement the
specific solutions that each post-conflict society needs.
Nothing less than international peace and security hang
in the balance.

