At the outset, I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her briefing and active engagement in these difficult circumstances. I would also like to reiterate Tunisia's full support of the mandate of United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and our continuing collaboration with the Mission's office in Tunis. I also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his briefing and commend Germany's efforts as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. Tunisia is deeply concerned about the continuing escalation of violence in Libya, especially the intensification of indiscriminate attacks on civilians, including medical personnel and health facilities. These make it all the more difficult to fight the spread of the coronavirus pandemic and put the Libyan people at high risk. We recall the obligations of the warring parties under international humanitarian law and call on them to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian aid throughout the country. There is no military solution in Libya. The last nine years of conflict and its devastating impact on all aspects of daily life of Libyans have proven that. Tunisia appeals to all stakeholders to immediately commit to the humanitarian truce and terminate all military operations in order to enable a lasting ceasefire and create conditions conducive to the resumption of the political process and national reconciliation. Accordingly, while calling on all parties to consider the outcome of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks in February 2020 in a positive light, we urge the international community to use all its influence to encourage the Libyan parties to ease tensions and achieve an immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire, with a view to preventing any further deterioration of the situation and the targeting of civilians. In this regard, we note with appreciation UNSMIL's continued engagement with all Libyan representatives on the three tracks, with a view to resuming meetings as soon as possible. We also emphasize the important role the international follow-up committee on Libya plays in advancing the implementation of the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. Tunisia is deeply concerned with the continuing violations of the Security Council-imposed arms embargo on Libya. It is obviously known that as arms continue to flow into the country, violence and military escalation will persist and expand, and the conflict will be exacerbated and amplified to the detriment of the political track and further impair peace and security not only in Libya but in the region as a whole. We therefore firmly insist on the necessity of abiding by the arms embargo and refraining from any interference in the armed conflict or the internal affairs of Libya. We also express grave concern over the growing involvement of foreign fighters in Libya and stress the urgency of addressing the related threats and challenges as well as the danger posed by the terrorist groups taking advantage of the situation. It is high time to reverse the current trends. All our efforts should converge towards relaunching an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process, fostering dialogue and promoting a genuine intra-Libyan reconciliation. There is no alternative to such an approach if security and stability is to be restored in Libya and if an end is to be put to the suffering of the Libyan people. Before concluding, my delegation would like to reaffirm Tunisia's strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We also reiterate our support for the peaceful settlement of the Libyan crisis in accordance with international legality and in full respect of the will of the Libyan people, underlining the importance of the continued inclusiveness of the Libyan political agreement. Finally, Tunisia reaffirms its strong support for the leadership of the Secretary- General and highly values the role that UNSMIL and all United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners in Libya are playing. We also recall the important role of the neighbouring countries and regional organizations, notably the League of Arab States, the African Union and the European Union, in advancing peace in Libya. The fighting in Libya must stop. That is a legitimate aspiration of the brotherly Libyan people. The Security Council has a key role to play in helping the Libyan people turn the gloomy page, and the international community has a moral obligation to act resolutely in support of bringing peace and stability back to the country.
