Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council, and
to thank the Libyan presidency for the skill it
demonstrated last month.

France aligns itself fully with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.

Sir, I would like to thank you first of all for
organizing this open debate on the situation in Haiti
and the work being carried out by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Beginning with all those who are working in Haiti -
and I am thinking here in particular of the Member
States in the region, which will deliver statements
later- the international community must remain
mobilized to support the efforts of the Haitian
authorities to stabilize their country and to put it on the
path towards sustainable development.

I would also like to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General's personal work on and commitment to Haiti,
particularly because, as he wrote himself a few days
ago in a leading newspaper, Haiti is at a crucial stage
in its history.

I would also, of course, like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi,
for his briefing, and express once again our full support
for all his work on the ground. The recent Security
Council mission to Haiti, led by Ambassador Urbina of
Costa Rica, allowed us to have a clearer and more
concrete picture of the achievements of MINUSTAH,
particularly in the security sector, and of the challenges
that Haiti continues to face.

As Mr. Annabi stressed earlier, Haiti is at a
crucial stage in its history. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/l29) shows that Haiti is enjoying the
first fruits of the efforts that have been made since
2006: the re-establishment of security, the
professionalization of the police force, the
improvement of the transport and electricity

distribution infrastructures, growth in tax income and
control of inflation.

Determined action by the Haitian authorities to
follow up on that policy of stabilization and
development is more than ever necessary, with the
support of the international community, to meet the
expectations of the people, who have already suffered a
great deal, in terms of security, enhancing the rule of
law and access to health care and education. In this
regard, I note the very encouraging comments made
earlier by the Special Representative with respect to
the freedom of expression and opinion and the growing
strength of the democratic legal system, which has
allowed a gradual improvement in the effectiveness of
efforts to counteract crime and corruption and to
ensure effective protection of human rights.

The partial senatorial elections that will be held
by June, with the first scheduled for 19 April, are of
course critical. The proper functioning of democratic
institutions depends upon them. We hope, of course,
that the elections will take place in a free and
transparent manner and, as Mr. Annabi said, lead to
men and women taking power who are competent and
committed to democracy and the rules of democracy.

However, the Government must also continue to
work with all parties, as it has begun to do, on major
projects that are important for the future of the country,
in order to establish a common vision among all
Haitians. Once again, I note the relatively positive and
optimistic assessment made by Mr. Annabi.

We fully support MINUSTAH's work to help
Haiti put an end to its political instability. We are
aware of the successive difficulties that Haiti
encountered last year, including the series of hurricanes
that struck the country and whose economic and social
impact was considerable. In this context, the
international community's commitment, including in
terms of security, is more than ever necessary in
support of this process, which must be consolidated for
the long term.

On this point, the international community must
enhance its efforts to meet the socio-economic
challenges that the country faces. That is what is at
stake at the donor's conference planned for 14 April,
which represents an important stage in implementing
the national growth and poverty reduction strategy. The
international community can rest assured that France
and the European Union, which are critical partners of
Haiti, will participate in the conference with renewed
resolve to be heavily involved and will do so over the
long term.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General, which was supported by the findings of the
Security Council mission, to rely on a medium-term
strategy to transfer, gradually and in acceptable
conditions, responsibilities that are currently assumed
by the international community to the Haitians
themselves. That is the goal of the consolidation plan
that was submitted to us in autumn. A review of
progress on the various aspects and indicators of that
plan will of course be essential following the
discussions that we will be having on the MINUSTAH
mandate. It is also essential in that regard that, under
the authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all institutions in the United
Nations system work in a coherent fashion.

We also hope, following the Security Council
mission and in the context of the review of
peacekeeping operations, that we will be able to
consider the political, military and police
configurations of MINUSTAH. That should take place
in an inclusive way, particularly with respect to police-
and troop-contributing countries, in order to ensure that
their views are fully taken into account.

This approach is particularly desirable since the
first assessment of the police mission was carried by
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), and many lessons have been
learned from the experience of MINUSTAH. We
encourage the DPKO to enhance its actions here and
we also believe that, in the longer term, MINUSTAH
should play an even greater role with regard to security
sector reform to meet such security challenges as
smuggling and the traffic in drugs and weapons.

To conclude, I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their support for the
presidential statement that we have prepared with the
delegations of Mexico and the United States.

