Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the United States delegation for
organizing this debate, which covers an area that
brings together the right to freedom of expression,
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and international humanitarian law,
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions. As the Human
Rights Council has affirmed, the right to freedom of
expression "constitutes one of the essential foundations
of a democratic society and one of the basic conditions
for its progress and development" (A/HRC/RES/ZI/IZ).
For his part, the Secretary-General has highlighted the
crucial role that journalists play in denouncing their
own treatment and the suffering of civilians in conflict
situations, as well as violations of humanitarian law
and human rights. For the first time in a decision by
the Security Council, resolution 1738 (2006), adopted
on 23 December 2006, on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, considered journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel as subject to
civilian protection.

Journalists doing their job in situations of armed
conflict face the dual problems of insecurity and
impunity. Indeed, in 2012 alone, according to the
International Federation of Journalists, 121 journalists
lost their lives while carrying out their professional
functions. The Federation also estimates that only
one in 10 cases where journalists are assassinated is
investigated.

In accordance with international law, the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, including
journalists and media professionals, rests with the States.
That responsibility also falls to non- State actors, such as
terrorist groups and criminal organizations. Combating
impunity for those who are responsible for war crimes,

genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law continues
to be one of the main challenges for the international
community in protecting civilians in armed conflict.
That includes journalists and professionals in the
communications media. From a broader perspective,
it becomes necessary, as recommended by Special
Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights. for
States to investigate and criminally prosecute crimes
committed against the freedom of expression.

My country supports the United Nations Plan of
Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity, drafted under UNESCO. We believe that
Plan of Action should be the cornerstone of a strategy to
protect journalists and communications professionals.
Of course, we understand that the protection of
journalists includes protecting their sources. We also
support the work of the Human Rights Council in that
regard, which goes beyond armed conflict situations.
The international community has adequate
standards for protecting civilian populations and
journalists and communications media professionals.
Those standards are contained in universal treaties and
United Nations resolutions. It is therefore not necessary
to develop new international standards. Rather, it is
time urgently to move on to an era of implementation
of those standards. The Security Council should call for
the implementation of those standards. States should
implement the standards through legislative and other
measures that involve the relevant actors, such as the
judiciary, the police and civil society. There is a large
space to promote regional and international cooperation
to benefit the security and safety of journalists and
other communication media professionals.

All of this has one objective, namely, to create
an environment that is conducive to journalists and
communications media professionals to achieve their
valuable mission to report in a safe, independent and
timely fashion.

