Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing this
morning, and I would like to say that I am very happy
to see our colleagues from the Republic of Korea and
Japan around the table.

The situation on the Korean peninsula has
momentous implications for international peace and
security. The unity ofpurpose among Council members
in addressing the situation has been decisive for the
progress made so far. Continued unity in our approach
will be critical to achieving our common objective ofthe
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. The Security Council must
stand with the same unity in the implementation of the
resolutions we have adopted.

I would like to make three briefpoints on sanctions,
diplomatic efforts and the humanitarian situation.

First, we must effectively implement and uphold
the sanctions on North Korea until the demands of the
resolutions are fully met. It is with great concern that
we see widespread violations of the sanctions regime
continue in a range of areas, including arms exports,
petroleum trade and financial transactions. We call on
all Member States to fulfil their obligations and ensure
their full implementation. We have worked actively in
the European Union to ensure that all countries have
the necessary guidance and capacity. We commend
the thorough work of the Netherlands and the tireless
efforts of our dear colleague, Karel Van Oosterom,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).

The important work of the Panel of Experts should
also be recognized, and we stress the need to respect its
independence and impartiality. It is never acceptable
for Member States to interfere with the work of the
Panel of Experts, seeking to influence its findings and
conclusions. That threatens to seriously undermine
the integrity of the United Nations independent panel
reporting process. Any difference of use should instead
be addressed through constructive discussions within
the framework of the sanctions Committee.

Secondly, diplomatic efforts and dialogue towards a
peaceful solution should be encouraged, acknowledged
and supported. We welcome the continued progress in
the inter-Korean dialogue and the upcoming summit
tomorrow. The inter-Korean family reunion process is
also a positive step forward, and we hope that further
such reunions can take place soon. The summit between
the United States and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was very significant.

It is important now that both parties work to
maintain momentum and take positive steps. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea should without
delay translate its commitments into legally binding
undertakings. Signing and ratifying the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty would be an important step
for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
demonstrate its seriousness. It is also important that
the International Atomic Energy Agency get a role
early in the verification of the denuclearization and
disarmament process. We welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system stand
ready to support those diplomatic efforts. Creative
diplomacy will also continue to be needed in the
next steps.

Lastly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
there is no doubt that the responsibility for the dire
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea rests with the Government. At
the same time, there are continued concerns about
reports of the adverse indirect impacts of sanctions
on humanitarian aid delivery and the ability of
humanitarian organizations to respond to life-saving
humanitarian needs. Enhanced efforts are needed
to ensure that the humanitarian exemptions in our
resolutions are effectively implemented.

