Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): It is a true
pleasure for my delegation and me to see you, Sir,
presiding at the close of your presidency of the
Security Council over this meeting on a subject that is
of great importance to us: small arms. Allow me also to
point out that, under your presidency, the most
important questions affecting our continent have been
considered by the Council and Member States. Congo
thanks you for that and offers its sincere gratitude to
your delegation.

Most present-day conflicts, as the Secretary-
General says so well in his report, contained in
document S/2008/258, are fought primarily with small
arms and light weapons. Africa, the largest dumping
ground for such weapons and host to the greatest
number of armed conflicts, is without doubt the
continent that most suffers the damaging consequences
of that scourge.

Hence, this meeting, taking place a few weeks
before the third Biennial Meeting to review the 2001
Programme of Action, is most timely. It offers Member
States and this organ, primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, an
excellent opportunity to consider appropriate solutions
to the threat represented by such weapons in certain
parts of the world.

I should like to paraphrase a great French
statesman, President Jacques Chirac, as he spoke of
another, equally important challenge at the World
Summit on Sustainable Development in September
2002 in Johannesburg, South Africa, to the effect that,
08-32416
so long as the threat of small arms and light weapons
remains both pressing and ongoing, the world must not
look away. A sense of realism demands it of us.

As we all know, the primary role in the struggle
against the illicit trade in those weapons belongs to
Member States. It is also clear, however, that in
addressing that and other challenges, partnerships are
equally necessary, particularly when complemented by
the coherent action of the United Nations.

My delegation welcomes the many initiatives that
have been taken at various levels, including the
meetings of experts organized by the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and other regional and
subregional meetings. We also note with pleasure the
decision taken by the States members of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), our
own subregional organization, at the twenty-fifth
ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in Sao Tome and Principe in May 2007, to
draw up a legal instrument to monitor small arms and
light weapons in Central Africa and a code of conduct
for defence and security forces. Congo takes this
opportunity to appeal to our ECCAS partners to
support such projects.

Congo recalls here that the Security Council
should, as it has with respect to other issues on its
agenda, demonstrate both its determination and its
unity by taking active measures to fight the scourge of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, which
has incalculable consequences for our peoples. Indeed,
the introductory words of Ms. Hannelore Hoppe,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, as well as paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of the
Secretary-General's report, are sufficiently eloquent
concerning its physical, human, material and other
consequences. It is therefore unnecessary for me to
revisit the harmful effects of the use of those weapons
in many countries in conflict.

In the light of all that I have just said, and with
respect to our rightful objectives concerning the threat
to international peace and security posed by the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, my delegation
should like to make the following comments.

First, the question of small arms and light
weapons should be addressed in parallel with that of
ammunition in the context of the drafting of a binding
legal instrument, which we strongly advocate. Indeed,
3
the Secretary-General's report notes that "[m]ore than
80 per cent of ammunition trade seems to remain
outside of reliable export data" (5/2008/258, para. 19).
And yet, ammunition is essential to the functioning of
those weapons. There is thus a need for joint and well-
coordinated action on the part of the international
community to monitor the circulation of ammunition
and improved stockpile management.

Secondly, the question of the responsibility of the
manufacturers of such weapons must be raised with
respect to export, transfer, licensing, marking and
tracing. Indeed, without the participation of
manufacturers and the assistance of the States where
they operate, no action by the international community
can have the desired results, given the complexity of
the present-day structure of the arms trade and the
existence of numerous brokers and points of sale.

Thirdly, the issue of respect for embargoes should
enjoy greater attention because it has been relentlessly
demonstrated that the perpetuation of some conflicts is
linked to the ease with which certain illegal armed
groups obtain weapons. Respect for embargoes is all
the more essential in that it allows us to reduce, to a
certain extent, the capacity for harm of illegal groups
and to prevent the emergence or resurgence of certain
conflicts.

The Secretary-General's 13 recommendations
could represent an equal number of steps forward if
they were converted into consensual decisions, despite
the fact that they do not all go as far as we should have
Wished, as the representative of the United States
pointed out this morning in referring to certification.
While we recognize the impact of this debate, we
regret that the Security Council has been unable to
make a far-reaching decision commensurate with the
expectations of peoples throughout the world who are
suffering the plague of war.

