The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) operates under resolution 2514 (2020), which authorizes the use all necessary means to protect civilians, create the conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance, support the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the peace process, and monitor and investigate human rights. It maintains the overall UNMISS force ceiling of 17,000 personnel. The Force comprises 14,554 personnel: 13,932 troops and 622 individual uniformed personnel. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) presented the challenge of maintaining an "infection-free" profile while continuing with mandate implementation. Personal hygiene and distancing norms required modifications to administrative and operational procedures. The need was to inform, adapt and follow a "new discipline" without causing undue alarm or caution. The following measures were adopted. Working groups at force and sector headquarters coordinate efforts and formulate directives and standard operating procedures for uninterrupted operations in the COVID-19 environment. Instructions are repeated through regular broadcasts. We have ensured handwashing facilities are available at multiple locations and the provision of personal protective equipment (PPE) to contingents and military personnel. Contingents have fabricated masks, and deficiencies have been addressed with Mission support. A few contingents are planning to ship in PPE and medicines/ medical equipment to support troops. A separate treatment and isolation facility was created with each contingent (Level 1). Entry into military camps has been restricted, and regular disinfection of accommodations and vehicles is carried out. Protocols for isolation and quarantining have been promulgated and the necessary facilities created. Level 2 hospitals have been prepared to receive and treat COVID-19 patients. Daily health checks and monitoring/isolation of suspected cases is being ensured. Troops returning from operations with contact with population are placed under medical observation for up to 14 days. To keep troops prepared and ready to react to contingences, training on operational drills and conduct of field exercises are being carried out. Stress management and welfare are being addressed through physical exercises; good communication and information sharing; a buddy system among all uniformed personnel; prayers and religious congregation with distancing; and support and guidance by commanders at all levels in person or via video-teleconference (VTC). Regarding operations in the COVID-19 environment, most operations can be conducted, minimizing risks from COVID-19 by adopting prevention measures. The following mitigation measures have been adopted. Patrolling and presence in populated areas have been reduced. Where presence is mandatory - for example, in protection of civilian camps - procedures have been modified to include mobile patrolling and measures to maintain safe distance from internally displaced persons (IDPs). Physical interaction is being limited with locals and within the force, adhering to social distancing, flexible attendance at the workplace, the use of VTCs, and controlled visits outside of the base. The number of personnel in vehicles and helicopters is being restricted. Hand sanitization is being carried out while on patrol, with washing with chlorine water upon return to base. Vehicles are disinfection upon entry. All personnel undergo medical checks upon return to base. Regarding the protection of civilians, the force is operationally committed to protecting civilians in dedicated camps, totalling 190,376 among Juba, Bentiu, Malakal, Bor and Wau, as well as in other areas/regions across the Mission. Troops on static protection duties at protection of civilian camps have been reduced by up to 60 per cent to generate troops to respond to protection threats in other areas as required. The Mission has continued to pursue its protection mandate following the processes of leadership engagement, threat assessment, early warning, and physical deployments of integrated teams in temporary operating bases and long-duration patrols through the following planning and execution processes. In terms of planning, hotspots are identified through systematic collection and analysis of information obtained from multiple sources - Government and community leaders, non-governmental organizations, human _ rights-violation reports, assessments by Civil and Political Affairs Divisions and International Organization for Migration data on the return of IDPs. An early-warning outlook is generated on a weekly basis to guide future mission operations. In terms of integrated operations, maintaining a sustained presence outside established bases, in areas of conflict and violence, is the key to resolving disputes, saving lives, building peace and encouraging the return of IDPs. The following methodology is being used to address the inter-communal violence currently being witnessed in many parts of the country. Integrated teams, comprising military, civil affairs and human rights divisions, at Mission and field offices, share information and proactively engage with community leaders and administrative, security and political authorities to defuse situations with potential for violence. Troops are deployed in the field in the conflict zone with civil affairs and human rights personnel to form a temporary base called a "hub" for up to three months. Patrols are executed to outlying areas, "spokes", affected by conflict to build confidence, deter violence and encourage the return of displaced persons. Day and night patrols offer protection and respond to threats to the population. We assist in and guide the forging of a negotiated settlement by bringing communities and their leaders together, and then enable the implementation of the agreement reached. We assist in recording human rights violations, along with efforts to build peace. We support humanitarian pillars in assessment of response and provide security required for distribution of assistance. We inform and educate the population on COVID-19-prevention measures and interact with women and girls to draw their perspective in finding durable solutions. We propose development projects for execution through the trust fund as a long-term solution to alleviate the population's hardships. Let me turn to impediments to executing our protection mandate. Undeniably, loss of life and population displacement continue despite our efforts. However, it must be noted that those figures are a small proportion of the lives that are saved. In the prevailing political environment, the principal impediments are as follows. First is the inability to know the time and place of the next incident of violence. Regarding the May 2020 clash between Murles and Nuers in Jonglei, while it was known that the Murles were likely to attack the Nuers and troop deployment was effected, the precise location and time remained unknown. It occurred earlier than expected, on 16 May, at multiple locations, in a coordinated manner and at considerable distance from the deployment of troops. The second principal impediment consists in limitations on movement and the inability to reach the desired location with the necessary force in the required time. Third is the need to balance the safety and security of troops with the probability of success of the mission. Troops deployed at locations for the protection of civilians need to be suitably armed and equipped to intervene, face and overcome resistance in protecting civilians. Fourth is the complex nature of conflicts with a historical context, around land, grazing rights, food insecurity, militarization of the population, tribal loyalties, and weak law and order and enforcement systems existing in a governance vacuum. Let me turn now to the performance of military contingents. Every military contingent is faring well considering the challenges of a very demanding operational environment. Troops have operated from temporary bases for more than three months, with minimal support, interacting with communities, generating confidence and building peace. Land operations are restricted from May to November due to monsoons, and weather restricts helicopter operations considerably. There is a need to review the equipment and self-sustaining capacity of contingents, for which a study is due. Specific improvements have been achieved in the security of bases, the accommodation of troops and the creation of isolation and quarantining facilities in good time within the Mission. Contingents are well-equipped with PPE, sanitization and washing facilities and are operating exceedingly well in the COVID-19 environment. Requirements are being met by the Mission, and national authorities are also contributing to the effort.
