Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
climate change and its impact on international peace
and security. Kyrgyzstan shares the view that global
climate change is becoming one of the most serious
challenges to humankind and thus requires an
integrated approach by the United Nations and its main
bodies and agencies. We hope that this debate will
contribute to a deeper analysis of the problem of
climate change and its impact on international peace
and security, and that it will allow for a more clearly
defined role of the Security Council in dealing with
such challenges.

Given the record rise in global food prices from
2008 to 2010, and due to global climate change, food
security in the least developed and developing
countries is being seriously undermined. The situation
is especially complicated for mountain countries such
as Kyrgyzstan. It might eventually lead to food
shortages and possible subsequent conflicts in the most
vulnerable States. Therefore, we consider it important
to implement General Assembly resolution 64/205 on
sustainable mountain development in terms of ensuring
food security for mountain countries.

The international community is aware that small
island developing States are already experiencing the
earliest ecological impacts of climate change in terms
of sea-level rise. Climate change has actually become
an issue of survival and security for them. We believe
that the United Nations should consider measures to
mobilize the necessary international support for

 

collective efforts to address the environmental
problems of small island States.

The report of the Secretary-General on climate
change and its possible security implications notes that

"[w]idespread mass losses from glaciers and
reductions in snow cover are projected to
accelerate throughout the twenty-first century,
reducing water availability and hydropower
potential and changing seasonality of flows in
regions supplied by melt-water from major
mountain ranges" (A/64/350, para. 34).

That process has already affected the Central Asian
region. For example, the supply of fresh water from the
glaciers of Kyrgyzstan, estimated at 650 billion cubic
metres, has rapidly decreased due to the reduction of
the glacier surface area by 20 per cent over the past 30
years. In 20 years it may well decline by another 35 per
cent. As a result, we may face a critical shortage of
fresh water, along with negative consequences for
peace and security.

According to the preliminary forecast of the
second national communication of Kyrgyzstan to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, our glaciers may totally disappear by 2100.
Such a situation requires not only the development of
effective inter- and intra-State water use and allocation
measures, but also the implementation of special
projects on forest conservation, the prevention of
natural hazards and the production of environmentally
friendly renewable energy sources, including
hydropower, which has no negative environmental
impact.

The significant increase in natural disasters in
many regions of the world, including Africa and some
countries of Asia and Central Asia, is another indicator
of the negative impact of global climate change. For
instance, in the past 10 years the number of natural
disasters in Kyrgyzstan has increased from 60 in 2000
to 420 in 2010. Experts estimate that disasters will
continue to increase in terms of both quantity and
destructive effects. This problem is of particular
concern in view of the transboundary threat posed by
uranium tailings located in Kyrgyzstan and in other
Central Asian countries.

Kyrgyzstan believes that these problems must be
taken into account in implementing conflict prevention,
crisis management, peacebuilding and post-conflict

 

stabilization measures. Kyrgyzstan considers it
necessary to design regional systems to monitor, assess
and respond to the negative effects of climate change
in terms of peace and security while bearing in mind
regional specificities. An important component of these
actions must be the timely identification and
appropriate inclusion of these matters before the
corresponding organs and agencies of the United
Nations system so that necessary steps may be taken.
With respect to our region, we believe that the activity
in this domain of the Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, in cooperation with
relevant United Nations agencies and organs, should be
increased.

Special attention is needed on the effective
implementation of country programmes and projects,
particularly on those aimed at environmental protection
or strengthening capacities of the most vulnerable
countries to tackle emergency situations. In this regard,
we hope that the role of the United Nations
Development Programme in coordinating these issues
and developing appropriate plans and strategies will be
further enhanced.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Kyrgyzstan is firmly committed to the international
agreements on climate change, including the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol. In this regard, we support the
adoption of all significant commitments to reduce
emissions of greenhouse gases before 2012. We also
consider it important to ensure the implementation of
the Agreements reached in Cancun in 2010 related to
assisting developing countries in formulating and
implementing national adaptation plans.
