Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President,
allow me to commend you for holding this timely
open debate on the critical issue of children in armed
conflict, with particular emphasis on child victims of
non-State armed groups.

We welcome and thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks, and we equally thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt;
the Child Protection Advisor of Save the Children,
Ms. Julie Bodin; and Mr. Junior Nzita Nsuami, ex-
soldier. We thank him in particular for coming and
sharing his experience, one lived under very difficult
circumstances, with the Council. It is important that he
is here and that he speak directly to the international
community.

Current armed conflicts have an undue impact
on children. Indiscriminate attacks targeting civilians
and terrorist tactics have troublesome consequences
on children, as stated in the latest special report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339). In Syria, for instance, the hostilities
have led to widespread abuses against children. In the
Central African Republic, the recruitment and use of
children has become endemic. The resumption of the
conflict in South Sudan has led to egregious violations
of children's rights. Those are just a few examples of
the troublesome realities of the past year.

The challenging character and tactics used in armed
conflict pose even more serious threats to children. The
deliberate targeting and military use of schools, the
indoctrination of children to commit despicable crimes,
their use to carry explosive devices and their abduction,
sexual abuse, forced recruitment, murder, rape, killing
and deliberate maiming are examples of violence and
abuse committed by extremist groups against children
such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) and others.

This open debate marks the first anniversary of
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, which was
launched by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougi and UNICEF, which is finding
success in mobilizing high-level political commitment
in support of its objective to end the recruitment
and use of children by Government security forces
by 2016. However, the vast majority of parties listed
in the most recent annual report (S/2014/339) are
non-State armed groups operating in 15 areas, which
highlights the timeliness of our debate this morning. In
fact, the recruitment and use of children by non-State
armed groups continues to be a serious violation of
international and human rights law and entails long-
term consequences for children exposed to huge
violence. Its persistence is a stark reminder that the
progress achieved thus far should be measured not only
by improvements in the normative framework, but also
in the way that the international community and the
Security Council in particular implement decisions in
specific contexts.

The United Nations endorses efforts to identify
concrete commitments that translate into action and
measures to engage with armed groups in order to
attain action plans to put an end to the recruitment and
use of children as soldiers.

At this point, we would like to share the experience
of Angola in relation to this issue in the aftermath of
the painful civil strife endured by my country for many
years, which had visible repercussions for the Angolan
population and children in particular. According
to a World Bank report, Angola's demobilization
process was one of the most extensive in the history
of the United Nations, and the United Nations was
instrumental in the formulation and implementation
of that programme. It was perhaps the first time that
the issue of child soldiers was specifically included
in the provisions of a peace process. The children's
demobilization and integration was declared a priority
in the first resolution adopted by the commission set up
to implement the peace agreement. A comprehensive
prevention, demobilization and reintegration
programme was developed, taking into account the
specific needs and rights of children, including girls
and the disabled, and based on emphasizing three main
pillars: family reunification, psychological support and
education and economic opportunity, including family
livelihood needs.

The legal framework adopted in that context
recognized the principles of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and providing for the minimum
age for military service, which was set at the age
of 18. As a measure to prevent re-recruitment, all
underage soldiers were granted an availability status
that guarantees their full exemption from future
military service. It was based on our experience that
we supported the incorporation, in the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding process, of specific commitments
related to child protection by providing opportunities
for the rapid release of children from armed forces and
non-State armed groups and their social reintegration.
The year 2014 was marked by the high-profile mass
abductions of children perpetrated by several terrorist
groups, including the 14 April abduction of 276
schoolgirls in Nigeria by Boko Haram, the abduction of
153 Kurdish boys in Syria and the abduction of hundreds
of Yazidi children in western Iraq, both by ISIS. We
strongly condemn the mass abduction of children by
non-State armed groups and terrorists, including Boko
Haram, ISIS and groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Central African Republic and Yemen,
among others. We call for the immediate release of all
abducted children.

We call for an expansion of the listing criteria laid
out in resolution 1612 (2005) to include abduction as an
additional cause to be covered by the United Nations
monitoring and reporting mechanisms on children
in armed conflict, thus ensuring that the responsible
parties are identified and held accountable. We
recognize that United Nations peace operations play
a vital role in the protection of children and should
require adequate training for the fulfilment of such a
critical duty. Peacekeeping operations should establish
a mandatory predeployment requirement for children
protection training for all troop-contributing countries
in order to make a crucial difference in the way they
address the challenges posed by the protection of
children.

In order to protect children from armed groups, it is
critically important that armed groups be impeded from
acquiring arms and weapons. The illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons resulting in the killing, injury
and maiming of children should be taken into account.
The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted by the General
Assembly in April 2013, is an important instrument for
arms control. It stipulates that exporting State parties
shall take into account the risk of trafficked weapons
that can be used in acts of violence against children.
We therefore encourage Member States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and to
adopt and implement legal measures to prohibit and
criminalize the use and recruitment of children under
the age of 18.

To conclude, with the impending tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and of
the various relevant commitments, principles and
guidelines on children associated with armed
conflict and armed groups and on their disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, we hope that more
States will support the various commitments and
principles and that more resources will be allocated by
the international community and concerned States to
ensure that such victimized children are reintegrated
into their communities.

