Mr. Biflrn Lian (Norway): In the Council debate
last Monday, I had the opportunity to express the deep
concern of the Norwegian Government with regard to the
critical and fragile state of the peace process in the
Middle East, and to urge the parties involved in the use
of force in southern Lebanon and northern Israel to stop
the spiral of violence. It is with profound regret that we
have witnessed today the tragic results of a lack of will to
exercise such restraint.

The people and the Government of Norway are
shocked by today's shelling by the Israeli Defence Forces
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
position at Qaana in southern Lebanon and by other
recent Israeli actions, and we deeply deplore the heavy
losses of civilian lives and the immense human suffering
that have resulted from these actions. These actions are
totally unacceptable and are out of proportion to the
attacks by Hezbollah against targets in Israel. This
escalation of the conflict can only serve the purposes of
those who oppose peace in the region.

Norway is currently the most important contributor
of troops to UNIFIL. We strongly deplore the casualties
suffered by the Fijian contingent. It is totally unacceptable
to put United Nations personnel at risk through actions of
the kind we have witnessed today, and earlier during the
recent actions. We demand that Hezbollah put a stop to
its well-known and cynical practice of establishing
positions close to civilian or United Nations installations,
and we demand that the Israeli authorities take every
necessary step to prevent shelling of United Nations and
civilian targets.

The seriousness of the situation should be clear to
everyone. We urge both Israel and Hezbollah to cease

 

immediately all military activities in southern Lebanon and
northern Israel and to conclude a cease-fire. We strongly
support the ongoing diplomatic efforts undertaken to this
end by the United States, France and Italy, on behalf of the
European Union.

It is against this background that I welcome and
support the resolution adopted unanimously by the Security
Council this evening.

