Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset, on behalf of my delegation, to
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important debate on an issue that remains a major
concern of the international community. We also wish
to thank Ambassador Sergio Duarte, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for his
important briefing this morning.

Collective security is the basic concept that
guided the founders of the United Nations when they
created the Organization. Accordingly, it represents the
major objective towards which all United Nations
activities are directed.

It has been only three years since the 2005 World
Summit, at which the Secretary-General issued his
report, largely inspired by the recommendations of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change,
which he himself had established in 2003 to take an
in-depth look at ways to adapt the United Nations
system to the needs of the twenty-first century and to
predict new threats to collective security.

Since then, it has been agreed that such threats,
which undermine collective security, also include intra-
and inter-State conflicts, terrorism, organized crime,
weapons of mass destruction, poverty, deadly
epidemics and climate change. All those threats
jeopardize human survival and undermine the stability
and security of States.

Based on the report of the Secretary-General, the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) placed collective security at the heart
of the interdependent triad of development, security
and human rights. That triad reflects the intertwining of
diverse threats whose assuredly indiscriminate effects
are felt in all regions throughout the world. The
equation is simple: address all those ills with equal
effectiveness, without any discrimination, and deal
with each threat in the same way as the others, because
it has been well established that threats transcend
borders and that their effects are universal.

One of those recurrent threats is, of course, the
outbreak of intra- or inter-State conflicts, whose
sporadic effects on stability in subregions, regions and
even continents are immediate. How, then, can we put
an end to conflicts that continue to break out? How can
we prevent countries emerging from conflicts from
relapsing into them?

The participants in the 2005 World Summit
provided an innovative answer when they decided to
establish the Peacebuilding Commission, thus filling a
fundamental gap in the institutional structure of the
United Nations in order to help countries make a
successful transition from war to lasting peace. Since
the Commission's establishment, its work has proved
arduous and requires the mobilization of increased
resources in order to assist in the implementation of
integrated peacebuilding strategies. In other words, the
commitment of partners, regional and international
institutions, donors and countries that are in a position
to do so must be systematic, constant and concrete.

However, all our peacebuilding efforts would not
be complete without effective control of the illicit trade
in weapons, which continue to circulate and jeopardize
peace processes. How can we aspire to peace, given the
excessive accumulation of weapons whose destructive
effects continue to undermine all peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development efforts? How can we
justify financing the weapons trade through mining, oil
and other resources when they should finance the needs
of populations?

In that regard, significant efforts and real political
will must be deployed to achieve the consolidation and
implementation of the existing legal instruments in this
area and, if necessary, to establish new legal rules, in
particular to regulate the transfer and brokering of
conventional weapons in order to control their
circulation.

But the danger of small arms and light weapons is
not our only cause for concern. The existence of
weapons of mass destruction is a perpetual high-risk
threat that continues to hang over the future of the
world. Undoubtedly, the universality of a treaty as
important as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, a cornerstone of disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation, serves the common objective
of collective security. Collective security requires the
renunciation of proliferation and a commitment to total
and complete disarmament, without which the risk of
the acquisition of such weapons by non-State actors is
very plausible.

Indeed, collective security is a two-sided coin:
one side is non-proliferation, and the other is
disarmament. Our world deserves such security, and if
we are to achieve it, both of those requirements must
be met.

Article 26 of the United Nations Charter requires
the Security Council to play a proactive role not only
in peacekeeping itself, but also in promoting it by
drawing up plans to be submitted to Members of the
Organization with a view to establishing a system for
the regulation of armaments. In the same spirit, in its
resolution 41 (1) of 14 December 1946, the General
Assembly also reaffirmed that obligation of the
Council by recommending that the latter formulate
practical measures for the regulation and reduction of
armaments.

To date, the Security Council has taken no action
in that regard, which to a certain extent has encouraged

States to increase their military spending, to the
detriment of their development needs. It has also
fostered major black markets in weapons in the
absence of control and regulation. In 2006, a small
group of States, including Morocco, concerned by the
harmful effects of armed violence in poor countries
affected by conflict, adopted the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development, which identified
a close correlation between those two antithetical
notions whereby a reduction in armed violence fosters
sustainable development.

The States that signed the Declaration are
committed to stepping up their efforts to integrate the
reduction of armed violence into their national,
regional and international development strategies and
their humanitarian assistance and crisis management
initiatives. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly on 17 November of
resolution 63/23 on promoting development through
the reduction and prevention of armed violence.

Arms limitation is important, but not sufficient in
and of itself. The key is human, economic and social
development. The key is in the consolidation of States"
cooperation and international assistance for
development.

Human development must supersede armament.
We must focus our action on that profitable market
instead of on military expenditures, which some States
have made their primary objective. Human
development must allow us to emerge from poverty
and destitution. It must have the human individual at
its heart and strive for the full flourishing of human
beings and their development. The quest for a better
life is eternal and, as Aristotle said so well, every
social organization must be evaluated on the basis of
its contribution to humankind. That is precisely the
philosophy underlying the human development
initiative launched in 2005 by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI of Morocco.

