The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly-
Niagri (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2005/768, containing the text of
a letter dated 8 December 2005 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Charles Konan Banny as
Prime Minister of cote d'Ivoire, and expresses its
full support for him. It also commends the
continued and decisive efforts of Presidents
Olusegun Obasanjo, Thabo Mbeki and Mamadou
Tandja, and reiterates its full support for them.

"The Security Council endorses the final
communique of the International Working Group
(IWG) of 6 December 2005. It recalls the IWG's
previous final communique' of 8 November which
stated in particular that the fundamental basis of
the peace and national reconciliation process is
enshrined in resolution 1633 (2005) and that the
IWG will provide all necessary support to the
new Prime Minister and the Government that he
the

will establish. The Council also reaffirms its
support for the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, which stresses that
the Ministers shall be accountable to the Prime
Minister who shall have full authority over his
Cabinet.

"The Security Council recalls and reaffirms
that the Prime Minister must have all the
necessary powers and resources described in
resolution 1633 (2005), and stresses the
importance of the full implementation of this
resolution by the Ivorian parties under the
monitoring of the IWG. Therefore, the Security
Council urges the establishment without delay of
the Government so that the Prime Minister can
implement as soon as possible the road map
defined by the IWG, and requests the Mediation
Group and the IWG to monitor this matter
closely.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the High Representative
for the elections."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/60.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.

