Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Baroness Ashton, High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU), for her insightful comments and analysis of some
current global security challenges. Nigeria lauds the
depth of the EU's work in regional security issues
around the world. We firmly believe that vigorous
action is needed to curb the threats to global security.
Accordingly, we look forward to the enhanced security
that the External Action Service will bring to EU
missions worldwide.

Second only to natural disasters, the challenges of
governance pose grave security risks to local
populations. Humanitarian aid is an essential support
for countries facing crises to develop robust and
participatory governance institutions. In turn, political
stability and properly functioning democratic
institutions are prerequisites for the reconstruction and
development of distressed communities. We therefore
commend the EU for its work in Haiti, the Sudan, Cote
d'Ivoire and elsewhere. The depth of its involvement in
these countries illustrates its understanding of the
relationship between security, development and
humanitarian aid.

With respect to Haiti, like the EU, we support a
transparent and legitimate electoral process and the
implementation of the postponed second-round
presidential elections. Indeed, we salute the work done
by the Organization of American States verification
mission to evaluate the presidential elections in Haiti.
We consider this to be an important step to maintain
and strengthen the confidence of the Haitian people in
the electoral process.
11-22784
Nigeria commends the international community,
especially humanitarian actors, for the support given to
Haiti in the wake of the devastating earthquake and
cholera outbreak. Strengthening the capacity of the
Government and national institutions to engage in the
tasks of reconstruction is an overriding long-term
challenge, to which we must remain fully committed.

In reviewing the Southern Sudan referendum, the
commendable role played by the EU cannot be
overlooked. Through financial support, monitoring
activities and partnership with the Secretary-General's
high-level monitoring panel, the EU contributed
significantly to the outcome of the referendum. We are
pleased that the EU is prepared to provide long-term
support for addressing the political and economic
challenges facing both Northern and Southern Sudan.

We welcome the EU's firm and clear support for
the decisions in favour of democracy taken by the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union. Now more than ever, a concerted
international response is required to overcome the
crisis situation in Cote d'Ivoire. EU support therefore
remains very necessary.

We also welcome the important role the EU
continues to play in efforts to find a lasting solution to
the Middle East crisis. Its commitment expressed at the
5 February Quartet meeting in Munich, Germany, to set
up an engagement in the peace process is
commendable. It is hoped that the next meeting,
scheduled to take place on the margins of the Group of
Eight Foreign Ministers' meeting, will add impetus to
this process.

On partnership in general, the vitality of the
partnership between the EU and the African Union is
evident, not only in the work of the EU in the Sudan,
but also in Operation Atalanta, a multilateral task force
off the coast of Somalia. These efforts reveal that
partnerships are an effective means of employing
global resources to combat regional security risks. We
therefore call for sustained dialogue between the EU
and African regional and subregional organizations,
and enhanced support for regional peace and security
architecture, post-conflict strategies and peacebuilding
efforts.

In closing, Nigeria shares the conviction that, if it
is to respond successfully to global crises, challenges
and threats, the international community needs an
efficient multilateral system founded on universal
11-22784
rights and values. Through partnerships, humanitarian
aid and financial support, the EU has demonstrated the
impact that multilateral partnerships can have on our
collective search for lasting peace.

