Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Morocco voted in favour of draft resolution S/2012/538
because it was in line with the recent resolutions of the
League of Arab States and our perception of the situation
in Syria, which shows quite clearly that no mechanism
adopted by the Council to address the crisis has had the
hoped-for result and that the parties in Syria have not
complied with the plan, including the complete cessation
of violence, to which they committed themselves. The
number of victims continues to grow, and the violence
has reached an unprecedented level.

We voted in favour of the draft resolution because
it endorsed the final communique of the Action Group
for Syria adopted in Geneva last month, which laid out
the main principles for ensuring a successful political
transition in Syria. In our views, the ideas contained
therein are in line with the political transition advocated
by the Arab League. We also voted in favour because
we support the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy and
seek a genuine cessation of violence.

Given the fact that the Council was unable to
adopt a strong resolution, all that we can do is to voice
our disappointment over such a result, whose only
loser is the brotherly Syrian people and the region to
which it belongs. Up until the final moment, including
during last week's intensive negotiations, we remained
hopeful that we would achieve consensus among all
Council members around a common vision of the plan
to be adopted to effectively address a crisis that has
continued to intensify in Syria and that has now lasted
more than 16 months. We had hoped that the Council
would remain united after adopting resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012), which laid the foundations
for pragmatic action to tackle all aspects of the crisis
in Syria. Morocco is convinced that the Council's
unified action remains a decisive factor in ensuring the
international community's successful achievement of a
timely solution to the crisis in Syria.
From the very outset, the League of Arab States has
worked with the Council to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis in Syria. It is convinced that the parties alone
will not be able to end the violence or to pursue dialogue.
The violence and the number of Syrian victims have
reached a level that prevents the parties from tackling
the Syrian crisis through existing mechanisms.

For that reason, the Arab League has urged the
Security Council to take strict measures that would
enable the Council to work within the framework of
Chapter VII of the Charter in order to put an end to
the growing violence in Syria, ensure that all members
shoulder their responsibilities, and create a climate
conducive to dialogue.

In his discussion with members of the Security
Council, the Secretary General of the League of Arab
States emphasized that the scope of the measures in no
way included military intervention. On that basis and
in view of its responsibilities within the framework of
the League of Arab States, Morocco has worked with
other members of the Council to elaborate a strategic
vision aimed at a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria
by re-establishing existing mechanisms, including the
six-point plan that served as our main reference for such
a solution. It included, of course, the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS).

The Council and countries that contributed to
UNSMIS were aware of the fact that the dispatch of
observers to Syria was somewhat different from other
missions. But Morocco chose to support the international
effort to find a peaceful solution to the crisis, including
after the acceptance of the six-point plan by all parties,
whose first demand was the complete cessation of
violence and the relaunching of the political process
to enable the Syrian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations.

To conclude, I wish to reiterate our firm conviction
of the need to continue our common, joint work on
restoring unity in the Council. What unites its members
is their Charter responsibility and its imperative to
prevail over differences of opinion.

We are heartbroken over the suffering of the people
in sisterly Syria. A credible solution that restores hope
and faith to the people of Syria is necessary to ensure
their understanding that the crisis will end and that
their aspirations will be fulfilled with the support of
the Council.

