Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia has been closely following the process of
a settlement in Haiti. We support the efforts of the legally
elected President, Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and of the
Government of Haiti to restore normalcy, constitutional
legality and democratic institutions in that country. We
note that as a result of the operations of the Multinational
Force in Haiti considerable success has now been
achieved in normalizing the situation and in creating a
secure and stable climate, in keeping with the provisions
of resolution 940 (1994). As has been confirmed by
international observers there and observers from human
rights organizations, an end has now been put to political
violence; gross violations of human rights have virtually
ceased; and the rate of common crime has dropped
somewhat. The situation in Haiti no longer poses a threat
to peace and security.

Yet it is clearly premature to assert that this trend is
irreversible. Obviously, creating stability, particularly
long-term stability, is related first and foremost to certain
social and economic factors and will require considerable
assistance from the international community to the people
of Haiti.

Both with respect to Haiti and in a broader context,
our approach to the matter of United Nations peace-
keeping operations was recently set out during the
Council's discussion of the Secretary-General's
Supplement to the Agenda for Peace. Specifically, we
consider that there must be a substantive discussion of
what the real requirements for United Nations peace-
keeping activities are and of what resources are needed to
meet those requirements. Every peace-keeping operation
is unique; the questions involved must be addressed in the
light of each specific situation. But we believe that a
single, clear-cut set of criteria should be fashioned for
launching and conducting such operations. This would
avoid double standards in the approach of the United
Nations and the division of conflicts into "priority" and
"secondary" conflicts.

We note that in the course of our work on the draft
resolution before the Council the sponsors accommodated
many of the ideas put forward by the Russian delegation.
While we continue to have certain concerns, to which we
referred during previous discussions, we consider that it
is possible to give the green light to the transition to the
United Nations phase of the operation. Here we are
guided by the essential desirability of strengthening and
expanding positive collaboration and cooperation within
the Security Council. We would expect our Council
partners to be guided by the same principles for the sake
of strengthening stability throughout the world.

 

