Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda to
the Council. As usual, we thank her for her work on the
ground and for her interesting briefing today.

The situation in the Sudan is undoubtedly very
worrisome. As the Prosecutor said, acts of violence
continue and dialogue between the relevant parties to the
conflict has come to a halt. The continued occurrence
of incidents of gender-based sexual violence, including
the rape of internally displaced women and girls, has
led to restrictions on their freedom of movement in
reception centres and areas of origin.

The courage and bravery of the Sudanese people
have been tested in recent months, leading to far-
reaching changes that will certainly change the history
of the Sudanese people. The people of the Sudan
long for justice, a fair trial and the prosecution of the
perpetrators of crimes. That will require a safe justice
system in which impunity is a thing of the past and
legal responsibility makes way for a new present and a
hopeful future for all victims of the terrible crimes that

took place during Al-Bashir's regime and, regrettably,
continue to occur.

To that end, the Sudanese authorities must recall
their international obligation to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court, as set out in resolution 1593
(2005). We therefore call on the Sudanese authorities to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor, beginning
by allowing their representatives access to Darfur in
order to conduct effective, impartial and independent
investigations. In addition, we encourage the authorities
to hand over criminals being prosecuted by the Court,
without prejudice to the principle of complementarity,
in particular if it proves impossible for them to be
granted a fair and impartial trial.

The Dominican Republic applauds the recent
decision of the Appeals Chamber, which establishes
that States have the obligation to arrest Heads of State
wanted by the Court, despite the immunity that their
office provides. Impunity is an evil that corrupts a
society's progress and can be eliminated only through
the prosecution of those responsible for criminal acts,
regardless of their functions or position. The time
has come for the people of the Sudan to move to new
leadership that bolsters respect for human rights and
the protection of civilians. There must be zero tolerance
for crimes committed against civilians and groups of
demonstrators, such as those that occurred during recent
events. The perpetrators must be brought to justice.

Lastly, we call on the members of the Council to
stand united in the struggle to alleviate the burdened
people of the Sudan. Let us foster cooperation and
encourage dialogue among the relevant actors. Let us
support the work of the Court, a strategic ally in our
common goal. The fight against impunity is key in the
maintenance of peace and security.

