Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his detailed briefing on the
humanitarian situation in several regions of Africa.

The real situation and the depth of crises in
Africa require us to look into the issue of increasing
humanitarian assistance. We pay tribute to the selfless
work of the United Nations humanitarian staff in very
difficult circumstances, in particular in Darfur and
elsewhere. However, of no less strategic importance is
the overall systemic approach that should allow us,
inter alia, to avoid the inequitable distribution of
humanitarian assistance on the continent and to put an
end to the phenomenon of so-called forgotten
emergency situations.

We believe that the situation should change in the
near future with the reorganization of the Central
Emergency Revolving Fund as the Central Emergency
Response Fund. The basic modalities of that
mechanism, as we all know, were established in a
resolution recently adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly. In particular, it provides for the
Fund's resources to be allocated to natural disaster
warning and to meet the obvious humanitarian needs of
countries in which the necessary time frame is
inadequate to mobilize resources for a consolidated
conventional inter-agency appeal.

The United Nations and the Security Council are
actively involved in Africa's problems. The
Organization, with its unique experience in settling
conflicts and in post-conflict recovery, can mobilize
the international community and various regional and
subregional machineries to achieve a comprehensive
solution to the problems of African countries. The
positive experience of increasingly fruitful cooperation
among the major United Nations organs, within their
mandates, is an important enhancing factor in that
regard. The forthcoming decision to establish a
peacebuilding commission will assuredly mark yet
another important step in that direction.

Russia welcomes the strengthening of the role of
African States in world policy and their efforts to settle
the remaining regional conflicts on the continent, to
promote economic and social development and to
reaffirm human rights and democracy. We understand
the magnitude of the problems facing Africa, and in
that connection we attach special significance to the
strengthening of the peacekeeping integration activities
of the African Union and African subregional
organizations. We note the fruitful results of the
African Union's intermediary efforts in settling
conflicts on the continent.

The world community's attention to African
problems must not abate. In the United Nations and
other international structures, Russia will in future
pursue a policy in keeping with the interests of the
States of the continent and continue to participate in
agreed measures for comprehensive assistance to
Africa, including through the Group of Eight and other
multilateral forums. We will continue to actively
support efforts to settle crises and to enhance Africa's
peacekeeping potential.
