Mr. Rock (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I would like first to thank you,
Madam, and the Government of Denmark, not only for
a very focused and productive presidency during a very
busy and challenging month, but also for having
brought us here today for this open discussion on a
matter of such significance.

Canada would also like to thank and acknowledge
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, not only for his
briefing today, but also for the consistent and
courageous leadership that he has shown on the issue
of the protection of civilians throughout his term of
office.

I know that the members of the Council are
aware, perhaps more than anyone else, that the
protection of civilians is not an abstract political or
legal concept. As members of the Council have seen
for themselves during their field visits, on any given
day in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or
Darfur, Colombia or Sri Lanka, Haiti or northern
Uganda, protection can mean a world of difference to
the men, women and children who are in need of it. It
can mean being able to venture beyond their
settlements to collect firewood without fear of sexual
assault by armed militia. It can mean children being
able to sleep with their families at night rather than
travelling miles to seek shelter to avoid forced
recruitment. It can mean that families can maintain
their livelihoods and property because they have not
become displaced or dispossessed. For those living in
occupied territories, it can mean that their rights under
international humanitarian law will be respected. For
those who want to shop or pray or simply go about
their daily business, it can mean that they will not be
deliberately targeted for terrorist attack.

The protection of civilians during and after armed
conflict is achieved through a set of actions - tangible
and practical. Some of those actions can be provided
by one's family and community. But critically, in so far
as the Council is concerned, legal and physical
protection must be ensured by one's State and, of
course, supplemented by the international community
as a whole. The Security Council's direct role in the
protection of civilians as part of its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security is
now well established. In this Chamber, Council
members have repeatedly pledged that they and the
wider international community will take steps to
improve civilian protection, as they did again this April
with resolution 1674 (2006). For its part, the
Government of Canada will continue to monitor the
implementation by the Council of its commitments,
including in country-specific contexts, and to support
work that enhances Council and wider international
efforts to respond appropriately to the needs of
civilians who may be at risk.

Canada welcomes the Council's intention stated
in resolution 1674 (2004), to give priority to civilian
protection components in multidimensional peace
operations, as well as the Council's strong statements
related to the need to address sexual and gender-based
violence. We were pleased indeed to see the
endorsement of the concept of the responsibility to
protect.

We would like to ensure that the Council
maintains its strong support for humanitarian access,
which has been a critical issue in northern Uganda,
Somalia and Darfur, and that the Council will consider
appropriate actions when such access is deliberately
obstructed. In addition, consistent with resolution 1296
(1999), we believe that efforts in relation to the
question of the security of camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons must not be limited only to
existing peacekeeping operations. That issue is proving
to be a key challenge in Chad, where the Council must
consider concretely what can and should be done to
address insecurity for the displaced in eastern Chad, as
it impacts on Darfur, and of course vice versa.
While resolution 1674 (2006) was welcome,
efforts to advance the subject must continue. Today,
Canada would like briefly to look forward and to
identify what might be the Council's next steps in
strengthening that protection.

First, there must be a more proactive response to
situations where civilians are at risk, including the use
of good offices, envoys, monitoring missions and
preventive deployments to act as a deterrent.

Secondly, there must be support for humanitarian
and human rights agencies through strong and
consistent Council resolutions and advocacy,
promoting compliance with international law and
helping to create an enabling environment.

Thirdly, the Council must continue its vital
periodic field visits so that it can raise civilian
protection issues in the very places where civilians are
struggling to survive. We welcome the emphasis placed
by the Council mission to the Sudan on the need for a
robust United Nations mandate for Darfur to protect
civilians in its discussions with the Government in
Khartoum.

Fourthly, there must be zero tolerance for
impunity as regards the implementation of Security
Council decisions. The Council should outline specific
actions, with time lines and benchmarks for parties to a
conflict, and then monitor their implementation, ready
to apply penalties when actions are not taken.

Fifthly, there must be strategic use of targeted
sanctions to deter attacks on civilians. There must also
be enforcement and monitoring of those measures
when they are employed.

Sixthly, we must develop criteria to guide the use
of force where diplomatic efforts do not prove
successful in preventing gross and systematic
violations of human rights and humanitarian law.

Lastly, until those criteria on the use of force are
adopted, the Council should focus on the design and
use of tailored and robust multidimensional mandates
for civilian protection where a physical international
presence is required, backed up by the necessary means
and capabilities and with follow-up on those mandates
once they are adopted and missions are in the field.

The key to the Council's success in acting early
on threats to civilians is its access to good data on what
is occurring on the ground. The Secretariat and
agencies in the field have a crucial role to play in
furnishing that evidence. Gathering it will be
facilitated by the welcome creation of the new standing

protection deployment mechanism by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and by the
completion, in the coming months, of a standardized
civilian protection monitoring and reporting
mechanism for use by country teams. Canada has been
pleased to contribute to both. Better information will
also assist with mission planning, an area where
continued improvements by the Secretariat are needed
and where cooperation between troop-contributing
countries, the United Nations and regional
organizations is key.

(spoke in French)

Member States, including those that are members
of the Security Council, must demonstrate their
willingness to ensure that populations at risk have
access at all times to the greatest protection possible,
that perpetrators of abuse are held accountable for their
actions and that rights advocacy, monitoring and
capacity-building become the watchwords of our
efforts. The circumstances in which the protection of
civilians must take place are complex and represent a
formidable challenge for the United Nations and
Governments, but one that can and must be met. The
words spoken in this Chamber alone will not make that
agenda a reality. Instead, concrete steps and the
willingness to make flexible and pragmatic use of all
the leverage available to us will enable us to meet our
responsibility to vulnerable people and groups. The
Security Council can count on Canada's support and
encouragement as we work together to respond to those
enormous challenges.

(spoke in English)

As I will be leaving my post to return to Canada
on Friday, this is the last opportunity on which I will
have the honour and privilege to address the Council.
May I say, in departing, how very much I have
appreciated these periodic opportunities to
communicate directly to the Council the views and
proposals that Canada wishes to put forward with
respect to the Council's vital work. Please, Madam
President, accept my expressions of gratitude and deep
respect, as well as my warmest best wishes to the
Council.

