Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): The six-month term of
the Interim Administration of Afghanistan is nearing
its end. The emergency loya jirga, to be convened in a
little over two weeks, will determine the shape of the
Transitional Authority that will assume power for the
coming two years. The political process in Afghanistan
is indeed at a critical stage.

At this important juncture, we are receiving
mixed signals from Afghanistan. While it is
encouraging that preparations for the loya jirga are
proceeding more or less as planned, small-scale armed
confrontations commonly occur in various parts of the
country, and there are signs that attempts at
intimidation may be affecting the loya jirga process
itself. This deeply worries my delegation.

The success of the emergency loya jirga must be
ensured. It must be conducted peacefully, and its
decisions must be respected by all. Only the Afghan
people can make this happen. Any attempt to
undermine the process could jeopardize the fragile
peace that is prevailing, however precariously, in
Afghanistan for the first time in over two decades.
Now more than ever, it is essential that the Afghans set
aside old differences and work together to establish a
balanced Transitional Authority that can lead the
country through the second phase of the Bonn process.

The international community must, of course, do
its part to support the convening of the loya jirga. As
Foreign Minister Kawaguchi announced prior to her
visit to Kabul earlier this month, Japan is providing
$2.7 million for equipment and transportation in order
to support the preparations for the loya jirga. In
addition, we are sending Japanese experts to assist in
the preparations for the loya jirga, and we will be
providing technical assistance and equipment to
broadcast the assembly via television throughout the
country.

All the planning and preparations will bear fruit
only if security is properly maintained. In this context,
we are pleased that the Council has decided to adopt a
resolution to extend the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) one month ahead of
schedule and before the loya jirga is convened. We
hope that this resolution will send to the people of
Afghanistan the strong message that the international
community will remain committed to assisting them in
their endeavours to maintain security during and after
the loya jirga.

At the same time, we would like to thank the
United Kingdom for the crucially important role it has
been playing as the lead nation of ISAF and Turkey for
its responsible decision to assume that role in the near
future.

Japan is determined to do its utmost to help the
Afghan people develop and maintain a secure
environment. Foreign Minister Kawaguchi indicated
during her visit to Kabul that Japan is considering
extending assistance for the reform of the civilian
police force, including the provision of wireless
communications equipment and vehicles, as well as the
rehabilitation of facilities. Japan has also decided to
make a contribution of $19 million for the clearance of
landmines and unexploded ordnance. In addition, Japan
is seriously looking into developing and implementing
appropriate projects to eradicate drugs and to build a
national counter-narcotic capacity in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we are committed to promoting the
reintegration of the hundreds of thousands of former
combatants and refugees. Towards that end, the
Japanese Government sent a team of Foreign Ministry
officials to Kabul last week to develop, in close
coordination with the Afghan Interim Administration
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), a large-scale reintegration
programme to provide alternative employment
opportunities for former combatants and refugees who
intend to take up peaceful livelihoods. We hope to
finalize this programme and begin its implementation
as soon as possible.

Furthermore, we are considering, in close
consultation with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the possibility of expanding the
UNDP recovery and Employment Afghanistan
Programme (REAP), which has so far provided 20,000
labour-intensive jobs in Kabul and has been
instrumental in reactivating the community by
recovering basic infrastructure and basic living
conditions. It is Japan's conviction that an expansion of
this project to other cities, such as Kandahar, would
contribute to ensuring security beyond Kabul.

While the maintenance of security is
fundamental, efforts for the recovery and
reconstruction of Afghanistan must also proceed
without delay. We have always understood these efforts
to be a necessary complement to the political process.
Indeed, if we look back over the history of events these
past seven months, significant progress on the political
front has always been accompanied by genuine
progress toward reconstruction.

That trend must continue. And once the Afghan
people deliver a successful loya jirga and a viable
Transitional Authority, the international community
must respond by accelerating the implementation of
assistance projects. Japan, for its part, is determined to
continue playing a central role in that joint endeavour.

In March, when I had the opportunity to speak
before the Council on this same issue, I called on the
people of Afghanistan to continue their efforts to
produce concrete results on both the political and the
reconstruction fronts. Now, with less than one month
left before the loya jirga, I reiterate my appeal. This is
truly a time when the Afghan people's resolve to
achieve genuine peace is being tested. The
international community, including Japan, will
continue to stand by them as they work to build a
peaceful and prosperous country.

