Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom fully associates itself with the
statement soon to be made by the Dutch Ambassador
on behalf of the European Union and the acceding
States.

As recent events have shown, the threat of
terrorist attack is ever present. The United Kingdom
Government has already offered its condolences to the
people of Russia and Indonesia. Such attacks underline
again the need for the international community to do
everything possible to prevent future attacks. That is
why the briefing of Ambassador Munoz today is so
important, as is his personal commitment and efforts
on behalf of the Committee. His visits to Member
States have been particularly important. They provided
opportunities to discuss the importance of sanctions, to
promote the work of the Committee and to find out
how sanctions are being implemented at an operational
level. This has been key to raising the international
profile of the sanctions and the work of the Committee.
Ambassador Mufioz will have the fullest support of the
United Kingdom.

I welcome the Al Qaeda and Taliban Monitoring
Team's report which identifies the changing nature of
the threat from Al Qaeda and the Taliban. That report
has inspired the Committee, both by making practical
recommendations on implementation and by providing
new insights into issues which have proved contentious
for the Committee in the past. We cannot shy away
from such issues and the Monitoring Team's report and
recommendations have already stimulated discussion
and provided a basis on which to focus debate. We
must move that discussion forward now. The United
Kingdom fully supports the future activities supported
by the Chairman of the Committee.

I would like to touch on two points which seem
particularly key to the success of the sanctions and of
the Committee. First, here is the Consolidated List. It
is not a List for use by the Security Council or the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee alone. The
List belongs to each and every Member State. Every
State must be encouraged to take ownership of that
List. One of the most important ways to do so is by
submitting names for inclusion on that List, where
there are names that should be provided.

It may be, as the Chairman has inferred, that
some States have refrained from submitting names
because they are unsure how to do so, or they believe
there is a stigma attached to admitting that there may
be Al Qaeda or Taliban associates in their country. But
as Ambassador Munoz argued, we should all do
everything possible to combat that perception. The
threat from Al Qaeda is common to many States, and
submitting names of its associates demonstrates a
State's clear mutual commitment to fighting terrorism.

Secondly, I would like to speak broadly about
cooperation, whether between States to facilitate
implementation between regional organizations or
experts, or on a national domestic level. Cooperation is
crucial to the success of the sanctions and the fight
against terrorism. Therefore, the recommendations of
the Al Qaeda Committee and the Monitoring Team are
very welcome, but there should be closer cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
executive directorate. In particular, I welcome the way
Ambassador Mufioz emphasized that point. The work
of the sister committees are key priorities which merit
the substantial consideration of the Council. Each has
much to gain from the other.

Another welcome recommendation from the
Monitoring Team is that information on the list should
be shared with national intelligence agencies and
financial institutions - partners in our effort to combat

terrorism and crucial to ensuring our rapid reaction to
new entries on the List. We tried to do this in the
United Kingdom and the value seems evident. Recent
statistics show us that the information drawn from the
Consolidated List and placed on the Bank of England's
web site is now getting something on the order of
50,000 hits per month. Sharing such information is
pivotal.

Today's discussion is another stage in the
international community's response to the fight against
terrorism. Much is being achieved, but the lessons of
recent events underline the need for us all to redouble
our efforts. Protection against the scourge of terrorism
in all its aspects is one of the key challenges for the
United Nations and all its Member States, as well as
for all the other regional organizations that also have
vital contributions to make. We have to live up to that
challenge.

