Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
subject of great concern. I take the opportunity of this
debate to reaffirm Gabon's commitment to work in this
area. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579)
and the briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Mr. Yves Daccord - and I welcome their clarity -
show unambiguously that the situation remains
alarming. Of course, I share their views.

In spite of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and
resolutions 1894 (2009), 1888 (2009) and 1674 (2006),
warring forces continue to attack civilians. Whatever
the continent or the country, armed conflicts are
invariably accompanied by massive violations of
human rights, barbaric acts, particularly against women
and children, and death and displacement among
populations. This situation is unacceptable in human
terms.

The Council's debates on this subject are of great
importance to Gabon, as they allow us to evaluate
progress made in our efforts to strengthen the regime
for the protection of civilians. My delegation would
like to highlight three points: the progress made; the
shortcomings that have been noted on the ground and
prospects.

The progress made relates mainly to the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. During previous meetings
on the agenda item under consideration, the Council
has acknowledged the need to include a strong civilian
protection dimension in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In the light of the scale of the task in the
host countries, the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and,
above all, the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
symbolize the challenges faced by the United Nations
in this area.

With respect to MONUC, solutions were
attempted in the framework of resolution 1856 (2008),
but they were unable to put an end to the abuse against
civilian populations. The reconfiguration of MONUC
and its transformation into the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) made it possible
to take into account in MONUSCO's mandate the
commitments set out in resolution 1894 (2009).

Pursuant to resolution 1925 (2010), the mandate
of MONUSCO now attaches primary importance to the
protection of civilians. In that framework, United
Nations police, which are one of the components of
MONUSCO, have now become involved in training
Congolese police officers. It is also in that framework
that the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and MONUSCO forces have organized joint
patrols to ensure the protection of civilians in the
province of Haut-Uele, in the eastern part of the
country.

The adoption of resolution 1923 (2010), which
extended MINURCAT's mandate until 31 December,
also addressed the demand for the protection of
civilians. Concerned by the effects of violence in
Darfur on the humanitarian situation and security in
eastern Chad and in north-eastern Central African
Republic, the Council wanted to ensure that
MINURCAT would continue to grant particular
attention to the protection of civilians, including
refugees, displaced persons and humanitarian workers.

Clearly, in Chad, MINURCAT's mandate made it
possible to help strengthen assistance to the
Detachement Integre de Securite (DIS), whose mission
is specifically to protect civilians and humanitarian
workers. Nevertheless, MINURCAT's drawdown will
be complete by the end of this year. In order to enable
the DIS to continue to play its role effectively, it seems
essential that it should benefit from all of the
operational camps left behind by MINURCAT. Gabon
urges the Council to include that element in the
framework of its support to the DIS continuity plan.

This progress is tenuous and should in no way
mask the shortcomings highlighted by reality on the
ground. The massacres carried out against civilian
populations, particularly women and children, between
30 July and 3 August in Walikale, not far from a
MONUSCO base, are terrible and intolerable. Beyond
Walikale, women continue to be subjected to rape in
the most humiliating conditions. Moreover, following
the examples of the Lord's Resistance Army and the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda,
warring forces regularly attack villages, and even
refugee camps, killing civilians and recruiting children
with impunity.

Given these continued abuses, the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts remains an enormous task
that is difficult to carry out. Although it is true that
through its Operation Shop Window MONUSCO was
able to restore calm in the east of the country after the
events of Walikale, there is reason to question its
ability fully to carry out its mission to protection
civilians. The area it must cover, although limited to
the region of the Kivus, is too vast. It is larger than
Afghanistan, and the difficulties related to
infrastructure seem insurmountable. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
MINURCAT in the Central African Republic, to cite
just two examples, are also facing the same challenges.
The problem, therefore, is twofold: first, the ability of
peacekeeping operations to adapt to their environment
and, secondly, ensuring that the resources made
available to them match the missions they are given.
Gabon invites the Council to continue its reflection on
those two issues.

The fight against impunity is another area where
there are clear shortcomings and where Governments
should work harder to avoid giving legitimacy to the
crimes that are committed. It is true that, in some
places, timid initiatives have been taken and, in many
countries weakened by crisis, the rule of law is still in
its early stages. However, it is crucial to ensure that the
perpetrators of abuses against civilians are held
accountable for their crimes before national
jurisdictions and, in the case of the failure of national
jurisdictions, the creation of ad hoc and mixed
tribunals is essential.

We should recall that the primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians belongs to States.
Therefore, it seems to us essential to strengthen their
capabilities in order to enable them to better respond to
that obligation. We must help them to reform their
security and defence sectors; we must help them to
establish the rule of law and re-establish their
administrative structures; and we must help them to
undertake large-scale programmes against poverty and
corruption. We are convinced that the protection of
civilians can only be effective if States have reliable
institutions, a stable republican army and police force
and adequate financial resources.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
United Nations will establish mechanisms for
evaluation, which could help improve States'
performance in the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. The presidential statement that we will adopt
and which was drawn up by your delegation reflects
our commitment to work along these lines.

