Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and assuring you of my
delegation's full support. I also thank Ambassador Puri
and his entire delegation for their excellent presidency
in November.
I thank Mr. Benomar, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, for his briefing on the situation in
Yemen. I welcome the first anniversary on 23 November
of the signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative, which paved the way to a peaceful political
transition in Yemen. The Secretary-General travelled to
Yemen on that occasion to demonstrate the support of
the international community to the transition in Yemen.

France reiterates its full support to President
Mansour and to the Yemeni Government in their efforts
to implement an orderly political transition that meets
the aspirations of the Yemeni people. The transition
in Yemen is exemplary, primarily because of the
commitment of the Yemenis themselves. It shows that,
in situations of overt crisis, the implementation of an
orderly, peaceful and democratic transition is possible.

The Yemenis have made considerable progress in
implementing resolution 2014 (2011). The formation of
a Government of National Unity, the beginning of the
restructuring of the armed forces and the successful
holding of presidential elections are all milestones in
the completion of the first phase of the transition. The
voter turnout in the presidential elections far exceeded
the most optimistic estimates and demonstrated that
the people of Yemen, in particular youth and women,
support the transition mechanism and thereby sought to
take ownership of it.

In order to consolidate the second phase of the
transition, it is now urgent to achieve progress in three
areas.

First is the launching of the National Dialogue,
which must provide an opportunity for all stakeholders
in Yemen, in particular youth and civil society, to
collectively draft a new social contract and achieve
national reconciliation. We welcome the agreement
reached on the distribution of groups within the
preparatory committee of the National Dialogue
Conference. In this respect, we welcome the work
undertaken by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General and by the ambassadors of the 10 countries
that are guarantors of the transition. We call on all
Yemeni parties to implement the National Dialogue
in a transparent and balanced way and to include all
stakeholders in accordance with the timetable for the
transition.

With the other sponsor countries of the Gulf
initiative, France will provide any legal expertise that
is requested of it, when the time comes, to support
the members of the National Dialogue as they explore
the possible outlines of a future constitution. We also
welcome the mandate issued by the Yemeni Parliament
to President Mansour to appoint a new electoral
commission, and we encourage the rapid progress made
on efforts to hold a referendum on the constitution in
2013 and national elections in early 2014.

Secondly, the Yemeni authorities must give
particular attention to the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. The resolution of the
humanitarian crisis is crucial to stabilizing the country
and to its subsequent economic recovery. Given the
magnitude of the needs, we welcome the results of
the donors' meeting in Riyadh and the meeting of the
Friends of Yemen in New York, which raised nearly
$8 billion through 2014.

In the confident wager that we are all making on
the future of Yemen, France has a particular place.
With an cumulative amount of $4.5 billion in economic
investments, it is the leading investor in Yemen. France
wishes to maintain its commitment to the country
through its projects, which are aimed in particular
at developing the electricity sector. Concessional
assistance ofmore than $80 million will finance both the
provision of electricity to rural areas and the regulated
distribution of electricity throughout the country. The
effective implementation of these projects, however,
still hinges on an appropriate security framework.
These actions are in keeping with the framework of
broader cooperation, which ranges from training to
security and includes humanitarian and food assistance.

The third priority is restructuring the security and
defence forces. France reiterates its firm condemnation
of all acts of terrorism, regardless of their justification.
In this regard, the Yemeni Government needs to
allocate the appropriate resources to protect industrial
installations, as their repeated sabotage is denying
the country the use of its own resources and deterring
investors. The security of airports and maritime ports,
two areas that are targeted by terrorists, also remains
a major challenge to the economic development of the
country.

The Security Council and the United Nations must
remain fully committed to the Yemenis. The transition
in Yemen has been a success for the Council. Through
its resolution 2014 (2011), the Council played a decisive
role with respect to a peaceful political transition in
Yemen and in keeping with the expectations of the
people of Yemen. If they remain fully committed to the

salutary path they have chosen, Yemenis can count on
the assistance of the Council as they consolidate their
transition.
However, we are particularly concerned by the
actions and statements of certain players that could
disturb, delay or destabilize the political transition. We
remind them that, in resolution 2051 (2012) of 12 June,
the Council underscored its determination to support
the transition in Yemen, including by expressing its
readiness to consider further measures, including under
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter, if such actions
continue. My country and the Council continue to stand
with the Yemenis in this historic transition, thereby
confirming our support to the legitimate democratic
aspirations that currently abound in the region.

