I commend South Africa, as the current Chair of the African Union and President of the Security Council, for choosing to highlight the issue of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union. It is a strategic partnership, not only in terms of preventing and resolving crises in Africa, but also because we need the African Union and African States to be able to respond to global threats. That is why we support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the African Union to strengthen this partnership. The African Union plays a major role in the prevention and resolution of political crises in Africa. We saw it in Madagascar in 2018 and in the Sudan in 2019. This year, once again, the South African presidency succeeded in arranging African Union mediation on the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. Those successes must be acknowledged. We also welcome your mobilization for a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Ethiopia, Mr. President. The Security Council must support the African Union's commitment to the prevention and resolution of crises on the continent. That principle is at the heart of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, on cooperation between the Security Council and regional organizations. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union is also of strategic importance in security matters. The African contribution to peacekeeping is invaluable, and we have a collective interest in strengthening it. France supports the development of sustainable and predictable financing for African peace operations, including through United Nations-assessed contributions. African countries must be able to ensure their own security and strengthen their regional cooperation within the framework of the African Peace and Security Architecture. Meetings between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council should enable progress to be made on this issue in 2021. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel is an example to be promoted. Our objective is for it to become fully autonomous, but that still requires the most ambitious support possible, to which the Security Council must contribute. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union can go even further by supporting projects to concretely implement the Silencing the Guns initiative, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We encourage the African Union to continue its efforts to operationalize the African Continental Free Trade Area. Cooperation must also be strengthened in the face of health threats. Resolution 2532 (2020), which we co-authored with Tunisia, calls for a cessation of hostilities and for greater cooperation between regional and international organizations in facilitating the fight against the pandemic. The African Union has contributed to the global effort by very quickly mobilizing the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. President Macron has advocated for a moratorium on the debt of African countries. France has pledged to mobilize €1.2 billion to help African countries fight the coronavirus pandemic. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union can be successful only with the involvement of civil society. I commend the African Union Special Envoy on Youth Solidarity for her determination to bring the demands of young African women to the Generation Equality Forum that France will host together with UN-Women and Mexico. Their demands will be heard. We call on the Special Envoys of the United Nations and the African Union to work together so that actions on the ground benefit women and young people more systematically. I want to conclude by once again congratulating South Africa on this meeting and its presidency this month, and more broadly on its biennium in the Security Council. The past two years have enabled your country to contribute significantly to the success of the multilateral method, Mr. President.
