Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Ijoin other members in congratulating Germany on
assuming the presidency of the Council and you, Sir,
for having convened this meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the Secretary General of the League or Arab States for
their presentations.

The work of regional organizations in the search
for solutions to situations on the agenda of the Security
Council is of the greatest importance. We are all aware
of the work of the League of Arab States in the case
of Lybia and the Gulf Cooperation Council in the case
of Yemen. Regional organizations are, without a doubt,
those with the greatest knowledge of the situations in
their regions.
The Middle East, North Africa and sub-Saharan
Africa face great security challenges. Cooperation with
regional organizations - such as the Arab League,
the Economic Community of Western African States,
the African Union and others - are of the utmost
importance in achieving lasting solutions that also
address the concerns of each region. The Council
should promote close collaboration with regional
organizations, giving priority to strategies aimed
at conflict prevention, mediation and good offices.
Regional organizations have a privileged position,
unique access to key stakeholders, and exceptional
knowledge of and experience with the diverse
situations in their regions; hence the importance of
their participation as strategic partners in carrying
out actions that fit the particularities and needs of
each situation under consideration. Nevertheless, it is
important to guarantee that the work of the Security
Council and regional organizations harmonize with one
another.

The concept paper before us (S/2012/686, annex)
asks how cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in particular can
be strengthened. In that regard, I believe that the
holding of annual evaluation meetings, such as those
that currently take place with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, including dialogue on
conflict prevention, could be beneficial.

Cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States can and must be strengthened in
order to confront the security challenges in the Middle
East. The appointment of Mr. Kofi Annan as Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States for Syria a few months ago, and more
recently, of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as Joint Special
Representative are good examples of that cooperation.

I would like once again to condemn the attack in
Libya on the American consulate in Benghazi, which
resulted in the death of Ambassador Christopher
Stevens and other officials. We cannot allow extremism
and terrorism to demean human life. Tolerance and
respect for cultural, religious, political and economic
diversity must take priority in global relations.

I would like to refer to the situation in Syria. The
Syrian crisis is a threat to peace in the Middle East, a
region that has faced precarious security conditions for
more than a year. We therefore deplore the inability of
the Council to stop the violence and bloodshed and to
facilitate a peaceful solution. In that regard, we must
point out that the Council has not been able to reach an
agreement to fulfil the responsibilities entrusted to it
by Member States.

The humanitarian situation is alarming, as we
discussed a few weeks ago in this very Chamber.
We share the concerns about the flow of refugees
into neighbouring countries, and today we wish to
acknowledge in particular the efforts of Turkey,
Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq, which have taken in
hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees in recent
months. The Syrian people have also suffered from
internal displacement and destruction of their homes
and infrastructure. We must redouble our efforts to find
a negotiated political solution to that crisis, which is
becoming more and more urgent by the day.

I take this opportunity to reiterate our call on all
parties in Syria to immediately put an end to force and
violence. We reiterate our concern with regard to the
persistent deterioration of the human rights situation. I
call on all parties to respect international humanitarian
law. While the primary responsibility to guarantee
respect for and the protection of individual rights and
fundamental freedoms of the population, including
the right to life and the freedoms of expression and
association, lies with the Syrian authorities, all parties
involved are obliged to comply with the norms of
international humanitarian law.

Despite the turmoil currently affecting region, the
search for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the Arab-Israeli conflict must remain a priority of
the efforts of the international community to achieve
peace throughout the region. In this case, as in others,
we must take advantage of the comparative advantage
of the League of Arab States to overcome existing
obstacles and restart negotiations aimed at establishing
a Palestinian State living in peace with Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders and
based on an agreement that will ensure the peaceful
coexistence of the two nations. To achieve that goal,
favourable conditions in the areas of human rights and
international humanitarian law are necessary to foster
renewed confidence and advance the negotiations.
Colombia continues to support dialogue as a path to
peace and prosperity, and will continue to urgently
promote that point of view in the Council.

We support the draft presidential statement on
effective cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States.

