Mr. Mladenov: In recent days, we have
witnessed another dangerous escalation of violence
in Gaza that risked unleashing an armed conflict with
catastrophic consequences for 2 million impoverished
Palestinians - people who live under the control of
Hamas and have endured three wars and crippling
Israeli closures. The Secretary-General warned that a
new war in Gaza would bring forth another unbearable
tragedy and urged all parties to exercise maximum
restraint. My team and I worked closely with Egypt
and all concerned parties to ensure a return to the
2014 ceasefire arrangements. Thankfully, a precarious
restoration of calm has now been achieved. We must all
work to ensure that this calm is maintained.

The period of 11 to 13 November saw one of the
fiercest exchanges of fire since the 2014 Gaza conflict.
The escalation was triggered by an operation Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) inside the Gaza Strip in which
a local commander of Hamas Al-Qassam Brigades and
six other Palestinians were killed. One IDF officer was
also killed and a second injured in an incident. In the
following two days, militants in Gaza launched some
450 rockets and mortars at Israel, including at the towns
ofAshkelon, Sderot and Netivot, killing one Palestinian
civilian and seriously wounding one Israeli civilian. An
IDF soldier was also seriously wounded by a targeted
anti-tank guided-missile strike on a bus transporting
military personnel in Kfar Aza. The IDF responded in
turn with a series of air strikes on 160 militant targets,
including a Hamas-affiliated television station and a
hotel, resulting in the killing seven Palestinians - at
least four identified by the Israeli army as members of
armed groups.

The fragility of the situation underscores the urgent
need to fundamentally change the dynamics on the
ground that address the underlying political issues. Two
million Palestinians in Gaza cannot be held hostage to
political grandstanding and brinkmanship. Their lives
matter and they deserve real leadership that addresses
the real problems of Gaza.

The latest outbreak of violence came just as the
United Nations and its partners were intensifying
efforts to alleviate Gaza's deepening humanitarian
and economic crises and, critically, to provide
space for ongoing Egyptian-led efforts to advance
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. This is essential
to ending the occupation and resolving the wider
political conflict.

Significant headway has already been made on the
implementation of the package of urgent interventions
endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians at its September meeting, held in New
York. In October, the United Nations started importing
and monitoring the delivery of donor-funded fuel to
Gaza's power station. This resulted in the greatest
supply of electricity since March 2017 - a minimum of
11 hours per day. I reiterate the United Nations sincere
gratitude to the Government of the State of Qatar for
the generous funding to this end.

The impact has been immediate. Water supply
has increased, the risk of sewage overflow has been
reduced, hospitals are less dependent on precarious
generators, street lights are on again, children can
study and play, and families have more cash in hand to
meet their daily needs. These improvements, however,
are temporary. They provide much-needed relief, but
can do little to reverse the long-standing, structural
problems affecting Gaza, driven by years of crippling
closures and Hamas control.

The implementation of the other urgent
humanitarian interventions in Gaza must also be
expedited. My team and I will continue to engage with
the Palestinian Government, donors and partners on
the ground to support several initiatives. These include
finding a sustainable solution to Gaza's electricity
and health problems, increasing the supply of potable
water and medical supplies, and sewage treatment.
These should take place alongside concerted efforts to
rescue the economy through cash-for-work and other
emergency measures.

Yet, the international community cannot bear
the burden of addressing Gaza's problems alone. The
primary responsibility falls on the parties themselves.
The clock on intra-Palestinian reconciliation is ticking.
I urge all Palestinian parties to not waste time and
engage in earnest and achieve Visible progress in
the coming six months. This is in the interests of the
Palestinian people. It is in the interests of peace. The
success of international efforts in Gaza depends on the
parties' willingness to confront the inevitable hurdles,
withstand the internal political consequences and stay
committed to the reconciliation process over the long
term. If any side fails, every side fails.

Hamas and militant groups must stop all provocations
and attacks. Israel must significantly improve the
movement and access of goods and people to and from
Gaza as a step towards the lifting ofthe closures, in line
with resolution 1860 (2009). The Palestinian Authority
must strengthen its engagement in Gaza, which is an
integral part of the Palestinian territory.

In earlier incidents, before the most recent
escalation on 26 and 27 October, 34 rockets were
launched by Palestinian Islamic Jihad towards Israel.
In response, the IDF targeted 95 Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad military sites across the Strip. A hospital
in the vicinity of one of the targets was damaged, as
were several homes in Gaza City. On 28 October, the
IDF struck and killed three Palestinian children aged
13 to 15 in the southern Gaza Strip, who they said were
placing improvised explosive devices at the security
fence - a claim refuted by the Palestinian Centre for
Human Rights. Protests the next day saw some 3,000
participants, with 1 Palestinian killed and another 15
injured by IDF live fire.

I remain very concerned by Israel's persistent use
of live fire against protesters. I call on the authorities
to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from using
lethal force, except as a last resort. I also urge Hamas
and other Palestinian militants to end the indiscriminate
firing of rockets into southern Israel and to stop all
violence near the fence, including attempts to breach it.

Overall in the reporting period, Israeli security
forces killed 31 Palestinians in Gaza, including
four children. One IDF soldier was killed during the
11 November operation. Meanwhile, in the occupied
West Bank, Israeli security forces killed four
Palestinians. On 22 October, Israeli security forces
shot and killed a Palestinian man in Hebron after he
was reported to have stabbed and injured an Israeli
soldier. Three other attempts against Israeli civilians
or Israeli security forces personnel were reported near
the Kiryat Arba and Kfar Adumim settlements on
5 and 6 November, and in Jerusalem on 14 November.
On 24 October, a 21-year-old Palestinian man was
shot and killed by the IDF during clashes following an
IDF weapons search near Tubas in the northern West
Bank. On 26 October, in the context of clashes between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians near Ramallah, Israeli
security forces shot and killed a 33-year-old Palestinian
and injured nine others; another 28-year-old Palestinian
subsequently died of his wounds later in November.

Israeli settlement activity continues to advance,
eating away at the viability of a contiguous future
Palestinian State. I reiterate that all settlement activities
are illegal under international law and an obstacle to
peace, and must immediately cease. On 5 November,
Israeli authorities advanced two plans for a total of 264
housing units in the East Jerusalem settlement ofRamot.
The demolition and confiscation of Palestinian-owned
structures also continue, with a total of 31 structures
demolished or seized by the authorities, citing a lack
of building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain in the Israeli-controlled Area
C and East Jerusalem. As a result, some 25 people
were displaced and, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the livelihoods
of 200 others were affected.

Meanwhile, on 4 November the Israeli authorities
informed the High Court of Justice of their decision
to demolish an illegal outpost comprising some dozen
Israeli families that had been established in recent
months in an abandoned military base in the Jordan
Valley. I welcome the announcement by the Israeli
authorities on 21 October to delay the demolition
of Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and reiterate the
call of the international community for plans for the
demolition of that community and all others facing
similar pressures to be annulled.

On 28 and 29 October, the Palestine Liberation
Organization Central Council held its thirtieth session
in Ramallah. In its final statement, the Central
Council reaffirmed recent decisions taken to suspend
its recognition of the State of Israel until the latter
recognizes the State of Palestine, based on 4 June
1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, as
well as to end security coordination in all of its forms
and disengage economically from Israel. A follow-up
committee chaired by President Mahmoud Abbas was
established to discuss the implementation of those
decisions.

The situation in Lebanon will be considered by the
Council this week. As we speak, the political actors
have yet to find an agreement on a national unity
Government. The delay hampers Lebanon's ability
to address issues essential to its stability, including
the economy. We again encourage all stakeholders to
put national interests first and expeditiously reach an
agreement that preserves Lebanon's stability and ability
to deliver on its international commitments.

In closing, let make two important points.

First, on Gaza, it is vital that all stakeholders work
to de-escalate the deteriorating situation and seize
the current window of opportunity to advance urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions, in line with
the conclusions of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. I
would also like to reiterate the importance of sustained
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and extend
our gratitude to the State of Kuwait for the swift
disbursement of its $42 million contribution to the
Agency.

Palestinian factions must seize the opportunity to
engage in earnest with the Egyptian-led efforts to bring
Gaza back under the control ofthe legitimate Palestinian
Government. We in the international community must
do all we can to support those efforts. Israel must also
recognize that Gaza is about to explode, and in order
to prevent such an explosion, people must also see a
normalization of their lives, for which the closures need
to be relaxed and ultimately lifted.

We cannot stand idle and allow the division between
the West Bank and Gaza to be further entrenched. The
Palestinian people are demanding that their leadership
finally reunite Gaza and the West Bank, advance the
goal of peacefully ending the Israeli occupation and
establish a viable Palestinian State based on the relevant
United Nations resolutions. That is what people desire;
that is what they deserve.

Secondly, on the broader peace efforts, it is
essential that we prevent the further collapse of the
foundations that must underpin any future agreement.
We must continue to consistently push back against
the entrenchment of the military occupation and the
erosion of international consensus on the final status
issues. Together, we must work with determination
and vigilance to establish an environment conducive
to the return of negotiations that will end the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, in line with the recommendations
of the Middle East Quartet report of 2016 (S/2016/595, annex). The United Nations remains firmly committed
to advancing all efforts towards a just and lasting
Israeli-Palestinian peace, based on the relevant Council
resolutions.

