Mr. Adom (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the United States presidency of the
Security Council for the initiative of today's briefing
on the status of implementation of the sanctions regime
for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. My
delegation also thanks Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her very
informative briefing.

Like others, I would like to express the condolences
of my country and my delegation to the Government
and the people of the United States for the consequences
of Hurricane Florence's devastating sweep through
certain states of the country, including yours, Madam
President. More generally, I would like to express
my country's and my delegation's condolences to all
peoples who have suffered the consequences of climate
change in recent times. All ofthose consequences serve
to underline once again the need to awaken and prepare
our collective consciousness for the fight against such
climate disruptions.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signs towards a
resolution that have been seen on the Korean peninsula.
Since the beginning ofthe year, these signs materialized
in a series of important events, culminating in the
historic summit held on 12 June in Singapore between
the Presidents of the United States and North Korea.
The meeting will undoubtedly be remembered as
the event that would capture the attention of the
international community and raise real hopes, given
the risks of a military confrontation with potentially
disastrous consequences.

My country congratulates all those responsible
for those achievements and looks forward with great
interest to the conclusions of the third summit to be held
in less than a year between the North and South Korean
leaders, which is scheduled for 18 to 20 September.
Accordingly, Cote d'Ivoire urges the leaders of the two
countries to continue along the path of dialogue and
expresses the hope that the upcoming meeting will lead
to the taking of concrete steps towards the signing of a
peace treaty between the two countries, which would
obviously constitute an important step towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. In that regard,
my delegation would like to express its satisfaction with
the opening of a joint liaison office on 14 September,
which is an important milestone on the path towards the
reciprocal opening of diplomatic missions.

Notwithstanding those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the impasse in
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), following the presentation
of the midterm report of the Panel of Experts on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The report,
which endorses the work of the Group of Experts and
whose publication has been awaited for weeks, is now
a source of contention among some members of the
Committee. With regard to the main blocking factor,
my delegation is of the View that it is essential, for the
better implementation of paragraph 5 of resolution
2397 (2017), that all members of the Security Council
agree on how to calculate the quantity of refined oil that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is allowed
to import during each 12-month period. The lack of
consensus on the issue is not only likely to hinder the
effective implementation of resolution 2397 (2017),
but it also has a negative impact on developments on
the ground, thereby undermining hopes for the early
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

That is why Cote d'Ivoire calls on all parties
to engage in dialogue and compromise in order to
safeguarde the unity that has long prevailed among
the members of our Council on the North Korean
issue, particularly during the voting, in December
2017, on resolution 2397 (2017), which strengthened
the sanctions regime. In addition, my country would
like for the independence of the Panel of Experts to be
preserved in order to guarantee the impartiality and
objectivity of its investigations and the relevance of
its recommendations.

Reports from various and consistent sources of
recurrent violations of the Security Council sanctions
regime by North Korea, through illicit oil transhipment
operations, illicit arms trade and illegal financial
transactions, are a cause of great concern. They
reflect the porosity of the sanctions mechanisms that
have been put in place and point to the magnitude
of the multiple challenges to be overcome in the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime.
My delegation would also like to express its concern
about extending the deadlines for the consideration of
humanitarian exemptions. In our view, it is crucial the
right balance be struck between the implementation
of sanctions and humanitarian imperatives, as several
humanitarian organizations recently sounded the
alarm bell on the need to ensure food security in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea following the
severe drought.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Cote d'Ivoire's
commitment to our enduring common objective of the
total denuclearization of the Korean peninsula as an
indispensable precondition for peaceful coexistence
among the States of the region. My country therefore
encourages all stakeholders to show their resolute
commitment to safeguard the gains in the interests of
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.

