Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): First of all, I would like
to express our appreciation to you personally, Mr.
President, and to the Government of Benin for giving
the item on cross-border issues in West Africa high
priority on the agenda, thus underscoring the serious
concern about the threat to regional peace and stability
posed by cross-border problems and trans-national
illegal activities.

Greece welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General and wishes to express its appreciation for the
analysis of the main challenges and the relevant
recommendations contained therein.

I would also like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
effective efforts in addressing the issue, and the
representative of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for his insightful comments.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made at a later stage by the Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

Civil conflicts and their severe humanitarian
impact, the subsequent flow of refugees, the increasing
use of mercenaries and child soldiers, the proliferation
of small arms, the mismanagement of natural
resources, failed economies and endemic corruption
are prominent among the factors contributing to
instability and requiring a wider and multifaceted
approach covering the entire region. The development
of a comprehensive regional approach to deal with
those issues is a priority goal of increasing importance
and could also contribute to treating the interlinked
root causes of the region's complex problems.

The victims of today's conflicts in West Africa
have been predominantly civilians, regardless of their
nationality. Improving regional integration and
cooperation in all areas of conflict management,
conflict prevention and peacebuilding will therefore be
of significant benefit to the well-being of the people of
the whole region.

West Africa should be a high priority for all. As
the Secretary-General points out in his report, while
several States in the region have already embarked on a
serious effort towards economic and democratic
reform, there are still others where conflict persists,
threatening the stability and security of all. Addressing,
in an effective manner, the longstanding structural
macro-economic, human rights and governance failure
has therefore taken on new and more urgent meaning.

African ownership of the whole endeavour is a
basic element of our approach. West African States
should be helped to enhance their capacity to pursue
policies aimed at social and economic development in
order to eliminate the possibility of future conflicts.

Turning to specific cross-border issues, it is
development which provides a guarantee for the
successful reintegration of ex-combatants into society
and for finding lasting solutions to youth
unemployment, thus eliminating the risk of ex-soldiers'
being recruited once again by parties to a conflict.

Greece welcomes the call for a regional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
plan of action, made at Dakar in August 2004 by
United Nations peace missions, United Nations
agencies and other development partners.

We also acknowledge that the illegal trafficking
of arms poses a serious threat to peace and stability in
the region, and we affirm our support for the strict
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We also welcome the extension for three more
years of the ECOWAS moratorium on the import,
export and manufacture of small arms and light
weapons and encourage the efforts being made to
transform it into a legally binding instrument.

We believe that, by publicly naming those who
violate the arms embargo and the ECOWAS
moratorium in order to bring them to justice, we would
not only demonstrate our determination to reinforce the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council, but also create a factor of deterrence for those
who might wish to violate them in the future.
The Secretary-General's report therefore rightly
points out that the subregion continues to be
confronted by the phenomenon of violent military
adventurism aimed at seizing power, which constitutes
a threat to stability and hinders the process of
peacebuilding in individual West African countries.

Greece therefore strongly supports the initiatives
taken by ECOWAS and United Nations agencies in
West Africa in introducing integrated policies to
reform the security sector, thus enhancing stability and
democratic governance in the region.

My Government, recognizing the efforts made by
ECOWAS, has recently made a substantial offer in
order to promote ECOWAS activities. We will continue
to do so to the extent of our ability. Moreover, as a
member of the European Union, Greece has been
actively contributing to overall efforts for peace,
stability and development in the region.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate our strong
conviction that only through a close and coordinated
partnership of all those involved, including civil
society, will it be possible for the international
community to reconcile immediate requirements with
long-term goals.

