Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): On 14 January,
in this Chamber, the Security Council held an open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Fewer than six months have passed since then. Our
presence here today to discuss the same topic for the
second time within such a short span is clear evidence
of the importance of this topic. I therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/277) and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing.

Joining all members of the Council in celebrating
the tenth anniversary of the Security Council's first
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as a thematic issue, my delegation commends
the progress recorded so far thanks to the aggregate
endeavours of all stakeholders, particularly those
women and men of United Nations missions dispatched
to the field to contribute to lessening the suffering of
civilians in certain parts of the world.

We are, however, deeply concerned about the
persistent and pervasive violations as well as the
increasing indiscriminate and excessive use of force
against civilians in conflict situations. We continue to
be disturbed by the growing number of deaths and
injuries inflicted upon civilian populations. We also
continue to be preoccupied by the widespread
displacement of civilians in most conflicts and by the
threat that it could provoke another conflict as a
consequence of the resulting social tension and a
myriad of problems for the host location. While aware
of the many reasons that have been put forward to
explain this situation, we are convinced that the most
visible and undeniable reason is the common failure to
comply with international law, especially international
human rights and humanitarian law, as well as the
common failure to ensure humanitarian access for
civilians, especially access to food, fuel and medical
treatment, as clearly mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report and its annex.

In this regard, my delegation should have liked to
see the situations of civilians in armed conflict
presented in a more structural manner in the report.
Supported by the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/PRST/2009/l, annex) and
with more weight given to analysing the situation on
the ground, a more structural report would provide a
better foundation for more adequate, timely and
convincing recommendations.

As it has in all Security Council debates and
other meetings on this topic, my delegation reiterates
Viet Nam's consistent View that the State must bear the
primary responsibility for protecting its civilians and
that, as the largest and most representative organization
of States, the United Nations system has a critical role
to play, particularly in political mediation, peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian and development
assistance.

In this regard, and given the comprehensive
nature of any feasible solution, we wish to underline
the imperative to enhance coordination among United
Nations bodies - above all the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and all United Nations
field missions - in responding to the needs of civilians
in armed conflict, not only in physical security terms,
but in political and socio-economic terms as well.

Reality has proved that, while possibly effective
in certain cases, dialogue with non-State armed groups
must be carefully considered and approached in the
overall framework of cooperation with the States in
question in order to avoid the unintended legitimization
of illegal or even internationally recognized terrorist
groups. Similarly, to end impunity, as called for in
resolution 1674 (2006), we support, inter alia, the
implementation of justice and reconciliation mechanisms,
including national, international and mixed criminal
courts and tribunals and truth and reconciliation
commissions, as appropriate. Nonetheless, we believe
that the referral of situations to international criminal
courts or similar mechanisms should be considered on
a case-by-case basis to avoid the risk of infringement
of national sovereignty resulting from generalization.

Furthermore, having attended informal meetings
of the Expert Group and benefited in certain measures
from the information provided by OCHA before the
renewal of the mandate of some United Nations
missions, my delegation remains affirmative in its View
that the establishment of any new mechanism within
the Security Council must be thoroughly studied before
a decision is made in order to avoid operational and
institutional duplication, as well as financial implications.
This approach is all the more necessary in the context
of the ongoing United Nations reform to improve the
efficiency of each and every United Nations body,
including the Security Council.

Recalling the six reports considered by this
Council, which contain more than 100 recommendations,
and the eight presidential statements adopted by this
Council over the past 10 years on this issue, I wish to
conclude by joining the Secretary-General in calling
for greater focus on the effective, actual translation of
these documents into improvements in the protection of
civilians on the ground so that civilians can eventually
be truly freed from the scourge of armed conflicts
mushrooming in many parts of the world in this
twenty-first century.

