Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank His Royal Highness the Crown Prince of
Jordan for convening this important debate. Countering
violent extremism is one of the most pressing
international challenges that we face. It is a priority for
my Prime Minister and for my Foreign Secretary, and
we greatly appreciate the leadership shown by Jordan
on this issue.

The past 12 months have been horrifying for young
people across the world - hundreds of students brutally
murdered in Kenya and Pakistan, scores of children
abducted and enslaved by Boko Haram, and countless
young people manipulated and exploited by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida,
including some from my own country, tempted to
join ISIL's murderous causes in Syria. The blame for
these atrocities and many more lies in the generational
scourge of Violent extremism. We all have a role to play
to defeat it, but we must particularly harness young
people to aid us in the fight if we are to reach a long-
term solution. They are the victims, but they are also
the solution, as His Royal Highness pointed out. I will
cover three areas where I think that together we can
make a difference.

First, we must resolutely counter the narrative
of extremism. It is incumbent upon all political, and
particularly religious, leaders to speak out clearly with
the message "not in my religion's name". But as others
have pointed out, a counter-narrative is not enough.
We need to promote a positive alternative narrative of
tolerance and inclusion. We must support those brave
youth advocates who stand up to extremism and promote
this alternative narrative. We all recall the bravery and
leadership shown by the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner,
Malala Yusafzai. Her speech at the General Assembly
calling for global education, even for those who sought
to kill her, was a powerful message against extremism.
Her story gives hope and inspiration to young people
everywhere.

Supporting youth advocates goes beyond just giving
them a platform; it is also about supporting countries to
provide education for all so that others have a chance
to follow Malala's lead. The United Kingdom is proud
to have supported more than 4.5 million children in
primary school education, mainly in South Asia and
Africa. As Malala herself said, extremists attack schools
because they are afraid of the change and equality we
will bring to our society. It is partly through education
that we can help expose the lies ofAl-Qaida, ISIL, Boko
Haram and others. It can help us to see how they hijack
religion for their own violent aims. It is partly through
education that we can give opportunity to vulnerable
young people still searching for their place in the world.
But education is not the whole answer. As we have
heard, the link between educational attainment and
extremism is not at all straightforward. In the United
Kingdom, many academically gifted young people
have also been radicalized.

Secondly, we must look at the factors that push
youths to extremism in our own communities. We must
protect young people in our schools, universities and
prisons from the influence of extremism. The United
Kingdom has trained over 130,000 public-sector
workers with that objective. We have a team of regional
coordinators that help universities manage the risk
of extremism. Our schools have clear safeguards to
prevent the promotion of extremist views incompatible
with our values. Our prisons protect vulnerable young
inmates during and after their sentences to prevent
radicalization.

This is not about curbing free speech. Extremist
ideas can be defeated only when people are free to
challenge them. But we must recognize that not just
Violent extremism but non-Violent extremism, whether
Islamist or neo-Nazi, can also incite hate and breed
violence. The Internet of course plays a crucial role
in that. ISIL and others have hijacked social media to
propagate abhorrent propaganda. Since 2010, the United
Kingdom has had to remove 75,000 pieces of content
encouraging or glorifying violent extremism. But civil
society and industry can play a role, too. They must
take a zero-tolerance approach to the abuse of their
platforms by extremism. The Internet can be a powerful
means of standing up to extremism; we must not let
extremists use it unchallenged. Be it the Government,
civil society or industry, we must ensure that young
people are at the front and centre of our approach, so
as to present a credible, hopeful alternative to the hate
speech of extremism - the dream that Mr. Atran spoke
of earlier today.

Thirdly, another strand for making a difference,
lies with the Council. Over the past six months, we have
adopted resolutions that target the financing of ISIL and
resolutions that oblige States to curb travel by foreign
terrorist fighters. Through the Jordanian presidency,
we have held important gatherings of religious leaders,
Foreign Ministers and experts to discuss practical steps
to address the challenge. But we can and we need to
do more. As Mr. Neumann said, we still have much to
learn about the root causes of extremism. Fragile and
conflict-affected States can provide the conditions for
violent extremism to take hold. Conflicted identity and
economic and social marginalization can also play a part.
Effective United Nations peacebuilding can therefore
play an important role. By promoting inclusive political
and economic institutions and encouraging democratic
processes, we can help present young people with an
alternative to turning to extremism. And in doing so, we
have the chance to make the Security Council relevant
to a new generation. Whenever the Council fails to act
on an issue of global concern, we undermine the faith
of young people in our work, and whenever we allow
narrow national interests to hold international priorities
to ransom, we erode confidence in the Council and our
Governments. In this generational challenge against
extremism, we simply cannot afford that.

