Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of resolution 2513 (2020), on Afghanistan. The resolution opens up a window of opportunity for the achievement of national reconciliation in that country. We stand in solidarity with the people of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in their aspiration to end this protracted war, restore peace and promote sustainable development. The Afghan people, more than ever before, need collective support from the entire international community. The prompt launch of intra-Afghan talks is a priority. We trust that the agreement between the United States and the Taliban movement signed on 29 February in Doha will be a step towards a comprehensive peace process with the participation of all sociopolitical strata, with the aim of achieving a settlement. We understand that the path to that goal will be difficult and there will be need for consolidated efforts, not just on the part of the Afghan people themselves but also in terms of assistance from regional and international partners. For its part, the Russian Federation has done a great deal to promote national reconciliation and a direct intra-Afghan dialogue. This has been the thrust of our efforts, including through the Moscow format, with the participation of regional players, and the focus on the launch of the intra-Afghan dialogue mechanism in Moscow. A major contribution to the creation of favourable international conditions and to the resumption of talks between the United States and the Taliban movement was introduced through consultations of the troika of the special representatives of the Russian Federation, the People's Republic of China and the United States, with the timely inclusion of Pakistan. This format would have been all the more beneficial had Iran, which has repeatedly demonstrated its constructive potential in this regard, been granted an opportunity to participate. The people of Afghanistan are at a crossroads in their history. We believe that the overriding and paramount imperative at the present moment is progress towards peace. All efforts must be geared towards the prompt launch of inclusive inter-Afghan talks with the participation of all the country's sociopolitical groups. We trust that the parties will be represented by delegations authorized to negotiate and to take decisions on a broad array of issues. We urge all Afghan political forces to set aside their differences, parochial interests and political ambitions and to jointly move towards a unifying platform so as to achieve the overriding goal of the peace so long awaited by ordinary Afghans. The first key step towards that end must be the abandonment of violence by all stakeholders. Efforts must be pooled to ensure that a concerted fight can be waged against terrorism. One of the prerequisites for the long-term stabilization of the country is the review of the sanctions decisions taken by the Security Council vis-a-vis the Taliban movement and their synchronization with the relevant national measures. There is no doubt that Afghanistan will require support from the States of the region, including, above all, its neighbours. We deem of great significance the full-fledged leveraging to that end of the potential of regional structures, especially the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and its updated SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, as well as the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
