Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for their
comprehensive updates on the latest developments
in South Sudan. We also commend Ambassador
Wronecka for her enormous efforts and valuable
insights on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan. We also welcome Ambassador Akuei Bona
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan,
to the Chamber. Additionally, we welcome the 90-day
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1103), as well
as his monthly assessment on obstructions facing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
would now like to make some observations.

First, with regard to the political situation, we
acknowledge that the signing on 12 September of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was a major
step towards peace in the country. We welcome the
progress made with regard to the implementation that
Agreement and have high expectations that it will lay
the foundations for durable peace and stability in the
country. We therefore call on the signatory parties in
South Sudan to demonstrate a spirit of compromise
and genuine political will to implement, in a timely
manner, the outstanding provisions of the Revitalized
Agreement on cantonment and the integration of forces,
in order to ensure that the Agreement will not meet the
fate of other failed attempts at peace in South Sudan.
We also call on the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the United
Nations and neighbouring States to continue their
concerted efforts to build trust and confidence among
the parties and assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement, as
the representative of Ethiopia has just proposed. We
welcome the signing of the Revitalized Agreement by
the members of the African Union Ad Hoc Committee
on South Sudan on 21 November and reiterate the need
to urge non-signatories to join the peace process.

Secondly, despite the overall improvement in the
security situation and the reduction in the number of
human rights violations, the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains fragile and volatile. Civilians,
especially women and children, continue to bear
the brunt of the crisis, suffering from Violence,
displacement and critical levels of food insecurity. We
therefore call on all parties in South Sudan to implement
the permanent cessation of hostilities, completely stop
the violence by bringing their forces under control,
halt attacks against humanitarian workers and strictly
comply with international humanitarian law.

We strongly condemn the series of attacks against
women in Bentiu between 19 and 29 November. It
is important to investigate those attacks and hold
perpetrators accountable. We also encourage donor
countries to provide adequate and sustained funding
for humanitarian assistance to the population. In order
to genuinely address the fragile situation in South
Sudan, humanitarian assistance should be accompanied
by development efforts and the addressing of the root
causes of conflict. Conflict can be somewhat resolved
or minimized by reducing tribal rivalries, implementing
confidence-building measures among local populations,
providing basic services and increasing job creation.
Women and youth need to play an important role in
those processes.

Thirdly, regarding UNMISS, our delegation
is concerned that some violations of the status-of-
forces agreement persist. We call on all parties to the
conflict to take all appropriate measures to ensure the
safety, security and freedom of movement of UNMISS
personnel. We welcome the initiative of the IGAD
countries to participate in the Regional Protection
Force. At the same time, we underscore the importance
of preserving a unified command and control structure
of UNMISS and ensuring that the Regional Protection
Force complies with United Nations standards.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan commends UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances, and we reaffirm our unfailing support
for its efforts aimed at achieving peace and stability in
South Sudan.

