Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing
this important debate. I would also like to express my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and the
other briefers for their valuable insights.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and the Kingdom of Thailand,
on behalf ofthe Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

The emerging challenges in the world today require
United Nations peacekeeping operations to be able to
respond in a faster, more timely and more effective way
to complex situations. At the same time, the safety and
security of United Nations personnel must be improved.
In that context, we share the view that adequate training
and capacity-building for peacekeepers is increasingly
important. Women peacekeepers must be given special
attention in order to equip them with particular skill
sets, capacities and roles. Training and capacity-
building activities should start at the national level and
be supported and coordinated regionally and globally.

At the national level, Member States should ensure
that personnel are properly trained and screened
in order to enable them to best meet United Nations
standards. Viet Nam has endorsed the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and is ready to provide well-trained and
-equipped personnel. The predeployment preparation
and capacity-building of personnel are crucial to
their safety, security and effective performance. This
preparation must include adequate awareness pertinent
to the deployment environment, such as historical,
religious, ethnic, social, cultural and political
particularities. In-mission training can provide updates
later. The core predeployment training materials are
extremely useful and should continue to be updated
by the United Nations, with the assistance of relevant
countries and regional and international organizations.

At the regional level, collaboration in training
and capacity-building can focus on the sharing of
information and best practices. Together with other
ASEAN countries, Viet Nam has been hosting
the Triangular Partnership Project for the Rapid
Deployment of Enabling Capabilities, organized by
the Department of Operational Support of the United
Nations Secretariat, with a View to strengthening the
capacities of peacekeepers in the region and beyond.
ASEAN countries contribute 5 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers. There is much to share and
learn from each other, including through strengthened
cooperation among peacekeeping training centres.

At the global level, the United Nations system
should continue to employ its whole-of-system
approach towards training and capacity-building,
especially through the partnership of shared
responsibility between the Security Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Training materials, standards and funding should be
up-to-date and supportive of countries' peacekeeping
endeavours. At the same time, improving the security
and safety of United Nations personnel must be the
Organization's top priority when working with all
countries and partners.

In conclusion, training and capacity-building are
crucial for the success of peacekeeping operations, and
Viet Nam affirms its commitment to working with the
international community in this endeavour.

