Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her
briefing and welcome Foreign Minister Amon-Tanoh
to today's meeting.

China congratulates Cote d'Ivoire on its election
as a non-permanent member of the Council for the
2018-2019 term and looks forward to intensifying
cooperation with Cote d'Ivoire in international
affairs with a view to making joint contributions to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In recent years, under the leadership of President
Ouattara, Cote d'Ivoire has enjoyed political stability
and sustained economic and social development, which
China commends.
Last year, during China's presidency of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7681), the Council adopted
resolution 2284 (2016), on the drawdown of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), and
resolution 2283 (2016), on the comprehensive lifting
of sanctions against C6te d'Ivoire (see S/PV.7681).
That fully reflected the affirmation of the Council and
of the international community that there had been
considerable improvement in the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire. Since 2004, UNOCI has played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the country.
China commends the contribution of UNOCI and the
positive efforts of Special Representative Mindaoudou
since she assumed office. Following the closure of
UNOCI, China hopes that the international community
will continue to strengthen cooperation with Cote
d'Ivoire with a view to helping the country achieve
sustained peace, stability and development.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important means of maintaining international peace
and security. UNOCI's successful experience is worth
studying with a view to drawing lessons from it.
Based on developments in the situation on the ground,
China believes that the United Nations peacekeeping
operation should make timely adjustments to its scale
ahead of its final drawdown and closure. Meanwhile, it
is imperative to fully respect the will ofthe host country
and enhance coordination with countries in the region,
as well as regional and subregional organizations.

Nine out ofthe sixteen United Nations peacekeeping
missions are located in Africa. Peace and stability
in Africa matter greatly to international peace and
security. China has consistently supported Africa in
resolving African issues through African means, as
well as regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union, in playing an active role in
resolving local issues. China stands ready to work with
the international community to provide ownership
and capacity-building assistance to Africa so as to
make greater contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

