The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.

First of all, I would like to sincerely thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing on the twelfth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (201 1) and to warmly
commend the dedication and the professionalism with
which she discharges her duty. That duty, we should
recall, is to dispense justice for the millions ofinnocent
victims of mass atrocities. I take this opportunity to
reiterate Senegal's support for the Rome Statute and
reaffirm my country's commitment to the effective
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), unanimously
adopted on 26 February 2011.

The review of the twelfth report allows us to
affirm that, despite an unstable international security
environment and ongoing budgetary constraints,
the Office of the Prosecutor has managed to make
progress on investigations in the cases involving Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senoussi. In
addition, it was able to provide judicious follow-up to
the proceedings regarding allegations of torture and ill-
treatment in the Al-Hadba prison and issue additional
arrest warrants to apprehend other suspects. That is an
eloquent expression of the desire of the Prosecutor to
conduct criminal investigations under the November
2013 memorandum of understanding on burden-sharing
with the Libyan authorities through sound cooperation
and exemplary understanding with the Office.

My delegation encourages the Prosecutorto continue
along that path and encourages the Libyan authorities
to continue sharing information and cooperating with
the Office of the Prosecutor, with a view to building a
credible and effectivejudicial system. After all, it is up
to the Libyan authorities to guarantee respect for the
rule of law in their own country. To that end, the support
of the international community for Libya, through its
Presidency Council, remains vital to restoring stability
and security throughout the country. Such stability and
security require the unification and reconstruction of
all national institutions, including political institutions
and security and defence forces. That is why my
delegation would like to reiterate its support for United
Nations mediation, led by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler.

This is an issue around which we must forge a
strong consensus. When the Security Council refers a
situation to the Court, it is simple logic that it should
ensure that the Court has the necessary cooperation
of Member States, and in particular it must grant the
Court the means necessaryto the success of its mission.
The perfect convergence between the values and ideals
of the Rome Statute, on the one hand, and the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, on
the other, demand that the Security Council and the
ICC cooperate increasingly closely in their common
fight against impunity for a world of justice, peace and
security.

It was not only to put an end to impunity and
prevent major crimes, but also to respond to the feelings
of frustration and outrage evoked by humanitarian
tragedies that have caused so much suffering to the
peoples ofthe world, that 120 States met in Rome 18 years
ago to set up the ICC, whose jurisdiction encompasses
the crimes considered to be the most serious by the
international community. Unfortunately, we are forced
to note that atrocities continue to be perpetrated against
innocent victims on a daily basis, and the overwhelming
majority of them still await justice. That is why my
delegation urges the international community to step
up its work to promote the successful functioning of the
ICC and the universality of the Rome Statute.

We must recall that the ICC remains today the only
recourse for victims where the right to justice is not
upheld in situ. That is why the Senegalese delegation
cherishes the hope that the States that have withdrawn
from the Rome Statute will heed the call ofthe President
of the Assembly of States Parties and reconsider their
positions, and that those States that have not yet
withdrawn from the Rome Statute will adhere to it.

We firmly believe that a positive perception of
the Court and the promotion of peaceful relations
marked by mutual trust between Africa and the ICC,
as well as the efficient and effective addressing of
everyone's concerns, necessarily require dialogue and
cooperation. We therefore invite all States parties to
commit themselves to a unified policy of consensus
and solidarity to restore the confidence and enthusiasm
that people and Governments demonstrated during
the creation of the Court. Given the gravity of certain
crimes that shock our collective conscience, we have a
moral duty to remain united and act together.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.

