The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Bedouma Alain
Yoda, and the Minister of State for Cooperation and
Francophonie of France, His Excellency Mr. Alain
Joyandet.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to the Ouagadougou political process and
to the electoral timeline endorsed by all the main
Ivorian political actors, leading to the first round
of open, free, fair and transparent presidential
elections on 29 November 2009. It commends the
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore of Burkina
F aso, for his continued efforts to support the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire.

"The Security Council further reiterates its
determination to bring its full support to a
credible electoral process and highlights the
importance of an inclusive participation of the
Ivorian civil society. It stresses that, to this end, it
has extended the mandate and has maintained the
troop level of the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) in its resolution 1880
(2009). It further stresses that it expressed in this
resolution its intention to authorize the Secretary-
General to redeploy troops as may be needed
between the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and UNOCI.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the delay in publication of the provisional
voters list, and highlights that further delays in
the publication of the voters list may put at risk
the timeline for open, free, fair and transparent
presidential elections.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Ivorian political actors are bound to respect the
electoral timeline. It urges all Ivorian actors to
comply fully with their commitments in order for
the voters list to be published as soon as possible
in the framework of a transparent and inclusive
process. It recalls that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General will certify the voters
list explicitly.

"The Security Council will review the
situation by 15 October 2009. It expresses its
intention to react as appropriate, consistent with
resolution 1880 (2009), towards those who would
block the progress of the electoral process.

"The Security Council further expresses its
intention to start considering the future direction
of UNOCI by reviewing by 15 October its
mandate and the benchmarks for a possible
drawdown of the operation, in particular in light
of the progress of the electoral process."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/25.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

