Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, for initiating today's debate.
This is an issue of serious concern to the United
Kingdom. Like others, I should like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her introduction today
and Mr. Costa and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their
contributions, and also to welcome the attendance of
High Representative Duarte at today's debate.

The draft presidential statement before us
addresses three key issues: action by the Central
African subregion, the arms trade itself, and action by
the international community in response. I should like
to address these three issues.

First, I shall address subregional action. The
United Kingdom believes that information-sharing and
transparency help to tackle this illicit trade.
Transparent systems are less vulnerable to
manipulation by groups that View rigorous export
controls as an obstacle to their self-serving goals.
Closing gaps and addressing weaknesses in licensing
procedures, end-use monitoring practices and other
controls are essential measures for preventing
diversion. It is easier to spot and correct diversions in
transparent systems than in systems that are more
opaque.

The establishment of a subregional register of
small arms by the Central African States should be an
effective step in our overall efforts to combat this illicit
trade and should promote regional confidence-building,
stability and security.

Secondly, with regard to the arms trade more
generally, we acknowledge the right of States to legally
trade in conventional arms for self-defence. However,
we must ensure that robust transparency and control
measures are in place to avoid arms being diverted to
those who could use them to commit human rights
violations and undermine peace and security.

To this end, the United Kingdom has played a
leading role in developing a legally binding arms trade
treaty that would set standards for the arms trade,
ensuring respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law while respecting a State's inherent
right to self-defence.

Furthermore, arms embargoes imposed by this
Council in the Central African region require the active
cooperation of the Central African countries
themselves to ensure their effective implementation. If
those embargoes are to be effective in their purpose
and deliver the improvements to the political and
security environments that they have been introduced
to achieve, any possible Violations must be promptly
reported.
Thirdly, the United Nations has a role. United
Nations missions in the subregion are involved in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration work.
Good practice in this area includes measures to prevent
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
to manage effectively the legitimate stockpiles of
weapons held by States.

The United Kingdom Government is playing its
part. We are providing funding to non-governmental
organizations that are developing initiatives and
mechanisms for enhancing controls and regulations on
small arms and light weapons and arms transfers,
reducing conflict and promoting more effective and
accountable security provision. We are also supporting
non-governmental organizations that provide
independent policy research and analysis on small arms
and armed violence issues, for example in Burundi.

Through our support to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Crisis Prevention
and Recovery Thematic Trust Fund, the United
Kingdom has assisted efforts to control and curtail the
supply of arms to conflict zones and fragile settings
through civilian arms collection, surplus destruction
and stockpile management, as well as enhancements to
transfer and export controls. We have also supported
UNDP's armed violence reduction work, which aims to
inhibit the demand for arms and target the root causes
of armed Violence and community insecurity, for
example by supporting armed violence prevention and
community security programmes.

Every day, people are affected by the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and their
ammunitions. In the hands of criminal gangs or armed
groups, as the Austrian Ambassador has just said,
hundreds of thousands of people worldwide are injured
and killed by them every year. Such Violence destroys
livelihoods, displaces entire communities and hampers
social and economic development. The impact on
peace, reconstruction, stability, security, human rights
and sustainable development has been especially
damaging in Central Africa. The draft presidential
statement before us points the way for addressing this
scourge and we strongly support the measures it
contains.

