Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller for their
briefings. South Africa wishes to express its support for
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy and commend
him on all the efforts that he is undertaking to find a
peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen.

My delegation would like to address two points in
our intervention today, namely, the political situation
and the humanitarian situation.

First, with regard to the political situation, we
continue to urge all parties involved in the war in

Yemen to cease hostilities and fully implement the
Stockholm Agreement. We believe that, in order to
achieve sustainable peace in Yemen, differences among
the parties cannot be resolved militarily.

In that regard, we call on all sides to carry out their
respective obligations as set forth in the Stockholm
Agreement. Its implementation is of paramount
importance, as it will assist in building confidence
among the parties and improve the chances of reaching
a broader political agreement. We welcome any positive
steps taken by the parties to resolve the conflict so far,
which help de-escalate tensions.

South Africa firmly believes that, in order to
ensure a long-term solution to the crisis in Yemen,
it is necessary for all parties to commit to a political
process. We continue to support a negotiated political
settlement that engages all parties in an inclusive all
Yemeni-led dialogue to resolve differences and address
the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The recent developments in southern Yemen are of
deep concern. We wish to encourage players in the region
to continue the process of seeking a solution to this
new development that will support the United Nations-
mediated process and the Stockholm Agreement. We
are encouraged by positive developments in the region
to increase cooperation and work to achieve that goal.
We further call on all the countries of the region to
prioritize dialogue to address any political differences
that might exist.

Secondly, concerning the humanitarian situation,
South Africa remains extremely concerned about the
serious humanitarian crisis in Yemen. To date, over
15 million people - halfthe population onemen - are
facing starvation; 1.1 million people are affected by
cholera; and 3 million people have been forced to flee,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Vulnerable groups, especially women and children,
most often face the severe consequences of war, and
that is no different in Yemen. This unprecedented
humanitarian crisis of epic proportions is a strong
indicator of the human toll of continued military
action and conflict in Yemen, which requires an
urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a
negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis.

South Africa also calls on all parties to abide by
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We welcome the full reopening of the World
Food Programme's aid distribution after its partial
closure in June. We remain hopeful that that critical aid
channel will remain open and free of misuse.

The continued violence by all parties to this
conflict is not conducive to peacebuilding measures.
To enable the latter, South Africa calls on all parties
to de-escalate the fighting in other parts of the country
and commit to a general ceasefire to enable dialogue
and inclusive peaceful negotiations.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict will be a negotiated,
Yemeni-led political settlement that is inclusive and
fair and that puts the interests and well-being of all the
citizens of Yemen first.

