Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers and the Secretary-General in
condemning the heinous act of terror on the United
Nations building in Abuja. We wish to express our
solidarity and sympathy with the people and
Government of Nigeria, and we extend our sincere
condolences to the Victims and their families.

My delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting, as well as
for the excellent non-paper (S/ZOll/496, annex)
reflecting many of the vital challenges that face United
Nations peacekeeping. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable remarks.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement

delivered by Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

We do indeed take comfort in witnessing the
cessation of conflict in some countries and their
progress in steady rebuilding and reconstruction. The
role and contribution of the United Nations and the
international community in their progress are
exceptional, and the Security Council has been
determined and decisive in that regard.

The experience of all those conflicts reaffirms the
critical importance of peacekeeping operations in
fulfilling the Council's primary responsibility for
saving humankind from the scourge of war. We believe
that the continuing importance of peacekeeping
missions should be duly recognized. We therefore
reiterate our full support for the Council's increased
recognition of United Nations peacekeeping as a global
partnership that draws on the contributions of troop-
and police-contributing countries, the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Secretariat, not to
mention the host country.

As this is a collective endeavour, all stakeholders
need to be on the same page with a sense of common
purpose in order to effectively address the challenges.
United Nations peacekeeping must also continue to be
clearly and firmly based on three basic principles,
namely, the interests of the parties concerned;
impartiality; and the non-use of force except in self-
defence and in defence of the Security Council
mandate.

As missions have become increasingly
multidimensional, complex and highly risky in some
theatres, our responsibility to provide explicitly clear
guidelines to Blue Helmets, along with the necessary
equipment, training and resources, has also become
more pronounced.

The political, human, financial, logistic and
information resources necessary to achieve the
mission's mandate can be mobilized and sustained only
through continuous efforts to strengthen consultation
and coordination among our stakeholders. In this
regard, the views of troop- and police-contributing
countries are critical, and they, along with the host
country, should be more frequently and meaningfully
consulted.
11-48209

The question of resources, as highlighted in the
concept paper (S/2011/496, annex), indeed remains
vital. A lack of required resources could not only
impinge on the safety and security of peacekeepers, but
could also affect peacekeepers' mandated capacities to
safeguard populations. To undertake the noble goal of
the protection of civilians, which my delegation fully
supports, adequate capabilities must be provided, along
with clear mission goals, in order to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

However, peacekeeping alone will remain
insufficient if our goal is to achieve sustainable peace.
A comprehensive approach that includes tackling root
causes and conducting peacemaking is often the key to
sustainable peace. Post-conflict peacebuilding is
therefore Vital to helping war-torn societies transition
to durable peace. In that regard, the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission is of paramount
importance. In that context, we commend the Security
Council's focus over the past two years on the nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Furthermore,
it is important that skilled and culturally aware civilian
experts, especially from the global South, be deployed
in a timely manner in areas in which expertise is
required by the host countries.

Peacekeeping is one of the important elements of
Indonesia's foreign policy. Indonesia has participated
actively in United Nations peacekeeping operations
since 1956, and is presently contributing to six
peacekeeping operations around the world. Indonesia
will continue its contribution and increase its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Let me conclude by reiterating the importance for
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
and the international community to not only ensure the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, but also to
tackle the root causes of disputes and conflicts at the
earliest stage in a well-planned, coherent, coordinated
and comprehensive manner, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations.

