Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
congratulate Sweden on its presidency of the Security
Council and applaud its commitment to gender balance
among the briefers of the Council this month. The
United Arab Emirates supports Sweden's dedicated
focus on the issue of children and armed conflict, and
its convening of today's debate.

I also thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba, UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore,
and civil society representative Yenny Londofio for
their insightful briefings earlier today.

There is nothing more universal than the principle
that children are entitled to special protection. That is
something that we can all agree on, no matter our policy
positions or how entrenched our disagreements may be.
The knot in the pit of your stomach when you realize
what is happening to children around the world affects
us all because it is an affront to our shared humanity.
For this reason, we should all be extremely concerned
by the significant increase of verified grave violations
against children in 2017.

Children are entitled to special protection not only
because they deserve a future, but also because they
represent our future. We know that there is nowhere
on Earth where children's futures are more under
threat than in my own region, where children suffer
enormously from the deluge of current crises. And this
poses an existential threat to the future of the Middle
East, where 60 per cent of the population of the Arab
World is under the age of 30. Throughout our region,
the United Arab Emirates is firmly committed to the
protection of children affected by conflict, both by
providing humanitarian aid and ensuring their long-
term well-being.

As Special Representative Gamba mentioned in
her briefing, the number of violations against children
around the world in 2017 was unacceptably high. In
Syria in particular, there were more abuses against
children than ever before as the unresolved conflict
endures as one of the most heartbreaking crises of our
time. Extremist and terrorist groups in our region also
continue to pose a serious threat to children. Da'esh in
Syria and Iraq and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
in Yemen, for example, kill, abduct, recruit for suicide
bombings, and sexually abuse children. They are
also responsible. for the attacks and the manufacture
of explosive devices that cause child casualties and
damage to infrastructure critical to the welfare and
safety of children. These are deliberate tactics at the
core of the modus operandi of extremists and terrorists.
We call on the international community to hold violent
perpetrators of such atrocities to account.

Old conflicts create suffering for children equal to
that in newer ones. In the longest and most entrenched
of the crisis in our region, we are appalled by Israel's
neglect of children in the occupied Palestinian territories
and its detention of hundreds of Palestinian children in
2017. Such actions, as well as violence against children
across the occupied Palestinian territories, will do
nothing but continue to undermine Israel's security.

We are also concerned with violations in the regions
that surround us. In Somalia, Al-Shabaab continues to
terrorize children and their families through heinous
crimes, including public executions of children. In
Myanmar, Rohingya Muslim children continue to be
persecuted as part of ongoing violence against that very
unprotected community.

Allow me to also address the situation in Yemen,
since the United Arab Emirates is a member of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, which has been
the focus of some in this discussion today. The coalition
takes its responsibility for protecting all civilians
in armed conflict - particularly children - very
seriously. The coalition has sustained efforts and will
continue to do more to minimize the impact of the
conflict on children, because we believe deeply that
every innocent child killed or injured in the conflict
is a loss too many. The coalition closely coordinates
with all United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations on the ground to ensure the protection of
children, and this will continue.

To that end, in coordination with Special
Representative Gamba, the coalition established a
dedicated child protection unit, embedded within
coalition headquarters, as a means of improving
the protection of children. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Special Representative Gamba
for her close engagement with the coalition, and
reiterate the United Arab Emirates's deep appreciation
for her important mandate. Our continuous efforts to
strengthen the protection of children have yielded
positive results, including through the reintegration
of Yemeni children who were recruited by the Houthi
militia into their communities.

While we work to protect children in Yemen,
the Houthis continue to terrorize the population. We
condemn their complete disregard for children and
their violations of international humanitarian law.
Among their worst offences are the despicable use of
children as child soldiers and human shields, the use of
civilian hospitals and schools for military purposes, the
indiscriminate laying of landmines, as well as missile
attacks on Saudi Arabia against its civilian population.

There is no better way to halt the tragedy of
children being unprotected in armed conflict than
preventing conflict from breaking out in the first
place. To that end, we call for better integrating child
protection and prevention efforts. We fully support the
Secretary-General's recommendations in his report
(S/2018/465) , and call on the Security Council to
reinforce those actions.

We also call for the full implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda, with its emphasis
on conflict prevention and the meaningful participation
of women. The involvement of women in prevention
efforts will reap dividends for protecting children
in the long term. Moreover, young people and their
active participation in building peaceful and inclusive
societies is also key to protecting children and
preventing conflict. Key to that is education. To that
end, we support the focus in the United Kingdom's
statement today on educating as part of our security and
development efforts, including achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 4.

Finally, regarding the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms for the Children and Armed Conflict
report, we support the guidelines on which the
mechanisms are based and believe they should depend
on reliable sources and independent United Nations
observers. In addition, we encourage the Special
Representative's Office to work and consult with
concerned States to share insights and give input ahead
of drawing conclusions in order to better inform and
empower a stronger and more robust child protection
architecture, focused on prevention.

