Mr. Abdoulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First, let
me extend our thanks to the American presidency of the
Security Council for holding today's important debate.

The changing security environment and the
complex nature of conflicts make it imperative that
we reconsider the effectiveness and utility of tools
available for the Security Council to prevent, manage
and settle disputes. There is no doubt that peacekeeping
operations are among the most important of those
tools, which makes it all the more important that we
review them so that we can maintain their effectiveness
and credibility.

We thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and would like to affirm to him that we support all the
principles that he suggested.

We welcome the presidency's initiative to shed light
on the need to review current mandates to develop and
reinforce them. This will help a recommitment to ending
conflicts that have gone on for far too long, where some
peacekeeping operations have become mere symbols
of the inability of the international community to
effectively contribute to a final settlement of decades-
old disputes.

Consequently, we do not necessarily consider the
objective of review as simply an exercise in cost-cutting
or achieving significant savings in peacekeeping
operation budgets. If we agree that the objective of this
review is to find ways of bolstering the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations by making them more
purposeful, then we believe that we need to undertake
a careful analysis of the political, security and regional
environments of peacekeeping operations. In addition,
we need to evaluate the effectiveness and impact of
the attendant tools of regional political initiatives and
sanction regimes.

Peacekeeping operations must be approached
from the perspective of the continuum of response to
conflicts, which means that operation mandates must
be developed in a context of ongoing engagement that
includes integrated, physical operational and pragmatic
approaches, within, of course, the specific context
under consideration. Mandates must be restructured
or realigned continuously in response to political and
operational developments.

It is also important that assessments be based on
elements that were proved necessary for the success
of those missions, including, for instance, a political
process that is supported regionally and internationally,
such as the current African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. This was also the case
for Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Cote d'Ivoire before
the closure of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste and the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, respectively. These were operations that were
deemed successful.

Meanwhile, exit strategies for the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti provide two examples where there is no
need for an extensive United Nations security presence

under a peacekeeping-operation mandate. Rather, the
United Nations presence should address the needs of
sustaining peacebuilding and reinforcing national
capacity-building to enable States and societies to
own and develop mechanisms that plant the seeds of
conflict prevention.

In addition to a credible framework as one
of the conditions for the success of peacekeeping
operations, maintaining the trust of the host country
in the credibility of the United Nations mission and the
resulting cooperation that would lead to the success of
such mission must remain a major focus in assessing
the relevance of a certain peacekeeping operation to
United Nations engagement in settlement efforts. A
poignant reminder of the importance of this perspective
is seen in the challenges faced by the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan. In addition,
relations between the Congolese Government with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Malian
Government with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali went through
critical stages that had a negative impact on the
performance and effectiveness of the two missions,
which prompted a realignment and restructuring of the
missions" roles to make them more responsive to the
needs and developments in the two countries.

The previous examples clearly show that the
effectiveness and function of peacekeeping operations
is a dynamic process requiring an integrated
multidimensional assessment and constant revision of
a mission's role, mandate and structure. Consequently,
no effective review of peacekeeping operations and
their development can be undertaken without first
reviewing the peace and security architecture of the
United Nations, including the United Nations role in
sustaining peace by integrating the roles of all United
Nations and international bodies' programmes and
agencies. This is why the Peacebuilding Commission
can play an increasingly important advisory role, as far
as every conflict is concerned, in helping the Security
Council realign mandates with the comprehensive
vision of sustaining peace and addressing the root
causes of conflicts.

Close consultations with troop-contributing
countries are of the utmost importance, especially
during the mandate-design and review stages, in order
to incorporate field experience into every mandate in
line with the concept of participation and collective
ownership of mandates. For this particular reason,
the tripartite consultation mechanism among the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat must be leveraged across deployed missions.

I would like to make six points that we think
will contribute to effective mandates in future
peacekeeping operations.

First, peacekeeping operations must not be
burdened by unrealistic tasks that exceed their capacity
and fail to recognize political and operational realities.

Secondly, exit strategies must be worked out in
the early stages of mandate development based on
clear benchmarks and a specific time frame. These
elements should be reviewed periodically to allow
the Council to recalibrate the mandate in line with
recent developments.

Thirdly, a strategic partnership with the host
country must be established and focus on national
ownership of dialogue and reconciliation efforts and
improved communication to build mutual trust. Such
an environment would greatly contribute to the success
of the mission while avoiding any obstacles.

Fourthly, sufficient attention must be given to the
building of national security capacity to allow the State
to assume the responsibility of protecting civilians.
Such an approach would eliminate the culture of
overdependency by the host country on the police and
military components of the mission, which makes it
more difficult to end a mandate when the time comes.

Fifthly, synergies and complementaries must be
encouraged between the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements in the area of conflict
resolution, based on the comparative advantages of
each. A case in point is the potential opportunity of
a partnership with the African Union to address the
crises of the continent, although the future of such
a partnership depends upon African peace support
operations having access to the budget of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

Sixthly, new input must be given to the partnership
between the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries when implementing the zero-tolerance policy
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations in line with the general framework endorsed
by the General Assembly pursuant to resolution 71/278.

Egypt is a major contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As such, we have offered
to host the 2018 ministerial meeting on peacekeeping
operations. We look forward to cooperating with the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries so that the meeting will represent a qualitative
leap in our common effort to develop United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

