Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I join others in
thanking Judge Meron of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Joensen of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor
J allow for their comprehensive statements. Our thanks
also go to Ambassador Rosenthal and his delegation for
ably guiding the Informal Working Group.
Pakistan commends and supports the important
work of the two Tribunals in delivering justice and
ending impunity. During their proceedings, the
Tribunals have developed a comprehensive corpus
of precedents in international criminal law, and we
welcome their contribution.

Two requests have been made to the Council. Judge
Joensen has requested the extension of the terms of
office of five permanent judges in order to meet the
goals of the ICTR's completion strategy - including
the completion of all appeals by the end of 2014 - and
Judge Meron has requested the extension of the terms of
office of ICTY judges. We are constructively engaged
with the Working Group to consider those requests and
to decide on an appropriate duration for the extension
of the Judges' terms.

There has been progress in the completion strategies
of the ICTR and ICTY during the period covered by the
latest reports of the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
two Tribunals (see S/2012/836 and S/2012/847). In the
past six months, the Tribunals continued to conduct trial
proceedings and appeal proceedings, draft judgements
and refer cases to domestic jurisdictions. They also
continued to contribute to procedural and evidentiary
international criminal law in a professional manner and
to implement various reforms to improve drafting of
judgements, translation, outreach, and preservation of
archives. The Tribunals' initiatives on assistance and
support to Victims, as well as legacy and capacity-
building projects, are steps in the right direction.

The Tribunals have made efforts to transfer their
functions to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. We are glad to know that
the necessary arrangements are almost complete,
as the ICTR transfers records and archives, as
well as prosecutorial tasks, to the Mechanism. We
hope that the ICTY will complete its preparations
for the transfer of other functions to the Residual
Mechanism by 1 July 2013, in accordance with Council
resolution 1966 (2010).

The Tribunals need to show commitment to the
timely conclusion of their proceedings and ensure full
compliance with the requirements of due process. We
recognize the difficulties in the assignment of work
to judges and in staff management in the process of
winding down the Tribunals' work. The recruitment
of workers and retention of staff with institutional
memory of cases pose major challenges to the work of
Tribunals in the completion process.

Over time, decisions ofthe Tribunals have produced
an impressive body ofjurisprudence that can influence
the fight against impunity and shape the future of
global justice. It is therefore important to preserve the
legacy of the Tribunals because of their contribution to
the fields of international humanitarian law and legal
doctrines.

