Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their briefings.

The developments in Guinea-Bissau give abundant
cause for concern. We regret the fact that the progress
made following the establishment of a consensus-

based Government in April has once again morphed
into clashes among the main political forces. Against
the background of pressing socioeconomic and
humanitarian challenges, this is farming the flames of
what is already a highly volatile situation in the country.

We welcome the President of Guinea-Bissau's
announcement yesterday of the decision to set 10 March
2019 as the new date for parliamentary elections.
Although we wish to avoid dramatizing the fact that
the appointments to the National Assembly have been
postponed, timely elections on 18 November would
have generated an important positive momentum for
improving the overall climate.
We now see that the situation in Guinea-Bissau is
inching towards a perilous threshold, beyond which
turmoil awaits both the country and its people. At this
fateful moment, we call on all social and political forces
to act responsibly and to proceed in a way that reflects
national interests and leads to a prompt resolution of
existing disputes. We have closely studied the report on
the outcomes of the strategic assessment of the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2018/1086). We believe that,
at the present moment, the United Nations mission
is a unique guarantor for national reconciliation.
The Office is successfully undertaking projects for
social development and building the capacities of law
enforcement and the country's armed forces.

At the same time, we must recognize the fact that,
in many areas, its potential, above all in the political
sphere, cannot be fully realized. In general, we believe
that the reconfiguration of the Integrated Office needs
to be approached in an extremely balanced manner.
Any hasty drawdown of the mission's work would
lead only to greater divisions within Bissau-Guinean
society, degrade State institutions and result in an
increase in drug trafficking and corruption. In that
regard, we believe that it would be advisable to decide
on the details concerning the implementation of the
mission's reconfiguration only after the electoral cycle
has been completed and the country has returned to the
constitutional path.

