Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I express my sincere thanks and gratitude to
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative and
comprehensive briefing at the beginning ofthis meeting.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2470 (2019),
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), based on the
request and desire of Iraq. It would be remiss of me
not to commend UNAMI and its efforts throughout
Iraq. The Mission is providing advice in support of
national efforts led by the Iraqi Government to build
a promising future for Iraq. That includes creating
the necessary conditions for achieving security and
stability and responding to the humanitarian needs
of the brotherly Iraqi people, in addition to creating
the necessary foundation for recovery and attaining
sustainable development and reconstruction.

I stress that the State of Kuwait will continue its
full support to, and cooperation with, UNAMI and
the country team in order to carry out their tasks to
the fullest. We believe that it is high time for Iraq to
recover after the painful events it experienced during
its fight against the terrorist group Da'esh. We reaffirm
our solidarity with the leadership, the Government and
the people of Iraq in their fight against that scourge. We
underscore the importance of consolidating national
unity and maintaining the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq.

We call upon all Member States that participated
in the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq to fulfil their commitments
undertaken during the Conference, especially those
pertaining to the reconstruction of the regions that
were occupied by Da'esh. We look forward to the
establishment ofa follow-up mechanism, in cooperation
and coordination with the Iraqi Government, to ensure
the fulfilment of those commitments in order to
alleviate its burden of fighting Da'esh and enable Iraq
to realize its vision for the future towards building a
new and unified Iraq.

Concerning the outstanding international
commitments and the remaining humanitarian issues
related to the missing Kuwaiti and third-country
nationals and Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, we share the regret expressed by the Secretary-
General in his latest report (S/2019/352) that 369 cases
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals remain
unresolved and that no human remains have been
exhumed since 2004. We call upon Iraq to continue its
efforts in that regard so as to achieve tangible results
on the ground. We hope that Iraq will continue its
constructive cooperation within the framework of the
Tripartite Commission and its technical committee,
under the able leadership of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, in order to resolve this humanitarian
issue as required.

We commend the commitment of Security
Council members to this issue, as they have kept this
humanitarian issue on the agenda of the Council for
many years. Council members are also following up
on the implementation of the various commitments set
in the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
those main commitments that remain outstanding.

We stress once again that the State of Kuwait will
spare no effort in working to determine the fate of
the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals. We
commend the commitment of the brotherly Republic of
Iraq to fulfilling its international obligations towards
the State of Kuwait. We are fully willing to provide
assistance to accelerate the implementation of the
obligations set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions. At the same time, we call upon the UNAMI
to continue carrying out its mandate concerning
missing persons and the return of property, including
the national archives, in keeping with resolution 2107
(2013). The Kuwaiti property and national archives
constitute a historical heritage for the State and the
people of Kuwait. It is unfortunate that we have not
received any information on the whereabouts of the
national archives since the liberation of Kuwait in 1991.

In conclusion, both brotherly countries are keen
to promote and develop their relations at all levels and
in all domains. Against that backdrop, Kuwait hosted
members of the Iraqi Government for two days during
the seventh meeting of the Joint Kuwaiti-Iraqi high-
level committee. We reached many understandings and
agreements on all issues of common interest, thereby
overcoming the circumstances that had prevented us in
the past from achieving integration and convergence as
two neighbourly countries and brotherly peoples that
have historical relations based on good-neighbourliness.

