Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, to express my warmest congratulations on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of March and to thank your predecessors
for the work they accomplished in guiding this body. I
would also like to welcome the renewed commitment
of the Council, which has just returned from a mission
to Haiti, to better understanding the situation
prevailing there.

Indeed, the number of resolutions adopted by this
organ with respect to Haiti - more than 10 altogether
between 2004 and 2011 - bears ample witness to the
interest it attaches to the recovery of that country,
which more than ever needs the support of the
international community. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for presenting
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/ 128), which
further informs us about the status of the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and its
prospects for the months to come.

Through resolution 1542 (2004), members will
recall, MINUSTAH was made responsible for helping
the Haitian Government and people to establish a safe,
stable environment in Haiti, supporting the political
process under way and improving the human rights
situation, in cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Meanwhile, the
earthquake of 12 January 2010 dealt a severe blow to
the convalescing Haitian nation, adding the loss of life
and devastated infrastructure. The resulting difficulties
in the political, economic and humanitarian spheres
naturally led to an increase in the size of MINUSTAH's
staff.

Based on a reading of the current report, it is
clear that significant progress has grown out of the
intelligent collaboration among the various
components of MINUSTAH and the Haitian
authorities. In that regard, we would do well to
emphasize the overall improvement in the security
situation, which is reinforced by the significant drop in
the number of murders, rapes and kidnappings.

I would like to congratulate MINUSTAH on the
progress made to date, as well as the efforts undertaken
by the Haitian Government, despite a difficult political
context. Nonetheless, concerns remain with respect to
the effects of the prolonged absence of a stable
Government on the Haitian political situation, which
has been severely weakened. The absence of a
consensual road map among the different political
forces for strengthening institutions and improving the
rule of law could undermine the encouraging results
already achieved. Ultimately, such a consensus is
necessary in order to draft reforms that could help
Haiti to establish an effective, independent judiciary
and a fully operational police force, and, most
importantly, to hold free, democratic elections in 2012.
That is the fraternal message that Senegal would like to
offer the political class of that friendly country.

But the challenge facing Haiti is not merely
political. It is also humanitarian and involves public
health. We must help that devastated country to
manage the aftereffects of the earthquake,
deforestation, and above all the epidemics that find
fertile ground under such circumstances.

Just as numerous countries came to Haiti's
bedside, in 2005 Senegal offered MINUSTAH an entire
police unit comprising 85 gendarmes, before raising
that number to 140 in 2010, without counting the
24 police officers already on the ground. In addition,
because of the centuries-old historic links between
Haiti and the African continent, Senegal pursued its
efforts in solidarity with the Haitian people in the
aftermath of the 2010 earthquake by signing a
cooperation agreement and a protocol covering the
hosting, training and professional integration of
Haitian nationals in Senegal. To date, 160 Haitian
students have been enrolled in Senegalese universities.

That process has been broadened by Senegalese
citizens who meet within private organizations such as
the Senegal-Haiti Initiative Committee to grant
scholarships to Haitian students and to donate
medicines. This attests to the great hope that the
Government and people of Senegal attach to the return
of stability to Haiti so that it can embark on the path of
true development.

Senegal endorses the recommendations contained
in the report and remains convinced of the capacities of
the Haitian political class and the unswerving
commitment of the international community to meeting
the challenges.

To conclude, I assure the Council of the
unflagging will and commitment of the Government of
Senegal to contributing to the implementation of
MINUSTAH's mandate and to all the other goals set by
the United Nations system to aid in Haiti's recovery.

