Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your
country, Indonesia, on your presidency of the Security
Council. I would especially like to thank you,
Mr. Minister, for your presence in New York to preside
over this meeting.

Before I turn to the topic that has brought us
together today, I would like to make a few brief
comments on the open debates of the Security Council.

I assume that the purpose of open debates is to
allow the members of the Security Council to hear the
views and opinions of the other delegations to the
United Nations that are not members of this body. I am
concerned because this is not the first time that I have
come to make a statement in the Security Council that I
have observed a phenomenon repeating itself time and
again. A sort of migration from the Council usually
occurs 90 minutes after a meeting begins, with the
principal members of the Secretariat and Permanent
Representatives gradually leaving the Chamber.
Moreover, at this very moment I notice that only the
President and another head of Mission are the only
Permanent Representatives seated at the table.
Apparently, there are other more important things
attracting the attention of our colleagues. It is a shame
that this meeting has been scheduled at the same time
as those other activities. I therefore hope that this is not
considered as a second-class exercise or a meeting just
for show. As far as the working methods of the
Security Council are concerned - a phrase that is
referred to continuously in this House * this is one
that should be reformed thoroughly.

With regard to the issue before the Council, my
delegation would like to offer the following comments.
We are going to approach this matter from a different
point of view than in the past, when doctrinaire debates
were held during the cold war with regard to the
application of coercive measures and corresponding
interpretations of the application of Articles 41, 42, 51,
52 and 53 of the Charter.

In current international practice, the participation
of regional organizations is part of the Organization's
overall framework, bringing to it the best capabilities
of the various regions in rebuilding and strengthening
States affected by conflict. It is therefore appropriate
that we continue a debate in the Security Council as to
the function of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

In the debate that took place in March, we
focused our comments on the possibility that regional
organizations could assume greater responsibility in
the area of military operations. We also expressed our
doubts about the desirability of moving towards the
regionalization of peacekeeping operations and the
need to fully respect certain traditional principles of
peacekeeping operations, especially those of
impartiality and the need for the composition of a force
to reflect the widest possible geographical
representation.

On this occasion, I should like to take up the
issue of the role of regional organizations once they are
already involved in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks. It is in that area that we can appreciate the great
potential regional organizations hold for cooperation
with United Nation-led processes. We believe that
there is clearly value to arguments calling for greater
participation for regional organizations in the areas of
peace and security and, more specifically, in post-
conflict reconstruction and development. It is at the
regional level that the consequences of a conflict are
most immediately felt. States in the region of a conflict
are in the best position to understand the situation in its
cultural context. It is also the States of the region that
have the most information.

With regard to the States of Latin America and
the Caribbean, we have the contemporary example of
countries of the region and the Organization of
American States (OAS) joining in the peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations in Haiti. Those countries
provided military contingents. Above all, however,
working through the OAS - they brought to bear their
experiences in post-conflict reconstruction in various
areas, including in the areas of humanitarian
assistance, the strengthening of democratic State
institutions, medical and economic assistance and
development aid.

I do not want to exhaustively enumerate the
activities of the OAS in the field, but its support is
essential and invaluable for States participating in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
However, I should mention its electoral support aimed
at Haiti's establishment of a permanent electoral
commission; its support in strengthening institutions;
the process to update Haiti's civil registry; its support
in strengthening Haiti's judicial system, in particular
through the Justice Studies Center of the Americas and
the Inter-American Juridical Committee; its promotion
of tourism and trade; its support for activities to
generate employment and improve the economy; its
assistance in the area of management training and
coordination of foreign aid; its support for the
Government of Haiti in formulating development
policies in coordination with the United Nations, the
Caribbean Community and other institutions; and the
implementation of OAS resolutions aimed at increasing
cooperation with Haiti with a view to operationalize
the National Drug Observatory through technical and
scientific capacity-building.

I should also underscore the steps being taken by
the OAS with international financial institutions, and in
particular the role of the Inter-American Development
Bank. Those institutions closely support the
development priorities of the Government of Haiti by
providing financial assistance for programmes intended
to create jobs, promote education and rehabilitate the
environment. They also support health policy in
various areas.

