Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): 1 align myself
with the statement made on behalf of the European
Union earlier today.

I will read out a shortened version of my statement
in view of time constraints. The full version will be
made available on my Twitter account.

Let me also thank the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for organizing this timely debate.
It is fitting that a neighbour of Colombia has
invited Member States to reflect on the importance
of peacebuilding. The recent history of that country
shows that it takes political courage and perseverance
to overcome obstacles to sustain sustainable peace in
a country. The comments just made by our colleague
from Sierra Leone are another positive example in that
context.

Let me also thank Ambassador Macharia Kamau and
Mr. Skoog for their briefings this morning. Furthermore,
the King of the Netherlands welcomes the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts, which
provides clear recommendations for improvement and
reform in the practices of peacebuilding, and we pay
tribute to the work, words and wisdom of Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal and thank him very much. I will focus
on three points: partnerships, coherence and peace
operations.

When it comes to partnerships, peacebuilding
can only be durable and inclusive if we view it as a
partnership that involves all of those who have a
stake in peace. We need not only the participation
of the belligerent parties, but also that of local
communities, local Governments, women, youth,
business communities, regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations. In our view, women's
participation, as it has already been said today, is
a condition for peace. We need to invite women to
participate on panels and at negotiating tables, and we
support the initiative of Mr. De Mistura to establish
an independent women's advisory board in his Office.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strives to support
partnerships for peacebuilding in practice. Since 2012,
UNICEF has implemented an innovative programme
known as the Peacebuilding, Education and Advocacy
Programme, with the help of the Peacebuilding
Support Office, and the Netherlands helped to make
that programme possible. That partnership combined
educational activities with academic development
with a view towards peacebuilding and advocacy
under national ownership, in conjunction with political
efforts. It was implemented in 14 countries, including
Pakistan, Uganda, Somalia and Liberia. It is an example
of a coalition of stakeholders working towards the same
goal: to give children and youth the tools to support
peace in their country.

With regard to coherence, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands considers it of the utmost importance that
the peacebuilding review be linked to the Secretary-
General's review of peace operations, the review
of resolution 1325 (2000) and the 2030 Agenda
on Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1). Linking the recommendations of those
crucial reviews and processes should ensure maximum
coherence of United Nations actions. The high-level
thematic debate in the General Assembly in May
provides us with an opportunity to reflect on concrete
ways of enhancing coherence within the United
Nations system on the issues of peace and security.
In addition, to prevent and effectively end conflicts
the Security Council has a range of possibilities at
its disposal. We welcome a more effective use of
existing mechanisms, such as horizon scannings and
briefings by Special Advisers and other bodies such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Department of Political Affairs.
Furthermore, we believe that Resident Coordinators
and Special Representatives should be accountable for
the efforts of the United Nations during the entire cycle
of conflict. Only this morning we hosted a meeting
between the United Nations Development Programme
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
enhance their cooperation on the ground on rule- of
law implementation in post-conflict situations. We
must build bridges between the silos within the United
Nations.

The third point on peace operations - during or
after a conflict, a coherent United Nations strategy
should focus on joint goals and deliverables, on the basis
of a shared conflict analysis and with complementary
roles for political, military, police and development
instruments. In that context, we also see a close link
between peace, justice and development.

In addition to supporting physical safety and
political dialogue in conflict-affected States, the
restoration of trust in the maintenance of law and
order is of equal importance. Security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are the main components of building peace. The police
component in missions should be further developed.
Resolution 2185 (2014), on the role of police in peace
operations, underlines the fact that police organizations
are the primary link between the Government and the
community in the field of security. They also provide
an essential element of the transition to stabilization.

In conclusion, I would like to refer to the draft
resolution on the peacebuilding architecture now being
negotiated in the General Assembly. In our view, the
draft resolution should give a clear and actionable
mandate to the Secretary-General aimed at overcoming
silos and addressing the fragmentation within the
United Nations system. We support the Ambassadors
of Angola and Australia in their efforts made on behalf
of that draft resolution.

The next points I am going to make were also just
made by our colleague from Sierra Leone, namely, that
peacebuilding activities are currently hampered by a
lack of funding. In order for the Peacebuilding Fund
to contribute substantively to peacebuilding efforts, it
must be able to rely on more donors than the ones that
are bearing the burden now. Aside from the Netherlands
being a large donor, we advocate for more and more
reliable funding and backstopping of special political
missions, peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation, in the Fifth Committee and other forums.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support,
as a partner of the United Nations for peace, justice
and development, for the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

