Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for her briefing
to the Security Council. The delegation of Egypt would
like to emphasize a number of points.

First, the three-year-long conflict in South
Sudan and its economic, political and humanitarian
consequences, as well as its repercussions throughout
the region, have shown that the only way to end the
crisis is through a comprehensive political settlement
that transcends political power-sharing and can
achieve comprehensive, complete and genuine national
reconciliation both for ordinary people and the political
elites, with the aim of resolving the issues and ensuring
lasting peace based on the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. From that perspective, it is important to ensure
that international efforts stress support for the political
process, in order to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan to support that process
and help to prepare a comprehensive plan for rebuilding
the State after the transition period.

Secondly, the high-level revitalization forum for
the peace agreement represents an opportunity that
must be seized and taken seriously. We must also step
up international support for promoting and backing the
efforts of the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in view of the fact that the
peace agreement's transition period is coming to an
end and their efforts represent a major opportunity of
avoiding further complications of the situation.

Thirdly, the current political situation and the
peace agreement require that every effort be made to
unify the factions of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement in Opposition and bring together the various
opposition groups, with the goal of forging a united
political front that rejects violence and that is capable
of being a serious political partner representing every
sector of society and of the political spectrum, without
narrow tribal prejudices, and of acting as a peaceful
political opposition in the modern meaning of the
term. In that regard, we believe it is key to support
the ongoing efforts to unify the opposition through
the Arusha process in order to ensure that it can be a
partner capable of participating in a positive way in the
future political life of South Sudan.

Fourthly, in that context, the ongoing efforts
of Egypt and Uganda resulted in the signing on
16 November of the Cairo declaration between the
Government of South Sudan and a group of former
detainees. The efforts were based on the Arusha
Agreement, signed in 2015 and supported by the entire
international community. We would like to point out
that they support and are geared to the same result as
those that other regional and international actors have
made towards reaching a comprehensive settlement
of the conflict by ensuring agreement among all the
political forces and parties.

Fifthly, in parallel with the strengthening ofpolitical
and diplomatic efforts, we would like to emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the international
community and all international and regional partners
are working to build up every component of the South
Sudanese State, help it to rebuild its institutional and
development structures and protect and promote them
in the future through a comprehensive reconstruction
plan. The Council's experience with other conflicts
has made it abundantly aware that a vacuum left by
the collapse of such institutions will be filled only
by chaos.

