Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation joins
other delegations in thanking the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Guehenno, for his informative briefing on
the elections in East Timor. Indeed, the Constitutional
Assembly elections held on 30 August, with a high
level of popular participation in the vote, are indeed a
glowing example to the world community.

My delegation commends the exemplary
behaviour and maturity of the East Timorese people in
this regard. The indomitable drive for self-rule and
their strong desire to lead the country to independence
have today borne their fruit. They are now only a step
away from attaining nationhood, which is a legitimate
expectation cherished by all and which will be
concretized in the very near future. We also note with
appreciation the election of 23 women.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
people of East Timor, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and all the
parties and international agencies who have left no
stone unturned in making the election a resounding
success.

At this juncture, there is no doubt that East Timor
is moving forward to achieve its historical course. My
delegation extends its very best wishes and reconfirms
its support for the consolidation of the gains of the first
democratic elections. At the same time, we should not,
as a main party committed to the peace process in East
Timor, be complacent. Our responsibility is now to see
how we can expedite the constitutional process that
would give the people of East Timor a constitution
reflecting their legitimate aspirations and objectives
and guaranteeing all rights and fundamental freedoms
without any discrimination. We are sure that an all-
inclusive approach, with the voluntary return of the
refugees, will further consolidate fraternity and will
help in the nation-building in East Timor.

We commend the invitation extended to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General by the
Indonesian President and Indonesia's congratulatory
message to UNTAET and to the people of East Timor
on the successful and peaceful election. Indeed, it
augurs well for fruitful bilateral relations between the
two countries. Like everyone else, we maintain that a
solid bilateral relation based on mutual confidence and
pragmatism will help East Timor through its
reconstruction programme and will enhance regional
cooperation.

Finally, on the question of international presence
in East Timor, we agree on the concept of right-sizing.
In this regard, we support the draft presidential
statement calling for a substantial international
presence in East Timor after independence.

