Let me begin by congratulating Indonesia on having accepted the request from several countries, including Ecuador, for the ongoing consideration of the risks to international peace and security posed by the pandemic. This dialogue should in fact be included in the formal agenda of the Security Council throughout the year so that we can assess the evolving situation. I would also like to highlight the briefings by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres (annex 1), former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon (annex 2) and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University (annex 3). By adopting resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on | July, the Security Council decisively joined the global efforts to combat the pandemic and those to mitigate and overcome the challenges that it is posing to peace and security. It is now crucial that the Security Council and all States Members of the Organization promote the effective implementation of the resolution, which calls for an immediate and comprehensive cessation of hostilities in all situations and calls on all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a humanitarian pause for at least 90 days. It is particularly important to implement the global ceasefire in order to facilitate humanitarian access and as a first step towards sustainable peace, as proposed by the Secretary-General and endorsed by 172 countries through the ceasefire statement co-sponsored by Ecuador. Ecuador advocates that it be complied with now and that the call for a humanitarian pause be renewed for another 90 days, by | October. It would also be useful for the Security Council and the Secretariat to be regularly informed where the resolution is being implemented and in which areas greater support is needed to ensure its effective implementation. The COVID-19 pandemic has already marked a turning point in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and it is occurring in the very year of the peacebuilding architecture review. Once the formal part of the review begins, we will need to take into account the outcome of this debate and acknowledge that pandemics exacerbate crisis conditions on the ground and undermine security and stability, thereby threatening peace. We need to promote efforts to improve the security conditions surrounding health systems and infrastructure. We also need to make progress on a coordinated international response. Moreover, we should redouble our efforts to ensure that this and future pandemics do not affect the Organization's new approach to preventive diplomacy. For example, we must therefore support the border areas of countries suffering from conflicts, as well as their neighbours, as Ecuador has been proposing in the consultations on implementing resolutions 2282 (2016) and 2413 (2018). Advancing the sustainable peace agenda did not anticipate a global crisis such as that resulting from COVID-19. However, it now requires cross-cutting and coordinated measures to combat COVID-19 and capacity-building so as to better address pandemics in the future, including through more robust and resilient peace and security frameworks.
