Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
extending my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. We are convinced that with your diplomatic
skill and vast experience you will guide the Council
effectively. My delegation pledges its full cooperation to
you and to your delegation.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Qin Huasun of China for his excellent
leadership in presiding over the work of the Council last
month.

My delegation would like to extend its appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his insightful report on the
situation in Tajikistan, as contained in document
S/1996/412. The continued fighting, the degradation of the
humanitarian condition of the civilian population and the
breakdown of the Ashgabat talks, as reported by the
Secretary-General, are indeed alarming. We call upon all
parties to halt the fighting immediately, in particular in
Tavildara, and to permit the civilian population to return in
peace and safety to their homes. We therefore welcome the
statements by President Rakhmonov and Mr. Nuri accepting
an extension of the cease-fire agreement. The news that the
parties are in the process of agreeing to resume the inter-
Tajik talks early in July is also encouraging. We are
pleased to note that the rest of the situation in the country
remains generally calm, although we take note of the
potentially volatile situation in Leninabad after the
occurrence of mass protests and the pursuant government
intervention.

We welcome the initiative of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gerd
Merrem, during his recent mission to the region, and we
hope that it will soon bear fruit by bringing the parties
together at the negotiating table.

In recent declarations, the Tajik Government and the
United Tajik Opposition have agreed that only a political
resolution to this conflict will bring about lasting peace
and stability in Tajikistan. We deeply regret the
restrictions on the freedom of movement imposed by the
parties on the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT). While we welcome the recent
assurances of President Rakhmonov that the restrictions
will be lifted, we are concerned that thus far there have
been no tangible acts to that effect. We call upon all
parties to cooperate with UNMOT.

In the light of the situation prevailing in Tajikistan,
it is evident that the role of UNMOT remains important.
We take note of the fact that the Government of
Tajikistan has stressed the importance of UNMOT'S
continuing presence in the country. For these reasons, my
delegation supports the extension of the mandate of
UNMOT for another six months, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution now before us.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to Mr. Darko Silovic, who is now leaving the post
of Head of Mission of UNMOT, for a job well done. We
would also like to thank Brigadier-General Hasan Abaza
and the personnel of UNMOT for their untiring efforts in
dangerous and fairly trying circumstances. Finally, we
would like to welcome Mr. Gerd Merrem, in his twin
roles as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and as the Head of Mission of UNMOT.

