Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Since the signing of the Abuja Agreement, the
peace process in Liberia has continued to move in a
positive direction, thanks to the international community's
assistance and promotion, particularly that of such
neighbouring countries as Nigeria and Ghana. Its new
Council of State has started to operate and has taken
some effective measures for the restoration and
maintenance of stability in the country. The re-
establishment of the country's judicial system has also
been placed on the agenda. The Chinese delegation
welcomes these positive developments.
The various parties in Liberia have taken important
steps in the peace process. However, we have noted that
they still need to make unremitting efforts to achieve
lasting peace, particularly by speeding up the
disengagement and disarmament of their forces. So far,
only 133 out of the 60,000 combatants to be disarmed
have laid down their arms and returned to their native
land. The work to be done in this regard therefore
remains very arduous. At the same time, there are still
violations of the cease-fire from time to time. We wish to
express our deep concern over the fact that all this might
constitute a stumbling-block to peace in Liberia.

After many years of conflict, the day of lasting
peace has now dawned in Liberia. This is by no means an
easy achievement. The various parties in Liberia should
cherish it deeply and seize the current favourable
opportunity to continue to work hard to this end. The
Secretary-General particularly points out in his report that
the disarmament and demobilization of combatants is a
key issue in the Liberian peace process. We fully share
this View, and we believe that an early completion of that
task will not only help maintain the momentum of the
peace process, but, more importantly, provide basic
conditions for national reconciliation in the country.
Therefore, the Security Council should urge the
conflicting parties concerned to demonstrate political good
will, resolve their differences and, taking into account the
fundamental interests of the Liberian people, take the
necessary actions to accomplish this task at an early date.

We have always held that the Security Council
should treat the conflicts in Africa the same as it does
those in other regions, support the just demands of
African countries and peoples and refrain from adopting
double standards in considering peace-keeping operations
in Africa.

 

The Chinese Government and people will, as always,
support the peace process in Liberia and the efforts made
by the international community and the Economic
Community of West African States for the settlement of the
Liberian question. On the basis of this position, China will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

