Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Special Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing
and to extend our full support for the dedicated work
the Special Representative and his team are carrying
out. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his important statement.
My delegation would like to express our deep
condolences on the loss of United States troops in a
helicopter crash in southern Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has achieved progress in its political,
security and economic transition over the past decade.
As Afghanistan enters its final year of transition, it
is important that the gains made be sustainable and
irreversible. In that context, I would like to focus on
four key areas where more efforts are required.

First, on political transition, ensuring the
success of the presidential and provincial elections
in 2014 will be the most critical task in the Afghans'
political transition. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing electoral preparations made by the Afghan
Government, including the finalization of candidates
and the completion of voter registration. Efforts must be
enhanced to ensure the security of electoral personnel
and voters and better access to encourage women's
participation. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) should strengthen its
support to that end so as to consolidate the legitimacy
and integrity of the process. National reconciliation,
owned and led by Afghans, is another important step
in moving the political transition forward. We welcome
the High Peace Council's recent efforts towards that end
and hope that such efforts will yield tangible progress
in the near future.

Secondly, on the security situation, while we
welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen the capacity
of the Afghan National Security Forces and the Afghan
National Police, a 13 per cent rise in civilian casualties
shows that serious challenges remain. The recent attacks
on humanitarian and development personnel further
adds to our concern. We strongly condemn such acts of
violence. We reiterate that all parties must take every
feasible step to ensure the protection of civilians and
comply with their obligations under international law.
The ongoing support of the international community
to strengthen the Afghan security sector and improve
cross-border cooperation is essential to effectively
meet such challenges.

Thirdly, on human rights, the protection of human
rights, especially those of women and children, is a key
commitment made by the Afghan Government under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework. We expect
the Afghan Government to build on the improvements
made and strive to make further advances, including
through the full implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women.

Lastly, on narcotics, we are concerned at this year's
record levels of poppy cultivation and opium production.
A comprehensive and coordinated response is needed
to address that threat. We urge the international
community and regional partners to further support
Afghan-led efforts to that end.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that the sustained
support of the international community remains vital to
Afghanistan's long-term stability. For its part, UNAMA
should continue to play an active role in assisting
Afghanistan, especially in protecting human rights and
strengthening governance.

