Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting and your country and
Minister's engagement.

Throughout its turbulent history, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has seldom been far from the
Council's agenda. Likewise, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is always present when our colleagues
in Geneva discuss humanitarian needs and appeals.
For that reason, it is easy to dismiss the latest crisis as
business as usual. However, as we have heard today,
we clearly cannot. The current crisis in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo is catastrophic in scale. Civilians,
particularly women and children, are bearing the brunt.
It is a man-made disaster. Surging levels of violence
fuelled by political instability and uncertainty are
leading to forced displacements, coupled with sexual
and gender-based violence, human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law - all of
which are driving the humanitarian crisis. The trends
and increasing rate in humanitarian needs are shocking
and unprecedented. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo is facing its worst humanitarian crisis in
modern times.

We therefore welcome the initiative of the
presidency and the Emergency Relief Coordinator
to bring the humanitarian situation in the country
to the attention of the Security Council. I also thank
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati and Abbe' Nshole for their
sobering briefings before the Council today. Let me
also take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We look forward to hearing him
later. Sweden fully supports the work of Mr. Lowcock,
the United Nations and partners on the ground. As
we have heard, the challenge is great, and it must be
urgently addressed. Our response must be swift and,
as Abbe Nshole said, correspond to the scale of the
challenge. I will outline four areas that should be the
focus of our efforts.

First, responding to immediate humanitarian
needs will require a surge in funding. We welcome
the upcoming high-level donor conference and hope
that it will generate generous, reliable and flexible
funding, as well draw attention to the situation in the
country. Sweden will continue to provide significant
and increasing humanitarian support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to meet increasing needs. Our
contribution for 2018 is already $28 million. It is
important that we all play our part. In such a complex
context, the need for an integrated approach that
addresses the nexus linking humanitarian, development,
human rights and peace and security is clear. In its
support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Sweden has aligned its humanitarian and development
support. We encourage others to do the same.

Full, safe and immediate humanitarian access for
all those who are doing what they can with extremely
limited funding and facing serious challenges must be
ensured. The Government has a particular responsibility
in that regard. We welcome the agreement between
the United Nations and the Governor of Tanganyika
on an enabling environment for humanitarian action.
The security of humanitarian personnel is an essential
element of access. Cooperation with the Forces armees
de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to guarantee safe passage to affected populations
is critical.

Last week, we commemorated the one-year
anniversary of the deaths of Zaida Catalan and Michael
Sharp, who were murdered. It was a sad reminder about
the lack of accountability involving their deaths and
how the security of United Nations personnel needs to
be enhanced.

Secondly, we must simultaneously step up
efforts to protect civilians who are increasingly at
risk. The roots of the violence are complex, but the
Government must shoulder its primary responsibility
vis-a-vis the population to stop the surging violence
and promote peaceful conflict resolution. In addition,
MONUSCO must be properly equipped to effectively
protect civilians.

Thirdly, in order to foster long-term stability and
peace, the holding of credible, transparent, inclusive
and peaceful elections on 23 December, with the
ensuing democratic transfer of power in accordance
with the Constitution and the 31 December agreement
is imperative. That is something we must all support,
including local and regional actors, with whom close
cooperation continues to be essential. What happens
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has broader
consequences and risks jeopardizing the stability not
only of that country but of the Great Lakes region.
Measures to ensure women's full and effective
participation in the elections are critical so that all
sectors of Congolese society can play their full part in
the democratic process. As Ms. Bahatijust said, women
and girls must be accorded significantly more influence
in every aspect of decision-making. That requires
political space. It is important that freedom of speech
and assembly be reasserted. In that regard, we welcome
the recommendation from the Government commission
of inquiry into the security forces' actions in response
to peaceful protests to lift the ban on demonstrations.

Lastly, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as elsewhere, the root causes of the conflict must
be addressed if the country is to break free from a
vicious cycle of poverty, insecurity and violence. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development offers
a framework to curb the chronic vulnerability of
many Congolese. The Government together with the
assistance of the whole of the United Nations, as well
as other parts of the international community, must
now work together to make progress in alleviating
poverty, ending inequality and creating a society in
which all Congolese look to the future not with despair
but hope. That will require an investment from the
Government, including through increased mining
revenues channelled towards the good ofthe people. On
the part of the international community, there needs to
be a comprehensive, integrated and resourced plan for
sustained peace.

