Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to
thank you for taking the initiative of organizing this
public meeting of the Council on counter-terrorism in
the presence of the Prime Minster of Spain, His
Excellency Mr. Jose Maria Aznar, whom I welcome
here on behalf of the delegation of Cameroon. I would
also like to thank him for the excellence of his
statement, for the accuracy and depth of his comments,
for the relevance of his analysis and for his proposals.

The presence at this meeting of the Prime
Minister of Spain testifies beyond doubt to his refusal
to capitulate to terrorism, the evil of this century. His
presence here also strengthens the political impetus
that our Ministers for Foreign Affairs gave on
20 January to the structures of the global coalition to
combat terrorism. His presence reaffirms the central
and important role that the United Nations must play in
our common fight against terrorism. As well, his
presence helps consolidate the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), which
the Permanent Representative of Spain, my colleague
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, has chaired so effectively
since April.

Spain, which for a number of years has been
subject to waves of terrorist attacks, has considerable
experience in combating terrorism.

The Prime Minister's Government has not yielded
to terrorism, which he has qualified as a "brutal,
terrible and bestial campaign". He has adopted a firm
stance and has taken the necessary measures. His
tenacity has won him admiration and serves as an
example.

The scourge of terrorism, this pernicious evil -
as he said so eloquently a few moments ago - spare
no civilization and no country, because it attacks
society indiscriminately, as a whole. The morning after
the events of 11 September 2001, on the occasion of
the ceremonial opening of the judicial session, His
Majesty King Juan Carlos I called for

"concerted action on the part of all countries to
combat terrorism and to find new forms of legal
cooperation among democratic nations".

This stems from Spain's heightened awareness of the
seriousness of the threat posed by terrorism and of the
scope of the destruction it causes.

Our common security can be ensured only if we
all are committed to a tireless and relentless struggle to
find the perpetrators of terrorist acts and their
accomplices. The links that have been established with
transnational crime call for vigilance and for a global
response.

We have always said that combating terrorism
must involve a multi-pronged approach. It is in this
perspective that, a few months ago, addressing
diplomats posted in Yaounde, Paul Biya, President of
Cameroon, suggested the following three prongs of
attack: a national strategy to combat terrorism within
each country; increased international cooperation
through exchanges of information, experience and joint
action; and the uprooting of evil. Indeed, it is evident
that only suppression can work against fanatics who
know no logic and no morality. We must not forget that
poverty, injustice and conflicts are often fertile soil for
the seeds of terrorism. We are pleased to see that that
same concern is shared by the Prime Minister of Spain.

On the legal front, robust international laws are
necessary to combat this scourge, which is an affront to
human rights and to the norms of humanitarian law. We
must complement existing norms by adopting the
comprehensive convention on terrorism as soon as
possible, as well as the convention on the suppression
of acts of nuclear terrorism.

With respect to strengthening national capacities,
technological disparities among States provide
loopholes that are exploited by terrorist groups for their
activities. Addressing these disparities necessarily
requires unfailing international solidarity, primarily
through an ambitious and realistic programme of
assistance which is easily accessible for States that
require that assistance.

The appeal launched on 12 September 2001 by
the Prime Minister of Spain for the establishment of a
single European security space to combat terrorism is
part of this dynamic approach. The 1999 Algiers
Convention must be complied with. In that Convention,
Africa agreed to organize to prevent and to combat
terrorism. The implementation of the related United
Nations Plan of Action calls for multi-pronged
international cooperation.

Combating terrorism must be a long-term
endeavour. United and resolute, we can overcome this
global scourge.

In conclusion, I wish once again to express the
appreciation of my delegation to the Prime Minister of
Spain for his visit and for his proposals. The CTC will
certainly draw on those suggestions.

