The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Iraq, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Peru, Poland,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.

The Security Councilwill now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/ZOl7/788, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Djibouti, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Peru, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Uruguay.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/710, which contains a letter dated
14 August 2017 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2379 (2017).

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.


