Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are greatful to the Secretary-General
for his briefing. His participation, his assessments and
his authoritative words about the situation that has
developed are very significant. We agree with him that
there are many wounds in the Middle East. However,
most important, currently the deepest wound is the
situation in Syria, insofar as any negative repercussions
would have major global implications.

Two days ago, news of a threat by the United
States to launch missile strikes against the Syrian
Arab Republic ricocheted around the world. The
Russian Federation was also warned to prepare for
strikes. Let me point out that our military is in Syria
at the invitation of its legitimate Government in order
to combat international terrorism. We continue to see
dangerous military preparations for an illegal act of
force against a sovereign State in violation of the norms
of international law. It is not just the use of force but
even the threat of it that flies in the face of the Charter
of the United Nations, and that is precisely what we
are seeing in the most recent statements and actions
of Washington and its allies. The bellicose rhetoric is
being ratcheted up at every level, including at the very
top. Additional forces and assets of the United States
military and its allies are bearing down on the Syrian
coast. It feels as though Washington is singlemindedly
heading towards unleashing a military scenario against
Syria. That cannot be permitted. Such developments
would be fraught with terrible consequences for global
security, especially considering that a Russian military
contingent is deployed in Syria.

There are also those who have been observing
these risky preparations with tacit approval, declaring
that they understand Washington's motives or engaging
in direct incitement, thereby becoming potential
accomplices in an act of reckless military adventurism.
There are people in the Security Council who love to
talk about preventive diplomacy. Right now, for some
reason, they are nowhere to be seen or heard. The guilty
parties have been speedily identified not just before any
investigation has been conducted but even before it has
been established whether the incident in question took
place at all, but evidently they must still be punished.
Someone will have to answer for these unfortunate
developments and for the previous interventions that
have engulfed many countries in years of crisis with
untold casualties.

Witness the recent experience of Iraq and Libya,
which, among other things, shows that the attitude of
America's leaders to the Security Council is largely
one of convenience. They need it as cover for their
Iraqi test tubes and Libyan no-fly zones. What they
are presenting us with now is another virtual test tube,
and an empty one. The reckless behaviour of the United
States as it tramples on international law and State
sovereignty is unworthy of its status as a permanent
member of the Security Council, which presupposes the
highest possible degree of responsibility and certainly
not a right to sabre rattling, a right that is unknown in
international law.

Why does the United States continue to torture the
Middle East, provoking one conflict after another and
pitting the States of the region against one another?
Who will benefit from a potential strike against the
Syrian military, which is taking the brunt of the fight
against terrorism and achieving major victories in it?
We know for sure that the ringleaders of the Syrian
armed groups were given orders to launch an offensive
after a possible military action. Is this latest wave of
chaos really being unleashed just for that?

The excuse is the alleged use of toxic substances
in the Syrian town of Douma on 7 April, for which
there has been no reliable confirmation. Our specialists
found no trace of the use of toxic substances. The
residents of Douma know of no such attack. All the
evidence of the alleged attack has been provided by
anti-Government forces for whom this development
is in their interests. We have good reason - indeed,
we have information - leading us to believe that what
took place was a provocation with the participation of
various countries' intelligence services. We have been
issuing warnings about this for a long time. It is a repeat
of the Khan Shaykhun scenario in April of last year.

The Syrian Government, for which this is clearly the
last thing it needs, has said that it was not involved and
has sent a request for an immediate inspection by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) of the location of the alleged incident. It has
offered security guarantees jointly with the Russian
military. The mission is already getting started on its
work in Syria and we hope that it will be able to conduct
a truly independent and impartial investigation.

Only the Security Council has the authority at the
international level to decide what measures to take and
against whom in connection with the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Russia will continue to work diligently
and systematically to de-escalate the recent tensions in
international relations. We proposed adopting a brief
resolution in support of the OPCW inspection mission
in Douma that the United States, Britain and France
irresponsibly blocked, thereby demonstrating their
lack of interest in an investigation. The only thing they
care about is overthrowing the Syrian Government
and, more broadly, deterring the Russian Federation.
This has been clearly visible in other international and
domestic political events built on unfounded hoaxes
and conspiracy theories that always centre around the
Russian Federation.

What is the United States trying to achieve? After
many years of internecine strife in Syria, significant
areas of the country have been stabilized. The
political process is reviving and indicators of national
reconciliation are emerging. The terrorists have been
dealt a significant blow. We have never denied that
the United States has also made a certain contribution
to achieving that shared goal, but it has always kept
certain types of terrorists in reserve for its fight against
the so-called regime and for advancing its geopolitical
priorities in the region.

My British colleague is always asking me what
Russia is doing to implement resolution 2401 (2018).
My answer is that my country is practically the only one
that is doing anything about it. Over the course of the
Astana process, peace has been restored in more than
2,500 towns and villages. That does not mean that they
have become victims ofthe regime, as the United States
calls it, merely that with the help of Russia and other
guarantors they have established normal relations with
the central authorities in Damascus. With the support
of the United Nations, the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress was held successfully in Sochi. How many
towns and villages has the United States brought peace
to? How many groups has it persuaded to join the
ceasefire agreements?

In order to break the deadlock in the situation in
eastern Ghouta after the adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), complex negotiations were conducted with
the leaders of armed groups, with Russian assistance.
The militias and their family members were safely
evacuated from the district, and civilians were finally
given the opportunity to shake off years of terror. Film
of their genuine joy exists, but the Western media is not
showing it. The United States does not care about the
fate of the prisoners of the militias in eastern Ghouta
who had been supporters of the Syrian Government.
When they were bargaining with the Syrian authorities
to exchange prisoners, the militias claimed that they
were holding between 2,000 and 4,000 people. Now
it turns out that there are far fewer. People died from
harsh treatment and hard labour digging huge tunnels
for their torturers.

Some members have grieved to see their bearded
pilgrims setting off for Syria on free tourist tickets.
They lost no opportunity to shriek from every street
corner about the plight of the hundreds of thousands of
people in besieged eastern Ghouta. Now those people
need help in rebuilding normal lives, but these Council
members have already lost interest because the area
is under Government control. Now there will have to
be unpleasant discussions about the blockade of Fo'ah
and Kefraya. When was the last time a humanitarian
convoy was there? When was the last time Council
members even asked about it? Someone must answer
for the coalition's destruction of Raqqa.

These are dangerous developments, with far-
reaching ramifications for global security. In this
instance, responsibility lies entirely with the United
States and its allies. It is apity that Old Europe continues
to lose face. We call on the leaders of these States to
immediately reconsider, return to the international legal
fold and not to lead the world to the dangerous brink.
We urgently need to find a peaceful way out through
a collective effort. The Russian Federation is ready
to cooperate equitably with all partners and to solve
the problems that may arise through dialogue. We will
continue to focus on finding a peaceful settlement to
the conflict in Syria based on established international
law. We will continue to work actively to that end, and
we call on all our partners to do the same.

