Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, and your team on the
successful conclusion of your presidency during this
very challenging month, which was filled - or should
I say, jam-packed - with all sorts of events and
activities, both in the Council and outside it. I also
thank you for the efficient and professional
performance of your presidential duties, which greatly
contributed to the constructive consideration of many
issues on the Council's agenda. In fact, the programme
of work that you had distributed on the eve of your
presidency has been successfully completed, and I
would say that the results are quite impressive.

In November, we had an extremely important
ministerial meeting on counter-terrorism. We discussed
Afghanistan intensively and adopted a very significant
resolution to that effect. We managed to achieve
consensus on Iraq. We had important thematic
discussions on children in armed conflicts and on the
protection of civilians. We touched upon many African
issues - Angola, Ethiopia, Eritrea, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Western Sahara, Sierra Leone
and Liberia. We managed to extend the mandates of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). We had an
important discussion of the activities of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and, of course, Kosovo
and other issues on the agenda. And we are having an
important wrap-up session today.

It is unfortunate that, while speaking about
transparency, we do not have more representatives of
Member States present here. So, maybe, as
Ambassador Mahbubani suggested, we should think
about it. Maybe we should lure members of the United
Nations by giving them the opportunity to speak before
the members of the Security Council, which was once
done on another issue. Perhaps that would bring the
Member States to this Chamber to participate in our
discussion.

Madam President, let me quickly go through the
questions raised in your note for the wrap-up meeting.

First, it should be recognized that during the
month of November, the Council in general met the
objectives set out in the document you distributed at
the beginning of this month. The level of success was
different on various issues, but that is the reality - the
way things work in the Council. I agree with you,
Madam President, that there has been an improvement
in the transparency of the Council's activities. I do not
want to add the word "considerable", and I would pick
up on what Kishore Mahbubani said. Maybe in the
future, we can think about making consultations of the
whole more transparent in one way or another, because,
as in the past, most of the issues continue to be
addressed behind closed doors, although the vast
majority - though not all - of them can easily be
discussed in an open format.

As to your question regarding other ways for the
Council to interact with States and others, I think we
have tried almost all of them. Of course, we can try to
explore other ways, but in our View, frankly, this is not
an issue. I think the issue is that the Council not only
should try to be transparent but also should be seen as
transparent by Member States. Even if after today's
meeting we ask States outside the Council whether the
Council is transparent or not, I am afraid that the
majority of the replies will be in the negative. If the
Council becomes truly transparent, the question of the
Council's interaction with States and others will not be
so acute as it is today.

On the procedure of receiving regular briefings
from the States, organizations or groups of friends
active in pursuing peace initiatives, frankly, during the
two years of our membership in the Council, we have
not seen any cases in which the Council refused to hear
a State or organization when it asked to brief the
Council on the implementation or results of peace
initiatives being pursued. I believe that we should
simply do this more often.

As to whether the press is the appropriate source
of information for the Council on such initiatives,
definitely not. It is the appropriate source of
information for the public at large, but not for the
Council. In our View, the Council is a body that should
continue to receive information from various sources
and act upon this information accordingly.

We agree with you, Madam President, that the
ministerial week was one of the major highlights not
only of the month but of the entire year. We think it
was very successful. The Council used it to its full
capacity and covered everything it could possibly
within the time available. I support your view that the
most important issues before the Council should
continue to be discussed during such ministerial weeks
if possible. I do not think it is realistic to have our
ministers come here more than once or twice a year,
but I believe that this year, the ministerial week was
successful. It was during the ministerial week that we
had the most important meetings, on terrorism,
counter-terrorism and Afghanistan, during which the
Council in fact set or reinforced its policies on these
matters.

It is no exaggeration to say that this month, the
attention of the Council has been focused mainly on the
situation in Afghanistan. An open meeting on this
subject on 13 November, with the participation of more
than 20 foreign ministers, launched the beginning of
the peace process in that country under United Nations
auspices. It was extremely important to be updated
regularly on the developments in Afghanistan, and we
are thankful to the Secretariat and to you, Madam
President, for the operative reaction to the
developments in this area.

Finally, Madam President, I wish to commend
your initiative to resolve the issue of the list of
speakers. I strongly encourage future Presidents to
continue your initiative. Once again, let me commend
you and your team for what you have achieved during
this month and for allowing the Council as a whole to
be successful.

