Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I have already said what my position is. Nothing of what I
have heard here has changed that position. In any case, the
assertion that the traditional basis for the use of force lies
beyond the confines of the United Nations Charter is
something that I cannot take seriously. I have set forth my
position, and it has absolutely not changed.

But I have taken the floor just to make two factual
clarifications, as some of my colleagues have mentioned by
way of argument certain events that were not quite
presented correctly. I would like to make the facts known,
particularly given that this is an open, public meeting at
which Members of the United Nations that are not members
of the Security Council are present. I must therefore clarify
two points.

The first point has to do with some colleagues'
mention of the fact that Russia is a member of the Contact
Group. That is quite correct, but they went on to say that
Russia was a co-sponsor of the package of documents of
the Contact Group. That is only partially true. The Contact
Group adopted a document in London that is the basis of
the draft political settlement. It is also true that that
document enjoys the full co-sponsorship of the Russian
Federation. With regard to the military implementation, the
Contact Group never discussed that document, not because
the Russian Federation did not want it to be discussed but
because our partners in the Contact Group decided to
discuss the military aspects of the implementation of the
agreement behind our backs, in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and not in the Contact Group. We
were discussing this with our partners in the Contact Group
and made offers so that questions about the implementation
of the agreement would be the subject of co-sponsorship
within the Contact Group. That was not done.

So when they say that Russia is a co-sponsor of
everything that was rejected by Belgrade, that is not the
true situation. Now, I repeat: our Western partners in the
Contact Group decided to prepare and discuss the military
aspects behind our backs, and Russia had nothing to do
with that proposal. It was the choice of our Western
partners to do this.

The second clarification that I wanted to make has
to do with the statement made by some of our colleagues
to the effect that NATO's actions became inevitable
because one or two of the permanent members of the
Security Council had blocked action in the Council. That
is simply not correct, for one simple reason: no proposals
on this topic were introduced in the Security Council by
anyone. There was never any draft resolution; there were
no informal discussions, not even in the corridors - at
least not with one permanent member of the Security
Council, namely, Russia. Those discussions never took
place. I am not saying what the results of those
discussions were, but to state now that one or two
permanent members of the Security Council blocked
action in the Council is simply, diplomatically speaking,
not true.

These are the clarifications I wanted to make so that
everyone knows what the facts are.

