Mr. Klein (United States of America): As we look
back on the Security Council's work in February, first,
once again, I would like to offer the deepest condolences
of the United States to the Russian Federation on the
passing of Ambassador Churkin, We were shocked and
saddened and our thoughts are especially with the team
at the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations at this time.

I congratulate you, Sir, and the Permanent Mission
of Ukraine to the United Nations on a successful
presidency, even as your country continues to deal with
the Russian occupation of Crimea and the dire situation
in Eastern Ukraine. That situation necessarily was a
major focus of the emergency meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.7876) that you called early in the month and also
your important open debate on conflicts in Europe
(see S/PV.7886). We continue to support the Minsk
agreements and their full implementation as the best path
to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United
States condemns last month's targeting of monitors
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the seizure of a Special Monitoring
Mission unmanned aerial vehicle by combined Russian
separatist forces. It is imperative that those forces stop
their attacks on civilian infrastructure, including the
Donetsk water filtration station. We call on Russia and
the separatist forces it backs to immediately observe
the ceasefire, withdraw all heavy weapons and allow
full and unfettered access to the OSCE monitors.

It was right and appropriate for Ukraine to draw
attention to the sometimes overlooked danger of
terrorists attacks on critical infrastructure. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) to help all States
to prevent, mitigate and respond to such attacks and
provide an impetus for Governments to cooperate more
on critical infrastructure protection.
Looking ahead, the United States urges the
Council to strongly condemn the Syrian regime's
blatant violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and of resolution 2118 (2013) and to support the draft
accountability resolution co-authored by the United
States, France and the United Kingdom, which will be
considered right after this meeting. As we move into
March, the Council must remain vigilant on the overall
situation in Syria and support Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura's efforts to advance a political solution to
end the rising violence and help ease the enormous
suffering of the Syrian people.

Finally, I would like to highlight the Council's
upcoming mission to Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria - under the leadership of the United Kingdom,
Senegal and France - to examine the security and
humanitarian impact of the Boko Haram conflict.
The United States welcomes the progress made by
the forces in Nigeria, Chad, the Niger, Cameroon and
Benin, working together as the Multinational Joint Task
Force, to clear the territory of Boko Haram and Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-West Africa fighters.
We look forward to discussing with the peoples and
Governments of the Lake Chad basin region how
best to support the humanitarian response to meet the
needs of the conflict-affected population, as well as
how best to support military and civilian initiatives in
order to counter violent extremism and restore peace
and stability.

In closing, I would like to thank you, Sir, for an
excellently run month of February and to commit our
full support to the United Kingdom as it takes up the
gavel for the month of March.

