Mr. Pascoe: I am grateful for this opportunity to
be here today to discuss the situation in Iraq and the
stepped up efforts of the United Nations to help the
Iraqi Government and people. I have just visited
Baghdad from 19 to 21 April, and attended the third
expanded ministerial meeting of Iraq and its
neighbours on 22 April in Kuwait.

The Security Council has before it the third report
(S/2008/266) issued pursuant to resolution 1770
(2007). It reflects the progress achieved by the United
Nations in its expanded role under the new mandate.
The report highlights the challenges facing Iraq and the
concerted efforts by the Government of Iraq,
neighbouring countries, the United Nations and the
wider international community to address them.

We are all aware of the difficult situation in Iraq.
Despite improvements in security, the Government of
Iraq continues to face formidable challenges to the
process of national reconciliation. Some important
steps were taken in January of this year - such as the
passing of the Justice and Accountability Law
replacing earlier de-baathification policies and a
package of laws that include the Law on Governorates
not Organized into a Region, the General Amnesty Law
and the 2008 budget. There are also encouraging signs
that the Arab Sunni front, the Tawafuq, could return to
the Government soon.

Together with security improvements, those steps
create a window of opportunity that we need to pursue.
As the Secretary-General's report highlights, it is
imperative that Iraqi leaders maintain that positive
momentum and take further steps to resolve other
fundamental issues that continue to divide Iraqis, such
as the sharing of natural resources and an agreement on
the federal structure of the Iraqi State. Those goals
could be achieved through the adoption of a fair and
equitable hydrocarbon law and the completion of the
long-delayed constitutional review process. There are
some indications that progress may be made in those
areas as well. The United Nations strongly encourages
those efforts and continues to provide the
Constitutional Review Committee with technical
advice and assistance.

Let me say here that the Council's adoption of
resolution 1770 (2007) and its broadened mandate for
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) came at a critical time and provides a firm
basis for our work in Iraq. The Secretary-General's
08-3196]
Special Representative and his highly motivated staff
are carrying out the mandate by expanding their
assistance to the Government and people. While the
tasks are daunting, UNAMI's enhanced efforts are
appreciated by Iraqis. The reputation of the United
Nations as an organization that provides valuable
assistance is growing.

Pursuant to the mandate under resolution 1770
(2007) and following the agreed six-month extension
of article 140 of the Iraqi constitution after its expiry
on 31 December 2007, UNAMI has made the
resolution of disputed internal territories a top priority.
UNAMI has conducted a number of field visits to
several disputed areas to meet with local leaders and
understand their concerns. It has facilitated a dialogue
in several contested areas in order to build confidence
and momentum among the parties. The Mission will
make recommendations with regard to the principles
and methodology that could be used by Iraqi
stakeholders as part of a common approach to tackle
the most highly disputed territories, including the city
of Kirkuk. We appeal to Member States to support
United Nations efforts and encourage the parties
concerned to work together to find lasting solutions.

UNAMI continues to support the Iraq Electoral
Commission in its preparations to conduct election
activities that are seen as credible by the Iraqi people.
Special Representative De Mistura, with the support of
the Iraqi leadership, announced on 14 February that
UNAMI would move forward the process of selecting
the directors of several governorate election offices in
cases where there had been no consensus among the
political parties to complete the appointment process.
That process - now almost completed - is an
excellent example of how the United Nations can add
value in Iraq. I urge the Council of Representatives to
forward the list of candidates for the Baghdad electoral
offices as soon as possible, to allow the process to be
completed.

The Iraqi Electoral Commission is currently
focused on organizing a voter registration update to
take place throughout Iraq in June, after which
Governorate Council elections are scheduled for
1 October. However, as the report notes, this timeline
depends on political agreements that must be reached
in the coming weeks, particularly with regard to voter
registration eligibility and inclusion of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). A new governorate election
08-3196]
law must be written and adopted by the Council of
Representatives as soon as possible.

The humanitarian situation in Iraq continues to be
of great concern and provides ample evidence of the
impact that violence in Iraq has on civilians on a daily
basis. In particular, the United Nations is monitoring
the situation in the Sadr City area of Baghdad and in
the city of Basra and is assessing the humanitarian
needs. The United Nations is committed to working
with all relevant actors concerned to ensure that urgent
assistance reaches the most vulnerable civilians. I
believe we can do more as our presence on the ground
increases and, along with it, the opportunities for
additional activities.

We must also focus our efforts on alleviating the
suffering of Iraq's refugees and internally displaced
persons, not only on humanitarian grounds, but also
because it has regional repercussions. While only
lasting political solution in Iraq can solve the current
refugee and IDP crisis, we believe that the Government
of Iraq and the wider international community, with the
help of the United Nations can and must do more in the
interim to help host countries, particularly Jordan and
Syria, with humanitarian assistance. In that regard, I
would like to note the recent deployment of three
personnel of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to Baghdad.
The positive impact of their presence is already being
felt.

The Secretary-General's latest report once again
expresses serious concern about the current human
rights situation in Iraq. Despite improvements in the
general security situation towards the end of 2007,
suicide bombings, car bombs and other attacks
continued, with devastating consequences for civilians,
in the first quarter of 2008. However, on a positive
note, a number of measures have been taken by the
executive and judicial authorities in Iraq to improve the
handling of detainees, including efforts to ensure more
effective judicial oversight and to alleviate
overcrowding. In this context, the UNAMI Human
Rights Office continues to visit the Government's
detention facilities and prisons at the invitation of the
relevant authorities in Baghdad and Arbil.

The support of neighbouring countries is essential
for the stability of Iraq. On behalf of the Secretary-
General, I attended the third expanded ministerial
conference of Iraq and its neighbours, in Kuwait on
3
22 April. It was an opportunity for participating
countries to reaffirm their commitment to Iraq's
territorial integrity, unity, full sovereignty and
independence, and to the principle of non-interference
in its internal affairs. In the final communique, the
participants condemned all acts of terrorism and
reaffirmed the obligation of all States to combat
terrorist activities. As always, these meetings also offer
invaluable opportunities along the margins for
participants to hold wide-ranging discussions of critical
bilateral issues. The participants also expressed their
desire to hold the next expanded ministerial meeting in
Baghdad. The United Nations is committed to
supporting this regional process through technical
assistance to the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
to three regional Working Groups, on energy, on border
security and on refugees and IDPs. The United Nations
strongly encourages Iraq and its regional neighbours to
step up their dialogue and interaction with a view to
strengthening cooperation in areas of mutual interest.

Since its launch in Sharm el-Sheikh in May 2007,
the International Compact with Iraq has emerged as a
key framework for cooperation between Iraq and
international donors in the areas of security, political
matters, governance, reconstruction and economic and
social recovery. It also provides a guide for focusing
assistance on Iraq's most critical problems. In this
context, I would like to thank the Government of
Sweden for agreeing to host the first Iraq Compact
annual review conference, which is to be held in
Stockholm on 29 May 2008 at the Foreign Minister
level. The conference, to be chaired by the Secretary-
General and Prime Minister al-Maliki, will be an
opportunity to review the progress made in achieving
the objectives of the Compact and discuss further steps
towards those goals. We strongly encourage member
States to take part in this event and to make concrete
commitments at the conference.

As the Secretary-General has said strongly and
clearly, whatever one's previous views on Iraq, the
whole world has a responsibility and an interest today
in helping bring peace and prosperity to the people of
that country. I returned from my Iraq visit convinced
that the United Nations is doing its best in this regard.
While taking strict measures to deal with the security
situation, the United Nations is playing an enhanced
role in Iraq. The Secretary-General has increased the
United Nations presence in Baghdad to 140 and in
Arbil to 40 international staff. In addition, an outreach
programme, which places national liaison officers in
each of the Governor's offices, has deployed 9 such
officers so far, and the United Nations has
re-established its presence in Basra. Expanding the
United Nations presence to Najaf, Ramadi and Kirkuk
is currently being contemplated. UNAMI and the
country team have also adopted an area-based
approach, which expands activities where
circumstances are more permissible. I have mentioned
UNHCR's valuable presence in Baghdad, and I trust
that other agencies will soon enhance their role there as
well. The Mission also continues to work to become
more self-sufficient in areas of logistical support and
security, and plans to build a new integrated
headquarters in Baghdad have been developed.

During my visit to Baghdad, I met with Special
Representative De Mistura and the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. I took advantage
of the opportunity to thank them on behalf of the
Secretary-General for their dedication and hard work
under very challenging conditions. I was struck by the
professionalism of the staff and the esprit de corps
within the Mission. Special Representative De Mistura
has done an exemplary job at motivating staff and
keeping them focused on carrying out their mandate. I
believe the United Nations can take great pride in their
work in an extremely difficult environment.

Several times during my visit, I was reminded of
the risks that our staff face when the alarm systems
sounded and instructed staff to take cover from the
threat of indirect fire. The Secretariat remains deeply
conscious of the security threat, and the Department of
Safety and Security, with our assistance, works to
constantly upgrade mitigating measures in order to
enhance the safety of our personnel in Iraq.

During my meetings with Iraqi and other
interlocutors, there was common theme: all expressed
appreciation for the enhanced role of the United
Nations in Iraq. In Baghdad, I met with Vice-President
Adel Abdul Mahdi and Deputy Prime Minister Barham
Salih, who welcomed the role that the United Nations
is playing with respect to the resolution of disputed
internal territories, preparations for governorate
elections before the end of the year, assistance to
refugees and internally displaced persons, and
facilitating political dialogue and national
reconciliation. They also thanked the United Nations
for its efforts in supporting humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts, and in particular, helping to
08-3196]
build a positive political momentum for the
development and implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq. Their comments were echoed by
Foreign Minister Zebari and in numerous other
speakers at the regional conference in Kuwait. These
statements serve as in important reminder that the role
of the United Nations enjoys the respect of Iraqi and
regional leaders.

We appreciate the support of Council members
for UNAMI's efforts to fulfil its mandate in Iraq. We
are grateful to those Member States that have provided
protection and logistical support to the United Nations
presence in Iraq, including those providing air support
and troops and funding for the distinct entity to provide
security for UNAMI. I would also urge member States
to provide additional financial and logistical resources
for the Mission, including funding for the new
integrated United Nations facility in Baghdad, and
additional required security arrangements, in particular
the provision of additional military advisers to
UNAMI.

Iraq is going through a painful transition. The
challenges of national reconciliation, reconstruction
and development after decades of dictatorship and war
are massive. I was impressed, however, by the
seriousness and commitment of the Government of Iraq
to address these challenges with a View to ending the
suffering and achieving a tangible improvement in the
lives of the Iraqi people. This is a long-term endeavour
that requires the sustained support of the international
community. The United Nations is committed to
playing its full part in accordance with its
comprehensive mandate in Security Council resolution
1770 (2007). The Council's continued support is vital
to that effort.

