Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the most recent written report submitted by
Secretary-General Guterres on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2019/938). We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also listened
carefully to Ms. Raemer's remarks.

In December 2016, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2334 (2016) on the question of Palestine,
reflecting the common expectations and aspirations
of the international community and in response to
a call for justice from Palestine and Arab States.
Regrettably, however, three years later, the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory has witnessed no
improvement; in fact, it has deteriorated even further.
Settlement activities continue to advance and expand
significantly as we speak. More Palestinian homes are
being demolished. Acts of violence and inflammatory
rhetoric by the parties concerned are escalating, and the
Middle East peace process has stalled.

China finds all the foregoing deeply concerning.
We call on all parties to earnestly and effectively
implement resolution 2334 (2016), stay on track towards
a political solution, adhere to the fundamental principles
of fairness and justice, and give full play to the key role
of the United Nations so as to form a synergy between
regional and international efforts aimed at pushing
for a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli question at an early date.

First, we must adhere to the two-State solution
as the basis for the ultimate goal of establishing an
independent Palestinian State. Foreign occupation is
the underlying cause of the decades-long Palestinian-
Israeli issue. The parties must remain committed to the
overarching goal of the two-State solution and pursue
dialogue on an equal footing and political negotiation
on the basis of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, the principle of land for
peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as other
international consensus and norms so as to resolve the
differences between the Israeli and Palestinian sides
and find a mutally acceptable solution.

Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly stipulates that the
establishment of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, constitutes a
violation of international law. The parties concerned
should immediately cease all settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territory and refrain
from demolishing Palestinian homes and destroying
Palestinian property.

Secondly, we must promote a rapprochement
between Palestine and Israel and encourage the relaunch
ofpeace talks as soon as possible. Historical grievances
lie at the root of the intricate and complex Palestinian-
Israeli question. Fighting violence with violence will
get us nowhere; it is only with the gradual building of
mutual political trust, for the benefit ofcommon security,
can there be a steady and solid long-term solution. The
parties concerned should proceed from the overall
interest of providing safety for local communities and
peace and stability in the region, exercise calm and
restraint in seeking rapprochement, cease military
actions and refrain from inflammatory remarks. They
must also cease and desist all acts of violence against
civilians, with a view to enabling an effective easing
of tensions, rebuilding and accumulating mutual trust
and creating favourable conditions for the restart of
the Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. China supports
all efforts of the international community that are
conducive to peace between Palestine and Israel, and
we appreciate the good offices of Special Coordinator
Mladenov and Egypt, among other parties. We firmly
oppose any irresponsible remarks made by any country.

Thirdly, we need to follow the Palestinian
economic and humanitarian situation closely and work
to improve it by adhering to a holistic approach that
promotes peace through development. At present, the
economic and humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Gaza, remains grim.
The international community should scale up its input,
place a greater focus on economic reconstruction and
prioritize livelihood-related projects so as to make a real
difference in the lives of the Palestinian people. China
supports the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) as it
continues to play its important role. The adoption by an
overwhelming majority of General Assembly resolution
74/85, on the extension of UNRWA's mandate, also
speaks to the international community's support for
and recognition of UNRWA's work. China calls on
the parties concerned to fully implement the relevant
resolutions and immediately and completely lift the
blockade on Gaza.

China supports the establishment of an independent
and fully sovereign State of Palestine, based on the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
stand ready to continue to uphold justice and fairness
and play our part as a steadfast builder of peace in the
Middle East, a facilitator of stability and a contributor
to the region's development.

