Slovakia aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 38). Allow me to express my gratitude for the holding of this open debate on women and peace and security on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on its better implementation. In our view, it is essential that the Security Council continue to systematically and consistently advance, advocate for and promote a holistic women and peace and security agenda in its work and decision-making. It is significant to contemplate the fact that, in the first five years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), only 15 per cent of Security Council resolutions included explicit references to issues related to women and peace and security. Between 2017 and 2019, however, that number increased to approximately 70 per cent. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his 2020 report (S/2020/946) on women and peace and security and to commend his leadership and commitment to this important agenda. My delegation shares and supports the Secretary-General's view that all approaches to conflict prevention, resolution and recovery efforts must have at their core women's full, equal and meaningful participation and rights, including respect for bodily autonomy. This, however, requires more than tackling discrimination. Placing women at the centre of peacebuilding efforts must involve ensuring that there is a solid foundation on which to build for the inclusive participation of women. I am glad to share that my Government approved the first national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for 2021-2025, and we therefore joined the 86 other States Members of the United Nations that have national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000). This is yet another tangible example of our commitment to the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. As I stated last year, increasing the number of women in our armed forces has been and continues to be a long-term policy on the part of Slovakia, which, despite the numerous challenges associated with the current global pandemic, remains active in peacekeeping around the world. The United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, for example, includes 241 members of the armed forces of Slovakia, including 25 women. I would also like to draw the Council's attention to Slovakia's standing in the Global Peace Index. As of 2020, my country has maintained its standing in the top 25, with a score of 1.57. Allow me also to reiterate the importance of having gender-sensitive security-sector-reform strategies throughout all planning, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation phases. We believe that Member States should redouble their efforts in that respect in order to not only address but also prevent sexual and gender-based violence. Women must continue to be promoted as equal leaders, and discrimination against and the stereotyping of women must be firmly and publicly denounced. Women are capable of so much if given the opportunity. It is our collective responsibility to provide and safeguard those opportunities. Reforming the security sector must focus on recruitment processes and an improvement in the delivery of security services to address and prevent sexual and gender-based violence. The discussions also underscored the fact that women must be promoted as equal and strategic leaders, barriers must be broken down and stereotypes about women's roles in societies, including their participation in peace processes, eliminated. Our support for gender equality and women's empowerment is also reflected in Slovak development cooperation projects. Slovakia is financially supporting the implementation of the South Eastern and Eastern Europe Clearinghouse for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons regional project aimed at strengthening gender equality in the Ministries of Defence and Armed Forces of selected countries of the Western Balkans. Slovakia is currently in the process of drawing up three key strategic documents on strengthening the role of women in society: the national strategy for equality between women and men and equal opportunities 2020-2025, its action plan and the national action plan for the prevention and elimination of violence against women 2020-2025. The whole world is currently facing a surge of unprecedented crises engendered by the global coronavirus disease pandemic, which undoubtedly has impacted and continues to impact the peacekeeping work of the United Nations around the world. Nonetheless, the challenges that we faced prior to the pandemic but did not manage to resolve remain with us. It is our sincere hope that as an Organization we will centre our approach on solidarity and the protection of the most vulnerable, including in particular women and girls. In conclusion, my delegation believes that the United Nations must be equally representative of, and responsive to, the needs of not only all countries but also all human beings. In order for us to be successful in tackling the current health and socioeconomic crises, responsible, inclusive and emphatic leadership matters. We need to unite and work together and in solidarity to not only protect the women and girls of our world today but also to ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights for future generations as well.
