Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
her important briefing today.

The Al-Assad regime, with the help of its military
allies in the air and on the ground, has carried out a
punishing campaign against the Syrian people over
the past eight years. The regime's assaults have led
to one of the greatest humanitarian crises since the
Second World War, sending millions of people fleeing
chemical-weapon attacks, air strikes, heavy artillery
shelling, arbitrary arrests and starvation. During
some of the most deadly moments of the conflict, the
Al-Assad regime gave the people of eastern Aleppo,
eastern Ghouta, Madaya, Moadamiya and Homs a bleak
choice - surrender to regime forces or starve. That
siege tactic is an unmistakable part of the Al-Assad
strategy to seek a military solution to the conflict rather
than negotiate a political solution through the good
offices of the United Nations.

Unfortunately, for millions of people inside Syria,
Al-Assad's use of starvation as a tactic continues.
There is no clearer example of the regime's starve-and-
surrender strategy than in Rukban. Humanitarian
conditions are deplorable as a result of the regime's
refusal to allow the United Nations to deliver aid on
a regular basis to the thousands of people living there.
Many of those people went to Rukban to escape the
regime's attacks on civilians in their home villages and
towns. It has been 111 days since the last delivery of
humanitarian assistance arrived in Rukban, in early
February - 111 days. The last United Nations-Syrian
Arab Red Crescent aid delivery in February was meant
to last 30 days. In addition to denying United Nations
aid convoys access to Rukban, the Al-Assad regime,
with military support from Russia, has imposed a
blockade around the camp that is also preventing regular
commercial deliveries of much-needed supplies.

The people of Rukban have few options for survival.
We know that from the messages that we hear from the
residents themselves. They do not have enough food.
Children are dying of malnutrition. Medicines, medical
facilities and health-care providers in the encampment
are scarce. Since 22 April, the Al-Assad regime has
denied requests from the United Nations for a third
humanitarian-assistance convoy. The regime could
easily approve the convoy tomorrow. The United States
stands ready to facilitate any deliveries. We know that
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
can provide the necessary assistance, because they have
done so twice before.

Today the United States renews its calls to the
Al-Assad regime to approve a third convoy to Rukban
immediately. We are deeply concerned about the fact
that the regime's continued refusal to allow aid into
Rukban has forced people to leave the camp under the
threat of starvation. Creating humanitarian conditions
so dire that families are forced to choose between
remaining relatively safe inside the camp or feeding
their starving children is not a humane choice to force
on innocent civilians, nor an acceptable way to generate
departures from the camp. I expect that those defending
the regime will cite the fight against terrorists as a
blanket justification for such severe measures. The
Council is united on the need to fight terrorism, but
that is not a licence to starve civilians or depopulate
a civilian safe haven. Any return process should be
carried out with full United Nations visibility and
access in order to ensure that departures from the camp
are safe, dignified, voluntary and informed. Coercing
people to depart the area by not allowing food in cannot
be described as anything other than starving people
into submission in order to further a false narrative that
the war is over, or that it is safe to return home. For
many that could not be further from the truth.

The United Nations has reported to the Security
Council that the recent military escalation in Idlib
and northern Hama by the regime and Russian forces
has resulted in additional displacements and reduced
the ability of the United Nations and its partners to
provide humanitarian aid. The United States wants to
underscore once again that the full implementation of
the September 2018 Sochi agreement is essential to
protecting civilian lives and preventing further forced
displacement. Russia and the regime must recommit to
implementing the 2018 Sochi ceasefire and restoring a
full de-escalation of the fighting in Idlib immediately.
Moreover, the parties on the ground must ensure that
the United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid
deliveries authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) reach
populations in Idlib, including in the demilitarized zone.
The United States remains alarmed by the
continued air strikes against health-care facilities
and health workers in north-western Syria. Attacks
directed at protected medical facilities are prohibited
by international law and are in defiance of many
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2165 (2014), 2268 (2016) and 2449 (2018). There must be
accountability for the forces and leaders who planned
and conducted any such strikes.

Finally, the United States remains gravely
concerned about the impact that any further use of
chemical weapons, including chlorine gas, would have
on the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria,
where conditions are increasingly dire. The United
States and its allies are closely watching the situation
in north-west Syria and will respond quickly and
appropriately to any further use of chemical weapons
by the Al-Assad regime.

As the Security Council marks the twentieth
anniversary of adding the protection of civilians in
armed conflict to its agenda, the conflict in Syria is one
of the starkest examples ofa failure to protect civilians.
We have to do more to ensure the full implementation
of international humanitarian law that the Council has
called for again and again. The people of Syria are
depending on it.

