Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania) (spoke in French):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing.

Undoubtedly, on 9 August the first round of
legislative elections in Haiti marked an important step.
Even if elections took place within a tense climate, the
very fact that they have taken place without any major
incident shows Haiti's serious commitment to democracy
and the rule of law. We are convinced that Haiti is on the
right track. However, much remains to be done, and the
results that have been achieved are not irreversible. The
situation requires our ongoing attention. The proposed
electoral calendar must be respected and implemented.
It is important for the political parties to continue to
behave responsibly, constructively and pragmatically.
Successful elections will be decisive to Haiti's stability,
future and sustainable socioeconomic and political
development.

Efforts to establish and strengthen the rule of law
in Haiti should continue. We look forward to seeing
the Government and courts take serious steps to end
impunity for all those responsible for human rights
abuses and violations, including police officers and
prison guards. It is urgent to advance such measures as
the drafting of a new penal code, the approval procedure
for judges and police officers, and the expansion of
legal aid services.

The human rights situation is of ongoing concern.
We strongly urge the Haitian authorities to establish a
strategic plan for 2015-2018 to strengthen institutional
capacity in the protection of human rights. To ensure
an effective democratic process, it is essential that all
stakeholders of Haitian society fully take part.

Economic growth remains a crucial factor for
the country's stability and development. While the
country has experienced a considerable decrease in
the number of internally displaced persons, other
negative factors - such as the increased number
of returning nationals, drought and cholera - have
increased the country's humanitarian needs and slowed
its development, thereby endangering stability and
security. In that context, international support remains
crucial. Haiti still requires robust assistance in various
areas ofpublic life, and we are pleased that the European
Union is the most important partner in that respect.

From the security standpoint, we see a decrease in
violence and increased responsibility on the part of the
Haitian National Police in maintaining public order.
That important achievement proved evident during the
legislative elections. We hope that, with the support of
the United Nations, the objective of training at least
15,000 police officers by 2016 can be achieved.

However, crime remains a major challenge. A
strengthened Haitian National Police with greater
accountability is necessary to deal with persistent
crime. We welcome the recent adoption of the national
crime prevention strategy for the period 2015-2017.
Internal discipline of the police must be addressed in
a serious and responsible manner. Swift and effective
action on the part ofthe Haitian Government will not be
enough without genuine support from the international
community.

We recognize the role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in
stabilizing security and strengthening rule of law
in Haiti. The very presence of MINUSTAH in the
upcoming elections in October and December will
be a calming factor. Taking into account the current
situation and the challenges facing Haiti in the near
future, we support the extension of the MINUSTAH
mandate in its current composition. However, we share
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that,
after the inauguration of the new President, a strategic
assessment be carried out to adapt the Mission to its
new situation and the new needs of the country.

To conclude, we welcome the positive achievements,
but we also recognize their fragility. The women and
men of Haiti still need our political and financial
support.

