The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.

The Chinese delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by the Council. I would like to
point out that ever since its deployment, the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has
effectively carried out its tasks and played an important
role in checking the spread of conflict in the former
Yugoslavia and in stabilizing the situation in that region.
We would like to express our appreciation to it.

We have noted that, thanks to the joint efforts made
by the international community, the situation in the
former Yugoslavia region is moving towards stability. We
would like to reiterate that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
should be respected by the international community. We
have also noted that not long ago the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia signed an agreement on mutual recognition.
We feel this serves the basic interests of the two peoples,
is beneficial to the development of relations between the
two countries and assumes a positive significance in
promoting the normalization of relations between the
countries in the region and in maintaining the peace and
security of the region.

We have studied the report of the Secretary-General,
and, taking into account the request of the Government of
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
situation in the region, expressed our consent to the
extension of UNPREDEP'S mandate.

At the same time, we feel that the United Nations
peace-keeping missions, including preventive deployment
missions, should follow some established principles and
should be terminated upon completion of their mandates.
We hope that, with a continued improvement of the

situation in the region, UNPREDEP will reduce its
strength according to its actual needs and finally terminate
its mission in a smooth manner.

I now resume my functions as President ol' the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.15 let.
