Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is my pleasure to welcome the State
delegation of Angola, led by General Carneiro, and to
thank him for his important statement.

Russia highly appreciates the constructive position of
the Government of Angola on the issues of the political
settlement, its dedication to the Lusaka Protocol and its
resolve to complete the peace process successfully.

Unfortunately, a different and diametrically opposed
approach is espoused by the UNITA leadership, which,
ignoring the Security Council's repeated warnings,
continues obstinately to refuse to fulfil its obligations.
UNITA has blocked the extension of the administration of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation to
the so-called sensitive areas - first and foremost,
Andulo, Bailundo, Mungo and Nharea - and has actively
increased its military capacity. Armed attacks on
Government representatives, the staff of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola, other international
personnel and the civilian population have escalated
dangerously.

As a result of UNITA's irresponsible activity, the
military-political situation has sharply deteriorated and the
peace process has been pushed to the brink of collapse,
raising the danger of the resumption of civil war. The
situation calls for decisive and prompt measures on the
part of the Security Council to alleviate the crisis in the
Angolan settlement. The Secretary-General's Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Beye, and the troika of
observer countries of the Angolan peace process are all of
one mind. Such, we believe, is the general sentiment of
the Security Council.

By adopting this draft resolution today, we feel that
it is equal to its given task. The draft resolution contains
a thoroughly thought-out and targeted list of additional
political, financial and economic sanctions, clearly and
primarily directed at the UNITA leadership, that will
automatically enter into force on 25 June if, by 23 June,
it has not complied with the concrete and realistic
demands of the Security Council.

We hope that the UNITA leadership will soberly
assess the situation this time and use the two-week grace
period it has been offered to fulfil its commitments. We
are firmly convinced that this forceful yet necessary step

 

on the part of the Security Council is fully consistent with
the interests of preserving and consolidating the peace
process in Angola.

