Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
As other delegations have done, my delegation would
like to take this opportunity to welcome the
establishment of the new African Union, with all the
expectations to which that event gives rise.

My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the statement made by Costa Rica on behalf of the
Rio Group.

The holding of this public debate opens up new
avenues for dialogue to enable us to listen to and
understand the concerns of States Members of the
United Nations with regard to issues that are of crucial
importance to us. This occasion should also be viewed
as an opportune moment to make the working methods
of the Security Council patently transparent.

While we welcome this debate, we are concerned
at the course taken by attempts to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), in that it has brought together four diverse
elements that we would have preferred not be mingled
in a single debate. The first element at stake is the
effort to maintain peace and security in the Balkans
through the activities of the United Nations. Secondly,
great uncertainty has developed with regard to the
capacity of the United Nations to renew a mandate or
to deploy new peacekeeping operations in order to
fulfil its purposes. Thirdly, questions have been raised
regarding the very applicability and universality of
international law. Lastly, and fourthly, debate has
arisen concerning universal commitment to the Rome
Statute, which establishes the International Criminal
Court. Today's debate is therefore wide in scope and
goes beyond the issues of peacekeeping operations and
the International Criminal Court. The Secretary-
General's 3 July letter to Secretary of State Powell
clearly and eloquently reflects the situation.

As far as the renewal of the mandate of UNMIBH
is concerned, Mexico would like to state that this
renewal is essential to provide continuity and solidity
to the international community's efforts to consolidate
peace and stability in the Balkans, thereby enabling the
European Union to assume its role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in an orderly fashion. However, despite
the efforts made to renew the mandate, it has not been
possible to find a solution to the underlying problem
raised by the delegation of the United States. In
particular, my country is concerned about proposals
that would grant countries contributing troops and
other personnel to missions established or authorized
by the Security Council any sort of immunity vis-a-vis
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. My
delegation has serious difficulties in subscribing to
proposals that would establish such exemption regimes,
because of their implications both for the functioning
of peacekeeping operations and for the integrity of the
system of international jurisdiction.

With regard to the Organization's capacity to
deploy peacekeeping operations, my delegation holds
that the Member States have collectively decided that
the Security Council should act on behalf of us all in
discharging its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. Therefore, the
legitimacy of the Council's action rests on such
decisions being in conformity with the principles of the
Charter and of international law. For that reason, my
delegation believes that the credibility of the Council's
work may be adversely affected with the approval of
decisions counter to the integrity of the international
legal system.

The Security Council is without question the
proper body in which to deal with matters relating to
peacekeeping operations. But we doubt whether it is
the proper forum in which to deal with matters relating
to the International Criminal Court, particularly if what
is at issue would undermine one of the essential
features of any judicial body: the independent exercise
of its jurisdiction.

The adverse consequences of the implementation
of the proposal to grant absolute immunity to the
personnel of peacekeeping operations are not
consistent. On the one hand there is the call for States
receiving missions to cooperate fully with international
tribunals, including the special tribunals. On the other
hand is the exemption of the personnel and troops of
those missions from their obligations under the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

Moreover, we - the States parties to the Rome
Statute and all States signatories that have committed
ourselves to not taking any action, in any
circumstances, that would undermine the Courts'
objective and purpose - are faced with a dangerous
precedent, which, if accepted, would represent a de
facto amendment to the Rome Statute. In particular, I
am referring to the possibility that the ICC be
instructed to suspend the investigation or prosecution
of cases of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity involving current or former personnel of
operations created or authorized by the Security
Council.

Similarly, legal institutions such as the law of
treaties, one of whose essential objectives is to promote
peaceful cooperation among States, would be damaged
if we allowed the Council to set the negative precedent
of using its resolutions to amend treaties.

Invoking article 16 of the Rome Statute to grant
immunity from its jurisdiction to the personnel and
troops of missions established and authorized by the
Security Council is not acceptable to my delegation.
Any decision that attempts to extract article 16 from
the Rome Statute and to interpret it in isolation in a
manner contrary to its original purpose undermines the
implementation of the entire Statute and erodes the
fundamental principle of the independence of the
Court. Article 16 must have temporary validity and an
exceptional application covering specific situations.
We cannot accept the need to grant a general
suspension with regard to events that have not yet
occurred. Even less can we accept that such a
suspension might become unlimited.

The action of the Security Council in fulfilling its
mandate must be in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations and with international law. For that
reason, the Council cannot, in the name of the
maintenance of peace and security, set up an exemption
regime that would alter the spirit of the provisions of
the Rome Statute.

My delegation would have liked to have seen the
United States be a party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, especially in virtue of its
leadership and its very significant and substantial
contributions in establishing and promoting other
international criminal tribunals. While we regret that
recently the United States has clearly stated its
intention not to ratify the Statute, my country wishes to
state that we have full respect for that decision. In view
of this, throughout these weeks of arduous work, we
have listened very attentively to the concerns of the
United States, and throughout this period we have
maintained a receptive attitude towards its proposals
and concerns. However, it still appears that we are far
from finding points of convergence. While the latest
proposals have shown some progress in that they
invoke the Statute, it is also true that they continue to
represent an interpretation that in Mexico's opinion
goes beyond the letter and spirit of article 16 of the
Statute.

The text of article 16 was the result of intense
negotiations at the Rome diplomatic conference. Its
content represents a fine and delicate balance that the
Council cannot and must not alter. If it were to follow
the route of the initiatives of the United States, the
Council would be interpreting the scope of article 16
very broadly, since the article was designed for specific
situations with a limited time frame for cases in which
it was justified by the need to maintain or to restore
international peace and security.

We are confident the United States will find a
way to resolve its concerns in this framework, given
that the Statute contains sufficient safeguards to protect
the legitimate interests of States parties and of States
not parties to the Statute.

The Statute is grounded in the principle of
complementarity. As has been stated, this is a
guarantee that the international community in no way
questions the strict parameters of independence and
impartiality governing the operation of the judicial
systems of States, in particular of the United States.

With regard to the universal commitment to the
Rome Statute, today the United Nations is at an
exceptional and historic crossroads. The choice
depends on all its Members - an irreparable step
backwards or the option that postulates the United
Nations and the progressive development of
international law as civilizing factors that promote
international cooperation, the legitimacy of
international institutions, and the strengthening of a
system of justice of universal scope to punish those
who commit the most grievous and far-reaching crimes
against the international community.

The Government of Mexico considers respect for
human rights and the validity of international law as an
unshirkable commitment. Our signing of the Rome
Statute and the constitutional process now under way
in Mexico to ratify it oblige us to defend its objectives
and focus our actions unequivocally on upholding its
application.

For those reasons, my delegation is not in a
position to accept any decision that would injure the
establishment and legitimacy of the International
Criminal Court.

