Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to extend my
gratitude to His Royal Highness and to your country
for having convened today's debate. This issue is of
particular relevance against the backdrop of today's
world and makes it very clear how closely linked
emerging challenges to international peace and security
are to the needs of one of the most vulnerable population
groups, perhaps the most vulnerable population group,
and also one that has the greatest potential for our
future as humankind, that is, youth.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the statement he made this morning, which also
provides guidelines on how to address this terrible
problem. I wish here to reiterate to what extent terrorism
is a threat and wish to make it clear that no excuse,
situation or condition canjustify acts of terrorism.

At the same time, I would like to stress, as all of
the members of the Security Council have done on
numerous occasions, that any measures adopted to
tackle the scourge of terrorism must be enacted with
full respect for the rule of law and implemented in strict
compliance with international human rights standards.

Violent extremism and radicalization constitute
today one ofthe most pressing threats to peace, stability
and development, as indicated in the excellent concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex) circulated by Jordan, because
it is this generation of young people, the largest such
generation in history, that is the target of the strategies
of terrorist organizations, which take advantage of their
needs and their dissatisfaction to expand their networks
of violence and further their criminal activities.

Colombia reiterates its willingness to work
together with the rest of the international community
on strategies aimed at preventing the involvement of
young people in violent activities of any kind, as well
as to engage in initiatives aimed at promoting the
empowerment, education and participation of youth. It
is Vital that we take balanced measures that respond to
all of the aspects of the complex phenomenon of violent
extremist.

Nonetheless, it is also important to recognize that
neither poverty nor underdevelopment is the cause per
se of such phenomena, as some have said. As history has
taught us, terrorism and extremism affect very diverse
societies with disparate levels of development and
varying social-inclusion conditions. For that reason,
it is not just counterproductive but also mendacious
to stereotype terrorism, radicalization and violent
extremism among youth as being uniquely a problem of
underdeveloped societies.

We therefore need to promote values such as
solidarity, respect, tolerance, acceptance of diversity
and respect for the rule of law, because an inclusive,
open society that is able to meet to meet the aspirations
of youth is vital not only to tackling the conditions
that promote radicalization and violent extremism, but
also to ensuring that we can achieve our aspirations as
democratic societies.

Including young people in the labour market is
without a doubt one of the elements that is pivotal
to the full development of their own aspirations as
individuals. In 2013, the number of unemployed youth,
according to the International Labour Organization,
soared to 73 million. We cannot continue to make
progress in the search for prevention mechanisms
without addressing that reality. We cannot lose sight of
the fact that both education and work are human rights
and that closing the gender gap at all levels of education
must be a priority in order to empower youth, improve
their living conditions and free them from the adverse
impact of violent extremism.

New technologies have proved to have negative
effects that must be urgently addressed. Proponents
of Violence have been adept at identifying innovative
ways of befriending and exploiting young people, and,
as an international community, we have been lagging
far behind in terms of finding an appropriate response
to this phenomenon. As we seek solution strategies,
it is vital that actions aimed at responding to this
scourge be adopted with full respect for freedom of
expression, religion and association, and the right to
privacy. Censorship, therefore, is not the answer. Youth
themselves need to take ownership of the discourse
on democracy and diversity and they themselves must
stand as critics of the manipulative attempts of those
who advocate violence.

We in Colombia are, unfortunately, all too familiar
with the effects that Violence and terrorism can have on
the lives of young people who, day by day, are seeking
to forge the future of our country. For that reason, we
are convinced of the need to grant the highest priority
to creating living standards that will allow future
generations to build fair and just societies and to live
together in peace and freedom.

