Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I, too, join other
Council members in paying tribute to the soldiers who
lost their lives in Mali.

I thank the Special Adviser and Head of the

Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) for his informative briefing on
the work ofUNITAD. We commend him and his team on
their continued progress and significant achievements
in their important task of seeking accountability for the
grave crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)(Da'esh). I also thank Mr. Kachi
for sharing his experiences with the Council.
It is clear from the detailed recent report
(S/2019/878) on the activities of UNITAD, under the
capable leadership of the Special Adviser and Head
of the Investigative Team, Mr. Khan, that significant
progress has been made in establishing a fully-fledged,
modern and professional investigative unit employing
the latest technology and international best practices,
and staffed by international experts from a wide range
of relevant fields.

Importantly, as we went through the report, we
deemed it impressive that the investigative capacity
is already yielding results, with UNITAD having
gathered large amounts of evidence in various forms,
including digital evidence, witness testimonies and
forensic evidence. It is clear to us that much thought
and planning has gone into the strategic focus of
UNITAD's present investigations in Iraq. We are also
pleased about the close cooperation between UNITAD
and the Iraqi authorities in developing mutually
supportive mechanisms to ensure that the shared aim
of prosecuting the perpetrators of ISIL's crimes in the
country is achieved.

Although ISIL has suffered significant setbacks
as a result of the military defeat of its self-declared
caliphate as well as the recent death of its leader, Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, it is clear that the threat posed by
the remaining elements, including affiliate groups that
have taken root in Africa and elsewhere in the world, as
well as the spread of the group's poisonous ideology by
means of the Internet, are issues that we must continue
to confront.

We also note with concern the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/612) indicating that despite
the setbacks that it has suffered, ISIL remains apervasive
threat in Iraq. Clearly this poses a destabilizing threat
not only to Iraq but also to the entire region.

In this context, having heard of the bravery that
Mr. Kachi demonstrated, which is clear from his
account of his experiences, we deem that the role of
UNITAD remains vital in implementing other efforts
to end the threat posed by ISIL, particularly in ensuring
that justice is served for the terrible crimes for which
the group is responsible. In that regard, it is clear that
UNITAD plays a vital role as an impartial, independent
body operating within the United Nations Charter and
employing United Nations best practices, in line with
the relevant provisions of international law, including
international human rights law, in supporting Iraqi
authorities in the challenging and harrowing endeavour
of seeking justice for the crimes committed.
While we are aware of the sensitive and challenging
legal questions that UNITAD has addressed with the
Iraqi authorities concerning the eventual sentencing of
those convicted, we have full confidence that they will
be resolved in a mutually satisfactory and cooperative
manner, and we welcome the prevailing spirit of
cooperation in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to express South Africa's
continued strong support for the important work that
UNITAD is engaged in and to encourage Member
States to continue supporting its efforts to close this
painful chapter in history inflicted by ISIL on Iraqis
and on humankind generally.

