Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina wishes to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for introducing her seventh report to the Council as
required by resolution 1970 (2011). We also welcome
the presence among us of the Permanent Representative
of Libya.

The referral of situations to the International
Criminal Court attests to the Council's recognition
of the Court's role with regard to justice and the fight
against impunity for crimes of international concern, as
well as of the contribution of the Rome Statute and the
International Criminal Court to that end.

Libya faces many challenges in building the
institutions of the rule of law. However, the constructive
dialogue between the Libyan authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor continues to evolve. Last
year, we were informed that the limited contact with
the Libyan Government had been overcome, that the
Office of the Prosecutor had renewed its contacts with
the new Administration following the 2012 elections
and that the Prosecutor and the Attorney General of
Libya had signed a memorandum of understanding on
burden-sharing with regard to future investigations
and proceedings, which did not affect the cases of Saif
Al-Islam Al- Qadhafi and Abdullah AZ-Senussi. Today we
have been informed that the Office of the Prosecutor
has already begun discussions with Libya in connection
with priority suspects and that it will imminently meet
with the Libyan authorities to discuss further details.
We encourage the Libyan Government to continue to
cooperate with the Court so that it, in turn, can support
effective accountability for the crimes committed in
Libya.

With regard to the cases ofSaifAl- [slam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi, which the Office of the
Prosecutor had suspended owing to the admissibility
challenge raised by Libya, Argentina has always
emphasized that this is about a judicial evaluation that,
pursuant to article 17, sub-paragraphs l (a) and (c),
is solely up to the Chambers of the Court. Argentina
hopes that Libya will initiate proceedings against
Abdullah Al-Senoussi. With regard to the admissibility
challenge pertaining to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, the
Appeals Chamber has rejected the Libyan request for
suspension while the appeal proceeds with regard to
the Court's ruling on the admissibility of the claim
regarding the request for handing over the defendant.
As the Prosecutor has done in her report, Argentina
reminds Libya that it has an obligation to surrender
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the court. We are aware
that there is a trial in Libya against Al-Qadhafi, but
Libya must ensure that this trial does not interfere its
obligations to the International Criminal Court.

Argentina acknowledges the concern of the
Prosecutor at the continuation ofthe situation described
in the report entitled "Torture and death in detention in
Libya," published in October 2013 by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
which the Security Council referred in resolution 2144
(2014). Although the Prosecutor points to a decrease
in the number of detainees being held without due
process, there are still approximately 7,000 detainees
who have not been transferred to State custody. The
Libyan Government recognizes the problem; however,
Argentina urges the central Government and local
authorities, in particular in Misrata, to guarantee
detainees due process under the transitional justice law
and to release all detainees who have not been found
guilty or who have served a sentence.

We would also like to reiterate the appeal to Libya
to effectively enforce its law criminalizing torture,
discrimination and forced disappearances, since we
are concerned by the Prosecutor's report that so far it
seems that not one State official or militia member has
been brought to justice for those crimes. In addition,
without prejudicing the assessment of the situation
of the civilians displaced in Tawergha as a crime
under the Rome Statute, it is essential that a strategy
be implemented to ensure the return of the 30,000
displaced people to their homes.

This is another report from the Prosecutor that
highlights Libya's willingness to cooperate with
the Court. Like the Prosecutor, Argentina fully
understands the extent of the challenges facing the
Libyan authorities, and commends the Office of the
Prosecutor for its willingness to continue to support the
Government in its efforts to deal with as many of the
cases under its jurisdiction as possible. We also believe,
however, that Libya's need for democratic, legitimate
legal institutions in the area of the rule of law clearly
exceeds the competence of the International Criminal
Court. The cooperation of the international community
is essential if we are to achieve a secure Libya with
reliable, sustainable institutions and respect for its
citizens' human rights.

There are some additional aspects that my
delegation wishes to emphasize, as we do every time
the Prosecutor presents a report to the Council. The
referrals that the Council makes - and the situation in
Libya is one of them - include an obligation to follow
up responsibly on those referrals. Argentina believes
that the Council cannot merely take note of these
reports and that it is therefore essential that it put into
practice the commitment expressed in its presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/2, either through the Working
Group on International Tribunals or a specific working
group dedicated to the ICC.

We would also like to reiterate that Argentina
considers the clause that seeks to exempt nationals of
States that are not party to the Rome Statute from the
Court's jurisdiction to be unacceptable. An exception
for nationals of States that are not party to the Statute
constitutes an attempt to alter the Statute's provisions
and could affect the credibility of the Court and of the
Security Council itself.

Another aspect that Argentina finds inexplicable
is that the Council has determined that the costs of
referrals will be borne not by the United Nations but
by States parties to the Statute. Besides the fact that
this violates the Rome Statute and the relationship
agreement with the Court, the fact of the matter is that
pressure on the resources available to the Court has
grown with the increasing numbers of its cases. Because
of this, making referrals without considering how they
are financed could well jeopardize the Prosecution's
activities and the Court's long-term viability. The fight
against impunity is a goal not just of States parties to
the Rome Statute but of the United Nations, and the
two referrals made so far are proof of that. However,
that goal must also be backed by a commitment to
providing the Court with the resources it needs to
fulfil its functions. If the Organization could provide
those resources for the two Ad Hoc Tribunals, we do
not understand what is preventing it from the doing the
same for the ICC.

As we do every time we discuss the International
Criminal Court, my delegation would like to emphasize
its belief that the Court represents a remarkable
contribution to achieving accountability for crimes of
international concern, and that it is as essential today as
when it was founded. I commend the Prosecutor for her
efforts, dedication and courage in our common cause,
the fight against impunity, and I once again urge the
Government and people of Libya to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court.

