Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have the
honour of speaking on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. The following countries
align themselves with this statement: the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania and the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As regards the Middle East peace process, allow
me to start by informing the Security Council that the
European Council, which brings together the Heads
of States and Governments of our 28 member States,
adopted short conclusions in mid-December, reiterating
our firm commitment to the two-State solution and,
in that context, that the EU position on Jerusalem
remains unchanged. The aspirations of both parties for
Jerusalem must be fulfilled, and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

In addition, the European Union and its member
States will continue to respect the international
consensus on Jerusalem that is embodied in, inter
alia, resolution 478 (1980), including on the location
of their diplomatic representations, until the final
status of Jerusalem is resolved. Recognizing the
special significance of the holy sites of Jerusalem to
the three monotheistic religions, the European Union
also strongly believes that the status quo put in place in
1967 for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif must
be upheld in line with previous understandings and
with respect to Jordan's special role.

The European Union is stepping up its efforts
to provide a political horizon for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In December, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission, Ms. Mogherini, and European
Union Foreign Ministers met in Brussels with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, while this
week they met in the same formatwith the Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas. On both occasions, we
conveyed our clear and united position. A negotiated
two-State solution that fulfils the aspirations of both
sides, in line with relevant Security Council resolutions
and known parameters, is the only way to bring about
the lasting peace and security that both Israelis and
Palestinians deserve.

We want to contribute to rekindling hope and
resuming the constructive engagement of all and with
all towards a genuine peace process, because we believe
that confrontation and lack of hope will only increase
despair, strengthen radical forces and weaken forces of
moderation and wisdom.

The European Union's position on Israeli settlement
construction and related activities, including recent
evictions in East Jerusalem and plans that have led to
the forced transfer of Bedouin communities in the West
Bank, is clear and has not changed. The European Union
remains strongly opposed to Israel's settlement policy,
which is illegal under international law. As reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016), that policy also dangerously
threatens the viability of the two-State solution.

We also urge Palestinians to effectively continue
to combat violence and incitement and to intensify
efforts to reunite the West Bank and Gaza under one
single and legitimate Palestinian Authority, which is
also critical to improving the situation of the people
in Gaza and will pave the way towards Palestinian
elections. Furthermore, we urge both parties to stand
by the Oslo Accords.

With all of that in mind, the European Union has
agreed, with Norway, to hold an extraordinary meeting
at the ministerial level ofthe Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, in Brussels next week, on 31 January.
That will be an opportunity to bring both parties and
other relevant actors together to discuss measures that
can underpin efforts to achieve a negotiated two-State
solution and how to concretely support the Palestinian

State and institution-building, including financial
support. The meeting will also address the situation in
Gaza and efforts to assist reconciliation in order for the
Palestinian Authority to reinstate full control in Gaza.

We are deeply concerned over the recent significant
reductions of funding to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). Reduced support will have serious security
and humanitarian consequences not only in the West
Bank and Gaza, but also in neighbouring countries. We
wish to stress that the EU has provided extensive and
reliable support to UNRWA since 1971. Collectively,
the EU and its member States are among the largest
contributors to the Agency, and that will continue.
The EU is ready to use its good offices also vis-a-vis
other current or potential future donors, to ensure
that UNRWA remains able to carry out its important
function of securing the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian refugees in an already unstable region.

Allow me to end by reaffirming the need for an
appropriate and effective international and regional
framework for relaunching direct negotiations. We will
continue to engage with both parties and our regional
and international partners, including within the Middle
East Quartet, to promote a return to a meaningful
process towards a negotiated two-State solution, in line
with known parameters, and towards a peace that can
be just and sustained.

