Mr. Lidington (United Kingdom): I would first
like to express the thanks of my Government to the
Secretary-General, President Clinton and President
Preval for their briefings today. I would also like to
join with my Brazilian colleague in expressing our
appreciation for the priority that you personally,
Mr. President, and the Government of Colombia have
given to the future of Haiti in bringing forward this
debate this morning.

We welcome the debate not just on the
strengthening of democracy in Haiti but also on the
role of United Nations peacekeeping. In the latter
context, I would like to take this opportunity to express
the condolences of the British Government to the
Secretary-General on the deaths of United Nations
peacekeepers and civilian staff in recent days in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and C6te d'Ivoire. The fate that they suffered is an
important and sobering reminder to us of the dangers
that United Nations personnel face every week
worldwide as they go about their work on behalf of all
of us.

The United Kingdom welcomes the preliminary
results of the second round of the presidential elections
in Haiti, and we are encouraged by the initial positive
assessment by the joint electoral observation mission
of the Organization of American States and the
Caribbean Community. We look forward to the
announcement of the final result on 16 April and urge
the authorities to meet that deadline. As Haiti enters
the final stage of this electoral process, we call upon all
parties and all candidates to continue to demonstrate
their commitment to democracy and the rule of law.

We believe that the newly elected president, in
partnership with the new Parliament, should push
forward with an agenda to rebuild the administrative
capacity of the Government of Haiti and to provide the
necessary platform for international investment and for
job creation. We want to see the highest priority given
to a continued commitment by the new authorities in
Haiti to inclusiveness, accountability and impartiality,
and a demonstrable willingness to engage
constructively with the international community.

The humanitarian situation is improving, but
Haiti continues to face very serious challenges in
meeting basic needs, principally permanent shelter,
clean water and sanitation, as President Clinton said to
us this morning, as well as in fighting cholera. The new
Haiti President will need to demonstrate strong
leadership in order to address those challenges.

The lack of capacity of the Haitian National
Police continues to have a worrying impact on the
safety and security of vulnerable Haitians, including
women and children. The Haitian Government must
reach a position where the troops of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) are no
longer the main providers of security in Haiti.
MINUSTAH, for its part, should continue to do its
utmost to support the development of local policing
capabilities. Building the capacity of Haiti's own
police is the only sustainable solution in the long term,
as MINUSTAH cannot stay in Haiti forever. We
therefore look forward to the next police reform plan,
which will map out this essential capacity-building
work for 2012 and beyond.

My Government also believes that it is vital that
Haiti's State institutions be afforded the same attention
and priority. A fully functioning judiciary and other
rule-of-law institutions, with - as President Preval
pointedly reminded us - no room for impunity, are

paramount. The rehabilitation of the Haitian
corrections system is another key element in the
recovery process, and donors, including the United
Kingdom, have channelled their efforts into making
valuable progress in this important area.

We continue to underline the importance of the
role that the international donor community has to play
in helping to re-establish Haiti's institutions and to
invigorate its economy. We would like join with other
Member States in calling for all outstanding pledges to
be fulfilled without delay.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank, on
behalf of the British Government, President Clinton
and his colleagues for their work on the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission. We urge the Commission to
redouble its efforts to achieve efficiencies in the donor
coordination process and increase the pace at which
donor assistance is able to get to those places where it
is most desperately needed.

MINUSTAH continues to play a fundamental role
in maintaining peace and security in Haiti and is a
crucial deterrent in the fight against violent crime and
civil disorder. As we reach the end of 2011, we hope to
see the conclusion of MINUSTAH's two-year surge
period. We hope that political stability and improved
security will enable a drawdown of the additional
military personnel that were deployed to MINUSTAH
early last year as part of the United Nations immediate
disaster response. This improved stability and security
should create space for the private sector to play a
more prominent role in the efforts to create
employment and rebuild the country. Of course this
effort has to be led by the Government and the people
of Haiti themselves, but private enterprises from across
the international community, including from the United
Kingdom, stand ready to assist and invest.

My Government's view is that the United Nations
must now begin to reassess the nature of our longer-
term support for Haiti. We need to explore how the
development role of donors and United Nations
agencies and programmes can best supplement and
complement the peacekeeping role of MINUSTAH.

Finally, I would like to place on the record our
thanks to the men and women of MINUSTAH for their
ongoing efforts in Haiti. In particular, I want to pay
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-

General, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his outstanding
contribution, including driving the United Nations
response to the devastating earthquake of January
2010.

