Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish to thank President
King and Prosecutor Rapp for their presentations and
congratulate them on the Court's achievements in
bringing to justice the alleged perpetrators of the most
heinous international crimes and contributing to the
development of international criminal law. I also wish
to welcome the participation in our proceedings today
of the Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Migiro.

Italy associates itself with the statement that will
be delivered by the presidency of the European Union
later on.

We strongly support the work of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone and praise its contribution to
the restoration of peace and stability in that country.
The Special Court has been crucial in reaffirming the
rule of law as one of the pillars of civil society, as has
also been discussed in the Peacebuilding Commission.
The conclusion of the first cases, with the imminent
delivery of judgements, is only the first tangible
outcome of the huge effort that began with the
establishment of the Court in 2002.

With the recent start of the trial against Charles
Taylor, the Court initiated a new phase of its work that
will mark a milestone in the field of international
criminal justice. We strongly recommend, however,
that media attention to the Taylor trial not distract the
Court from continuing its activities in Freetown with a
view to accomplishing its completion strategy.

Several statements this afternoon have recalled
the Special Court's contributions to the development of

international criminal law. We would like to mention
the investigations into the use of child soldiers and
forced marriages, which will surely result in precedent-
setting decisions in the area of international crimes
against the weakest part of the civilian population and
which have tragic and long-standing repercussions in
civil societies.

I would like to refer briefly to the Special Court's
affirmation of the crucial role of justice in the peace
and reconciliation process. Peace and justice must go
hand in hand in societies that have been disrupted by
civil wars. The Special Court proves that, with the
support of the international community and the
Security Council, with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, a
judicial institution can be set up in the very place
where horrendous crimes have been committed.

The establishment of the Special Court in Sierra
Leone is per se a fundamental outreach. But that is not
enough. Italy is proud of its contribution, especially
through the European Union, to the several outreach
activities of the Special Court, and we hope that these
activities will continue. At the same time, we believe
that an effort must be made to ensure that the people of
Sierra Leone will continue to perceive the Special
Court as a friendly institution whose premises will go
on serving the country even after the Court has
concluded its work.

As regards the functioning of the Special Court,
Italy welcomes the recent decisions aimed at making
the Court more efficient and at overcoming some
management difficulties. The adoption a few days ago
of the budget for the 2007-2009 period is a step in the
right direction, towards forecasting the financial needs
of the Court in the next two years, thereby paving the
way for a smooth completion strategy.

