Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I begin by
welcoming the participation of Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sierra Leone, in today's Council meeting, and thanking
her for her statement. I also thank Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), and His
Excellency Ambassador John McNee of Canada in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration on Sierra Leone for their
briefings.

My delegation is certainly concerned about the
recent outbreak of political and security tensions in
Sierra Leone, which underscores the still-fragile
situation there, which requires continued and urgent
attention. Apart from the increasing divisions along
regional lines throughout the country, Sierra Leone
must also deal with the emerging threat of piracy, illicit
drug trafficking and the illegal trade in natural
resources, uncontrolled migration to urban centres,
high numbers of unemployed and underemployed
youths, and reductions in remittances and other adverse
effects of the global financial crisis. All of these
challenges have the potential to create an environment
conducive to further violence.

In that context, we welcome the signing of the
2April joint communique, in which the parties in
Sierra Leone committed themselves to a cessation of
all acts of political intolerance and violence and agreed
upon a bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies.

We take positive note of the strengthened
cooperation among Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team, the Peacebuilding Commission
and other development parties to strengthen their areas
of focus and the principles of national ownership,
mutual accountability and sustained engagement, as
contained in the United Nations peacebuilding strategy
for Sierra Leone and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations family for Sierra Leone.

We are further encouraged by the efforts of the
Government of Sierra Leone to translate its Agenda for
Change into further concrete results, particularly in
such areas as fighting corruption, reforming the
security sector, creating jobs for and empowering
youth and combating drug trafficking and organized
crime.
While commending UNIPSIL's efforts in carrying
out its new mandate, as stipulated in resolution 1829
(2008), we believe that well-coordinated and
interconnected cooperation among United Nations
agencies, regional organizations and international
donors remains essential to ensuring maximal use of
resources, avoiding duplication of work and helping
serve the best interests of Sierra Leone in each phase of
its development.

Finally, I wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam will
continue to support the efforts of Sierra Leone to
sustain peace and stability, address the root causes of
the conflict, promote national reconciliation and unity
and strengthen its international integration process. We
call upon the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the international
community at large to continue to assist the Government
of Sierra Leone in these endeavours.

