I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings. We very much appreciate that Mr. Arias was able to join us today. The regular sharing of information with the Security Council on the OPCW's activities and investigations is very valuable. We were grateful that during Estonia's presidency of the Security Council in May, Mr. Arias and Mr. Santiago Ofiate, the Coordinator of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), were able to brief the Council regarding the findings of the first IIT report and shed further light on that important investigation. Given that the OPCW and the Security Council share the same objectives of upholding the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons and supporting chemical disarmament, we need to ensure close collaboration in order to move things forward on this file. Let me start by reiterating Estonia's support for the professional and impartial work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We have full confidence in the technical expertise and independence of its investigative mechanisms. It is extremely regrettable that there are countries that deliberately work to undermine the OPCW, thereby threatening to weaken the international architecture combating the use of chemical weapons. That is unacceptable and deeply worrying. We cannot allow the norm against chemical weapons to be eroded and the use of such weapons to become a normality. The use of Novichok against the Skripals in the United Kingdom in 2018 and this year in Russia against opposition politician Alexei Navalny is a very concerning development. We urge Russia to conduct a thorough and transparent investigation and hold accountable those responsible for these crimes. We also urge Russia to conclude the necessary agreements with the OPCW for the swift deployment of the technical assistance mission. Turning now to the eighty-sixth monthly report of the OPCW Director- General (see S/2020/1152), we note with regret that outstanding issues persist relating to Syria's chemical weapons declaration. While we welcome the fact that another round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian authorities enabled three outstanding issues related to the declaration to be closed, there are still 19 remaining - 19 outstanding issues, after six years and 23 rounds of consultations. The fact is that after signing up to the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013 and taking on the responsibility to declare all of its chemical-weapon stockpiles and facilities, the Syrian regime has failed to do so. It has deliberately concealed its production facilities and used those horrendous weapons on multiple occasions against its own people. Independent United Nations and OPCW investigative mechanisms have found the Syrian regime to be responsible in seven cases. Estonia strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab Air Force, as the first report of the IIT, issued on 8 April, concluded. Using chlorine and sarin, the Syrian Air Force conducted three chemical attacks in Ltamenah in 2017 in order to suppress the opposition and terrorize its people, with a blatant disregard for human lives and suffering. Estonia welcomed the Executive Council decision of 9 July setting out clear and verifiable parameters for the actions that the Syrian Arab Republic needs to take in order to return to full compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is very unfortunate and worrisome that Syria has failed to take the required steps. We hope that once the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention resumes in April, it will take appropriate action regarding Syria's non- compliance with the Executive Council decision and address Syria's complete lack of cooperation with the OPCW. We also hope that the Security Council will not stand by in the face of clear evidence that chemical weapons have been used by the Syrian regime and that it will take action to uphold its resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations.
