Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes Crown
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II to New York. We
also thank the delegation of Jordan for organizing this
important and timely debate. We want to acknowledge
the presence of participating Ministers and to welcome
them to the Security Council. Our appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Neumann and
Mr. Atran for their insightful briefings.

Violent extremism is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security; combating it is one
of the most urgent challenges facing the international
community. The most violent extremist groups
operating across the world today - the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab - dominate the headlines with atrocities
that shock our conscience as the human race. They
share a common agenda to unleash terror, mayhem,
destruction, instability and human suffering and to
acquire territory. In pursuit of their hideous agenda,
they radicalize and recruit young people. The inevitable
consequence is an increase in the number of young
people who become foreign terrorist fighters. That is
evidently a cause-and-effect relationship. It is therefore
crucial that any attempt to address the problem of
Violent extremism needs to begin with an in-depth
assessment of the options available to prevent the
radicalization of young people and their recruitment by
extremist groups.

In his profound briefing this morning, Mr. Neumann
reminded us that there is no single reason that young
people become radicalized. Indeed, various reasons
have been adduced to explain why young people are
readily enlisted into extremist groups. Some of those
reasons include the quest for recognition, fellowship
and identity. Young people also join extremist groups
in search of financial gain, protection and solidarity.
Those are some of the pull factors that lure young
people into extremist groups.

The other dimension of the problem is the push
factors linked to the circumstances of young people
in many parts of the world. The disproportionate
impact of the economic crisis in some countries tends
to marginalize and disempower youth. That could in
turn propel them into violent extremism. Poverty and
unemployment could also trigger youth vulnerability to
Violent extremism. Those and other push factors often
reflect the dynamics in society.

Ideologically motivated violence begins at the
local and moves on to the national level, eventually
taking on an international dimension. Addressing the
problem will therefore require concerted action at the
local level. That is why the family, community leaders,
teachers and religious leaders - and Mr. Neumann this
morning added the mother - all have a crucial role
to play. Working together in a complementary manner,
they can all help to build safe, secure and resilient
societies where young people are shielded from values
that are alien to their societies. It is essential that all
stakeholders play their roles in the character formation
of youth by building linkages across sectors, sharing
experiences and adhering to best practices.

In Nigeria, youth matters are embedded in
decision-making at all levels of Government, including
at the federal, state and local levels. The vision of our
national policy on youth is to empower Nigerian youth to
become self-reliant and responsible citizens. The policy

aims to provide a sustainable framework for integrated
planning and collaboration among stakeholders for
the development of policies, programmes and other
initiatives that promote and enhance the development
of Nigerian youth. For example, the National Youth
Service Corps, a scheme established in 1973, has been
a vital instrument in inculcating in Nigerian youth the
spirit of selfless service to the community. It has also
helped to foster much-needed unity and understanding
among young Nigerians by exposing them to the diverse
cultures in a pluralistic society.

We also have a citizenship and leadership training
centre that has been established to give young people
the experience of self-discovery and self-actualization.
Our Youth Enterprise with Innovation in Nigeria
programme, otherwise known YouWiN!, is a recent
Government initiative designed to generate jobs. It
aims to encourage and support aspiring entrepreneurial
young people in Nigeria in developing and executing
business ideas that could generate employment
opportunities. It is expected that this and similar
Government initiatives will help empower young
people and make them productive members of society.

Given its experience with Boko Haram, Nigeria
understands that countering radicalization and Violent
extremism will require more than a military approach
or option. For that reason, the Federal Government
has adopted and institutionalized a soft approach
that encompasses peace, security and development. It
involves a multi-stakeholder approach that has brought
together all levels of Government, the private sector,
academics, civil society and community and religious
leaders in a joint effort to stem the tide of radicalization
that has helped to foil the infamous Boko Haram
insurgency.

The emphasis of the soft approach is on
counterradicalization, deradicalization, strategic
communication and economic regeneration.
Counterradicalization aims to stem the flow of
recruits and reduce the potential for indoctrination.
De-radicalization seeks to reintegrate extremists and
their families back into society through a number of
activities, including prison interventions and vocational
training. Strategic communication aims to produce
a narrative that presents moderate religious views in
order to counter the terrorists' extremist narrative.
Economic regeneration is being pursued in the states
most affected by Boko Haram's activities, with the
aim of improving the local economy in those areas and
raising living standards.

The problem of the radicalization of young people
and violent extremism is one that requires concerted
action at every level and the national, regional and
global levels in particular. Because it is a critical threat
to global peace, terrorism is a multifaceted battle that
must be fought on many fronts, with a determined will
to transform young people all over the world to enable
them to take on their role as trustees of the world's
future.

