The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his briefing. Through him, I would also like to thank
all United Nations and other humanitarian personnel on
the ground. They work under extreme circumstances.

Sixteen days ago (see S/PV.8188), the Security
Council showed a rare example of unity regarding
Syria when it adopted resolution 2401 (2018) . I recall
the glimmer of hope that day in the Chamber. All of us
agreed that all parties to the Syrian conflict must cease
hostilities in order to enable the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and the evacuation of the critically sick and
wounded. Yet one day after the adoption of resolution
2401 (2018), the Syrian regime, supported by Russia
and Iran, launched a most violent ground offensive to
conquer the enclave of eastern Ghouta. That offensive
came on top of a relentless air campaign that had
started one month ago. Resolution 2401 (2018) calls for
a cessation of hostilities, without delay. Unfortunately,
it is the military offensive that continues without delay.

Elsewhere in Syria, including in Idlib and Afrin,
violence continues to threaten the civilian population
as well. The Council must do everything in its power
to advance the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018). In that regard, I would like to stress the
importance of humanitarian aid, the monitoring of the
cessation of hostilities and accountability.

With regard to my first point, the immediate
delivery of humanitarian aid, last week we were deeply
shocked to hear reports that medical supplies, including
surgical supplies, insulin and even trauma kits, had
been removed from convoys by the Syrian regime.
Medical supplies save lives and provide relief to the
inhumane suffering that too many Syrians are going
through. Medical supplies cannot be used as weapons
by terrorists. There is no justification for denying
medicine and medical supplies to the wounded and sick.

The first humanitarian convoy that received
authorization from the Syrian regime to deliver aid to
eastern Ghouta was not able to fully unload because of
resumed fighting. The convoy that arrived last Friday
was finally able to deliver aid, including medical
supplies, for 27,500 people. However, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is still waiting
for authorization to complete the delivery to Douma for
all 70,000 people, as initially approved by the Syrian
authorities. We call on all parties to immediately allow
sustained and unimpeded access to deliver supplies to
people in desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
That applies to eastern Ghouta and to all in need
throughout the country.

On my second point, the cessation of hostilities and
the need for monitoring, resolution 2401 (2018) calls
for an immediate nationwide cessation of hostilities.
A strong monitoring mechanism is needed urgently
in order to ensure implementation. We agree with the
French proposal in that regard. Since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), air strikes have continued, even
increased, especially on eastern Ghouta.

We hear the Russian Federation say that those
strikes are targeted at terrorists. However, we underline
once more that the exemption to the ceasefire for attacks
directed at United Nations-listed terrorist groups does
not provide an excuse to ignore the basic principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution. According
to the latest report of the Commission of Inquiry, the
siege of eastern Ghouta continues to be characterized
by the use of prohibited weapons and attacks against
civilian and protected objects, which we condemn in
the strongest terms.

We also condemn the shelling of Damascus from
eastern Ghouta. We call upon all parties to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian law
at all times. Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura should
facilitate negotiations between armed opposition
groups, the Syrian regime and Russia in order to
advance the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

One concrete and helpful step is to evacuate United
Nations-listed terrorist groups from eastern Ghouta.
A first evacuation of 13 imprisoned terrorist fighters
reportedly took place last Friday. It is crucial that
any evacuation of armed fighters take place in a safe
and orderly fashion. We call on the United Nations to
prepare for putting in place the necessary monitoring
mechanisms in that regard. We call on Russia to accept
the offer of the Special Envoy to facilitate further
evacuation of United Nations-listed terrorist groups
from eastern Ghouta. Civilians should never be forced
to leave against their will. Forced displacement may
constitute a war crime.

On my third point, the credibility and accountability
of the Council, despite the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018) we have seen no cessation of
hostilities. We have seen no significant improvement
in the humanitarian situation on the ground in Syria.
This also has a negative impact on the credibility of
the Council. It is vital for the functioning of the rules-
based international order that decisions of the Council
be respected and implemented. As a Council, we have
a collective responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. However, we should
not forget that the responsibility and, indeed, the
obligation to execute its decisions lies with individual
Member States.

The human suffering in Syria, especially in
eastern Ghouta, must end now. We need a full
cessation of hostilities in all of Syria, including eastern
Ghouta, Idlib and Afrin. And we call on the Russian
Federation in particular to use its influence and to do
its utmost to achieve that, thereby also upholding the
Council's credibility.

In conclusion, the siege of eastern Ghouta is
entering its fifth year. The war in Syria will enter its
eighth year later this week, on 15 March, as others have
noted. One wonders how the Syrian regime thinks to
ever achieve the legitimacy to govern the people it now
pounds into submission or death.

As the High Commissioner for Human Rights
stated during the thirty-seventh session of the Human
Rights Council, "what we are seeing in eastern Ghouta
are likely war crimes and potentially crimes against
humanity". The perpetrators of these crimes must know
they are being identified, that dossiers are being built
up with a view to their prosecution, and that they will
be held accountable for what they have done.

We thank the Independent International
Commission ofInquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for
its important work to date. We recall the resolution of
the Human Rights Council of 5 March, which calls on
the Commission to investigate the situation in eastern
Ghouta. We call on all Council members to support
the referral of the humanitarian catastrophe in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. We also urge all
States to increase their support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for the Syrian
Arab Republic.

For now, however, our common efforts should be
directed at securing immediate relief for those millions
in Syria in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
For that, we need the cessation of hostilities to be
implemented immediately and in a sustained manner.
We need a continuous pause in the fighting of 30
days, as demanded by resolution 2401 (2018). If its
implementation continues to fail, that will require a
response from the Council that goes beyond where we
stand now.

We thank the Secretary-General for his perseverance
and endless efforts to uphold the norms and values of
the Charter of the United Nations, international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, as well
as to promote compliance with resolution 2401 (2018).
We call on all Council members to follow his example.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to again remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

