The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l997/269, which contains the
text of a letter dated 2 April 1997 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Togo to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
transmitting the text of the statement adopted at the
conclusion of the first special session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held in
Lome on 26 and 27 March 1997, which was devoted to the
situation in eastern Zaire.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its deep concern
about the alarming situation of refugees and displaced
persons in eastern Zaire.

"The Security Council underlines the obligation
of all concerned to respect the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council, while noting that some
cooperation has recently been extended to
humanitarian relief agencies by the Alliance of
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo/Zaire
(ADFL), strongly urges the parties, and in particular
the ADFL, to ensure unrestricted and safe access by
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations to guarantee the provision of
humanitarian assistance to, and the safety of, all
refugees, displaced persons and other affected
civilian inhabitants.

"The Security Council also urges the ADFL to
cooperate fully with the United Nations in the
implementation of the repatriation plan for eastern
Zaire of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. In this context, it calls on the Government
of Rwanda to facilitate the implementation of this
plan.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.50 p.m.
