Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina endorsed by the
parties yesterday at Dayton, Ohio, represents a historic
turning-point in a bitter conflict that has beset the Balkans
for the past four years. The British Government warmly
welcomes this Agreement. That may sound a rather
obvious statement. After all, as a member of the Contact
Group, as the major contributor for much of this year of
peace-keepers on the ground, and as one of the major
contributors to the programme of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for

 

the former Yugoslavia, the United Kingdom has played a
central role in the cumulative efforts over the past four
years that led to this Agreement.

But even if that is an obvious statement, it still needs
to be said loudly and clearly. There are already those
among the parties who claim that this Agreement is unfair,
that more could have been gained by continuing the fight.
They prefer to dissociate themselves from what was agreed
at Dayton, rather than grapple with the opportunities and
difficulties it presents. I cannot and do not share their View.
The British Government has always believed that a
negotiated settlement was the only way in which lasting
peace could be achieved. This Agreement preserves Bosnia
as a single State. It lays the basis for strengthening its
independence and security. It will allow - crucially - the
people of Bosnia, including those who have been forced to
flee their homes, to decide who should represent them. And
it provides the basis for the restoration of stability
throughout the entire Balkan region. It is for all these
reasons that the British Government warmly welcomes this
Agreement.

We also pay tribute to all those who helped to bring
about the Agreement. The United States played the
principal role at Dayton. We congratulate Secretary
Christopher, Assistant Secretary Holbrooke and all those
who worked so hard to achieve this Agreement. But it
would not have been possible without the international
community's collective determination to secure a negotiated
settlement, without the dedication of past negotiators -
most recently Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg - or
of the European mediator Carl Bildt and the other Contact
Group teams represented at Dayton. Nor could it have been
achieved without the courage and perseverance of United
Nations troops, the UNHCR and other agencies on the
ground, and the commitment of Governments to make
peace-keeping troops available in the first place.

In August last year, Belgrade took a significant step in
deciding to close its border with the Bosnian Serbs until
they were prepared to accept a negotiated settlement. This
Council rightly responded by granting a limited package of
sanctions relief, conditional on that border remaining
closed. The existence of this Peace Agreement is the
clearest possible Vindication of this Council's use of
economic sanctions to bring about change. It is therefore
right that this Council should now reward Belgrade's
contribution to the successful outcome of the Dayton
negotiations by granting very substantial sanctions relief.

But this Council - rightly, in our View - is giving
a conditional reward. The draft resolution before us holds
out the prospect of the permanent removal of sanctions
when the Agreement has been implemented and when
free and fair elections have been held. It also holds out
the prospect that sanctions relief can be taken away at any
time should there be failure to cooperate over
implementation. It is careful to avoid prejudicing the
complex issue of succession to the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which we hope the
countries of the region will now address urgently in order
to reach agreement on the disposal of assets. This draft
resolution provides that frozen assets that are the subject
of claims, including from any one of the successor States,
shall remain frozen until the claims have been resolved.
In this context, the British Government will, when
implementing the resolution, interpret claims as meaning
those raised in current legal proceedings, which we
believe is the sense of this draft resolution.

As well as suspending sanctions, it is also right that
this Council should allow a phased lifting of the arms
embargo in the context of implementation of the Peace
Agreement and given the shared interests of all the States
in the region to conclude regional arms control
arrangements. The British Government attaches particular
importance to the conclusion of such arms-control
arrangements and we expect those concerned strictly to
uphold their obligations set out in the Annex to the
Agreement on Regional Stabilization. This Council has
seen several lively debates on the question of the arms
embargo over the past few years. It remains a contentious
issue. But there can be no doubt that both economic
sanctions and the arms embargo played an important part
in containing the conflict and persuading the parties to
turn aside from the military option and to negotiate in
earnest.

This Agreement, welcome though it is, will be worth
little if it is not implemented urgently and in full by the
parties. This will require dedication and perseverance.
There will be many difficulties along the way. But the
parties must remain determined to see this task through,
because their only alternative is a slide back into the
suffering and misery of the past four years.

The next step is for the parties to sign the
Agreement at the conference to be held in Paris in the
near future. That will help open the way for an
implementation force to deploy and for the civilian
implementation structures to take shape, but in turn, the
parties need to be able to count on the active involvement

 

of the international community in helping them implement
this Agreement. We are ready to play our part. There is
likely to be a very substantial British contribution, including
by making troops available to take part in the
implementation force. We will also be working with our
European partners to support international efforts to
promote the voluntary return of refugees, the monitoring of
human rights, the holding of free and fair elections and the
promotion of long-term economic reconstruction.

So that this work can go forward smoothly, the British
Government will convene a peace-implementation
conference in London in the very near future, so that those
Governments, organizations and agencies most involved in
implementation can work out the practicalities of how best
this should be done. The United Nations will play an
important role in those arrangements and we look forward
to the Secretary-General's taking part in the London
conference.

There is one very important aspect of this Council's
policy towards the situation in Bosnia that is only briefly
referred to in the draft resolutions before us. That is the
work of the International Tribunal. It remains more
important than ever, now that peace is truly in prospect for
Bosnia, that all sides cooperate fully with the Tribunal, for,
if reconciliation is one of the vital ingredients in the process
of rebuilding a war-torn society, then that process must also
include a place for justice. No Government - Serbian,
Croatian or indeed any other - should suppose that it is at
liberty to obstruct the Tribunal's work. Less than two
weeks ago, for example, this Council demanded, inter alia,
that the Bosnian Serb authorities cooperate in the efforts to
establish the fate of thousands of civilians missing from
Srebrenica. Nothing that happened at Dayton yesterday
should be allowed to eclipse the need to establish the facts
in such cases and to ensure that justice in the end prevails.

