Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and to thank the Secretary-General for the important
statement he made.

My country is extremely concerned about the
situation in the Gaza Strip and the ongoing military
operations, as well as about the uninterrupted
launching of rockets deep into Israeli territory. In
deploring the heavy loss of life and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, we have to stress that the six-
month truce between Israel and Hamas ended with the
firing of Qassam rockets from the Gaza Strip, which
we condemn without reservation. We call for the
immediate cessation of those attacks against unarmed
Israelis.

We also urge the Israeli Government, in the
exercise of its right to self-defence, to guarantee the
utmost restraint and moderation in its military
operations. It is deplorable that, in a heavily populated
area, innocent civilians were involved and that attacks
caused the loss of civilian lives.

It is important that violence end on all sides. We
must urge all parties to agree to a ceasefire.
Consequences at the regional level could be extremely
dangerous. It is essential that unity among the
Palestinians be restored. Mediation between Palestinian
factions is crucial and should not be abandoned,
despite the current difficult situation.

There is an urgent need to relaunch the political
process that was started in Annapolis one year ago;
resolution 1850 (2008) sends a key message in that
regard. There is no going back. The Arab Peace
Initiative continues also to be a main point of reference
for the peace process.

The most urgent objective that the international
community must set out to achieve is an immediate
ceasefire. This should be flanked, just as urgently, by
immediate humanitarian aid to the Palestinian civilians
living in the Gaza Strip. We take positive note of the
efforts mentioned by the Secretary-General, by which
the Israeli authorities, in cooperation with the United
Nations, have today allowed 84 trucks with essential

deliveries to enter the Strip. But more needs to be
done. We commend the work and dedication of United
Nations humanitarian agencies and personnel,
especially the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

It is my Government's belief that the Security
Council should again address this situation, taking into
full account the position expressed by the European
Union foreign ministers yesterday in Paris. The
following elements should, in particular, be considered.

First is the call for an immediate and permanent
ceasefire based on an unconditional halt to rocket
attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.

Secondly, there must be an immediate resumption
of humanitarian aid through the reopening of all
crossing points and their lasting and normal operation,
as provided for by the 2005 Agreement on Movement
and Access. On this, consideration could also be given
to an international observation mechanism to guarantee
the cessation of hostilities and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid.

Thirdly, the Security Council should also urge the
parties to intensify their efforts to advance the peace
process, as demanded by resolution 1850 (2008).

And fourthly, Palestinian reconciliation and
reunification, under the legitimate Palestinian Authority,
will remain a key element.

