Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Stephen O'Brien and Jeff Feltman for their
presentations on this issue, which is so important to us
all. Mr. O'Brien's accounts of the situation in the Lake
Chad region in the areas affected by Boko Haram are
appalling. Vulnerable populations, including children,
young girls and women in particular, are the target
of heinous acts. In addition, we remain extremely
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in those countries. We need to address the
plight of the people by making every effort to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches them. The needs
are enormous, as working conditions for humanitarian
actors remain particularly difficult and Boko Haram is
a long way from being defeated, despite the progress
achieved. I take this opportunity to salute the courage
and commitment of humanitarian actors working under
these conditions.

The humanitarian consequences of the actions of
Boko Haram, recalled earlier by Stephen O'Brien, are
considerable. However, the figures are alarming, since
the threat affects nearly 20 million people. There are
three times more displaced people today than there were
two years ago. It is the fastest growing displacement
crisis in Africa. People affected by the crisis require
urgent assistance in the form of food, water, shelter,
health care, protection and education. Stephen O'Brien
told us earlier that 5 million people are in a situation
of food insecurity. In Borno state alone, nearly half
a million people are deemed to be at the emergency
stage - that is to say, very close to starvation.
According to UNICEF, 50,000 children are likely to die
of malnutrition if they do not receive treatment.

We have, of course, the duty to assist them, but
this also means that Boko Haram must be fought with
the utmost firmness. The countries of the Lake Chad
Basin have taken the initiative to unite their efforts in
the framework of a joint multinational force, and we
welcome this approach. We support this effort both
militarily and financially. France actively supports the
operations against Boko Haram carried out by countries
in the region. We bring intelligence to the benefit of the
countries involved, in addition to logistical support to
Chad and Niger by providing equipment and training to
the Cameroonian forces. We are all allies in the fight
against terrorists and such criminals, whatever form
terrorism takes and wherever it occurs.

The ongoing military operations against Boko
Haram have already proved their effectiveness.
Today, Boko Haram no longer controls territory and
has retreated into its safe havens. These important
achievements owe a great deal to the work of military
forces from Chad and Nigeria. Many soldiers of these
armies have already paid the price in blood in the
regional offensive, and France respectfully pays tribute
to them. The fight against Boko Haram is far from over.
The offensive campaign waged by the countries of the
region will continue, and it is our duty to support it.

It is equally essential that the fight against Boko
Haram be complemented forthwith by development
policies in the affected regions. Without them, this
criminal movement will continue to thrive on poverty
and the feeling of exclusion that feeds it. France too is
involved in that effort; the President of the Republic
launched a Lake Chad initiative, which has been
implemented by the French Development Agency at the
regional level.

In closing, I recall that international humanitarian
law applies to all parties. The United Nations and its
partners should have access to all persons in need,
including displaced persons. We call for immediate,
safe and unconditional access to populations in need.

