Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate and for
steering the strong, yet pragmatic resolution 2143
(2014) on children and armed conflict.

The testimony of Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, the
former child soldier, this morning has touched our
hearts. We appreciate the valuable briefings given by
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, and UNICEF Executive Director
Anthony Lake.

Children are our most valuable asset. They need
to be protected and nurtured through better education,
proper nourishment and moral guidance. The dictum of
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war cannot be realized
without making a continued investment in the future of
our children. All cultures foster love and affection for
children.

Yet we find millions of children trapped in wars
and conflicts around the world. As noted in the concept
paper (S/2014/144, annex), tens of thousands of children
continue to be recruited, killed or maimed, sexually
abused or deprived of their right to education and
health care when schools or hospitals are attacked. In
situations of armed conflict, children are often coerced
into taking part in active hostilities. Pushing children
into combat situations is inhuman. As a child soldier,
a child becomes both the subject and object of crimes.
The scourge can and must be stopped.

With the Council's determined efforts over the past
15 years, significant progress has been made to reduce
the number of child soldiers. Comprehensive norms and
standards have been developed. Thousands of children
have been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated
into societies but the task has not been accomplished.
We should all support the Special Representative's
"Children, not soldiers" campaign by creating a
greater awareness through media campaigns about
the recruitment of children as soldiers, by conducting
dialogue with the mothers and families of the affected
children, by enlisting the endorsement of all parties to
conflict to the initiative and by mobilizing resources
for capacity-building.

The establishment of legal frameworks, aid
verification mechanisms and universal world
registration systems prevent child recruitment and
reinforce accountability. Investigative and prosecutorial
capacity-building helps in combating impunity and
punishing perpetrators. Persistent perpetrators must be
identified and brought to justice under national judicial
systems and, where applicable, through the use of
international criminal justice mechanisms.

Education is an enabler and emancipator, and
by far the most effective answer to armed conflicts.
Attacks on schools endanger students and teachers,
destroy premises and deprive children of their right to
education. Such attacks, in most cases, are perpetrated
by terrorist and other armed groups that do not respect
national laws and international norms. In any case, the
military use of schools should be strictly prohibited in
all circumstances. The international community should
therefore strengthen the hands of national Governments
in dealing with these groups and protecting seats of
education and learning.

Peacekeeping missions can play a vital role in
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict; they are often the first line of defence. It is
therefore essential that peacekeeping missions receive
the necessary training and resources to effectively
perform their critical tasks. As the largest contributor
of peacekeeping troops, Pakistan welcomes the
recommendations in resolution 2143 (2014) on specific
operational predeployment and in-mission training of
peacekeepers. Pakistan treats this responsibility with
the utmost seriousness.

We should continue to encourage the closer
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in protecting the rights of children in armed conflicts.
The African Union's intercession in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad, Cote
d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Mali, for instance, has
been quite successful. These experiments are worth
replicating. Progress on the delisting process depends
on the political will of the countries concerned.

We support the mandated reporting and monitoring
procedure to protect the rights of children in armed
conflicts. We want to strengthen the political consensus
around such mandates. For that purpose, the legal
parameters of the mandate must be respected. Focus
should continue to remain on situations of armed
conflict and those threatening international peace and
security.

Finally, we call for the cessation of all armed drone
strikes as they infringe the rights of children to life,
education and development.

