Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I should like to
start by thanking the President and the Prosecutor of
the Special Court for Sierra Leone for their very
informative briefings this morning and for all the work
they are doing to help to bring justice to the people of
Sierra Leone. We would also like to welcome to the
Council today the representative of Sierra Leone.

Since we last considered the work of the Special
Court, Sierra Leone has made significant progress. Its
elections in September 2007 were another milestone
for the country. They demonstrated that, in spite of a
decade of conflict, Sierra Leone is beginning to
consolidate its peace and rebuild its democratic
institutions and tradition. Part of that consolidation has
been the re-establishment of the rule of law and the
repudiation of impunity. The Special Court has played
a central role in that process.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Special Court, as we are a friend to Sierra Leone. We
have demonstrated that support through practical and
concrete actions. We are one of the largest financial
contributors to the Special Court, having contributed
some $32 million to the Court's operations since 2002.
We are also an active member of the Special Court's
Management Committee here in New York.

The Court is now entering the final stages of its
work. It is significant that the Security Council is
considering the work of the Court in the same week
that the defence case begins in the trial of Charles
Taylor. He is the first African head of State to be tried
for war crimes. He is also the last of the indictees to be
brought before the Court. We are confident that
Mr. Taylor will receive a fair trial in accordance with
internationally recognized human rights norms. We
stand ready to imprison Mr. Taylor in the United
Kingdom if he is convicted.

It is because the Court is entering the final stages
of its work that, as President Winter has said, we must
urgently address the Court's legacy and residual issues.
Like the Court itself, the proposed residual mechanism
is slimmed down and cost-efficient. Supporters of the
Court will need to consider how that mechanism is
funded, how it may fit with the follow-on mechanisms
of other international tribunals and how it offers the
international community both the best service, in terms
of international jurisprudence, and value for money. It
is critical to the integrity of the justice process to date
that residual functions be sustained effectively.

It remains important that, even in these final
stages, the Court continues to work to fulfil its mandate
as expeditiously as possible and, where possible,
deliver further efficiencies and budgetary savings.
Equally, it is essential that the international community
ensure that the Special Court has the resources it needs
to complete its valuable work. We have heard today of
the impending crisis in the Court's finances. We would
strongly urge all Member States to make the further
financial contributions needed to fund the final chapter
of the Court's operations. We are grateful to those
States that are working with the Court on the issue of
enforcement of sentences and witness relocation.

Finally, we should like to pledge our support for
the continued work of the Court, which has played an
indispensible role in helping to bring sustainable peace
to Sierra Leone. We pay tribute to its President,
Prosecutor, judges and all its staff.

