Mr. Griffiths: Since I last spoke to the Council (see S/PV.8672), our region has been going through a crisis, the consequences of which have threatened the gains we have been observing in Yemen. Fortunately, the immediate crisis seems to be over and I venture to say that through the actions of many people, Yemen has been kept safe from such crisis for now. This achievement - and it is a real achievement - is based on a consensus that Yemen must not be affected by regional tensions. Most importantly, at this time of crisis we have seen no major acts of military provocation in Yemen. This is remarkable. Indeed, it has been one of the quietest weeks in Yemen since the war began, with only one air strike, very limited military movement on the ground and no drone or missile attacks on neighbouring States. I therefore hope that it is not premature to say that Yemen has emerged at this moment unscathed. This achievement has not come by chance. Yemeni leaders and leaders in the region have deliberately exercised restraint and withheld from acts of provocation. I would like to add my condolences upon the death of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos bin Said on 10 January. There is no doubt that Sultan Qaboos was an inspiring leader in the field of peace and reconciliation. I wishHis Majesty Sultan Haitham bin Tariq Al Said success in leading Oman in the coming years. That will be of great importance to all of us who are focused on the issue that we will be discussing today. The regional crisis has tested the resilience of the various efforts being undertaken by the parties. These endeavours must make progress if we are to realize the ambition that 2020 will bring peace to Yemen. I would like to draw the Council's attention to these efforts: the de-escalation of military hostilities and the implementation of the agreements made in Stockholm and Riyadh. I would also like to refer to the efforts on the ancillary measures being undertaken by the parties, which have value in themselves, while also building confidence between the parties in their other endeavours. Where do we stand on each of these tracks? First, with regard to the de-escalation of military operations, I said to the Council in November that the air war in Yemen had been reduced by 80 per cent. This was a remarkable achievement at that time, and I think that it is even more remarkable now that it has been sustained and even improved upon. Since the beginning of January, there have been nine days with no air strikes at all. It is certainly and tragically true that some fronts remain active and that there are still far too many civilian deaths. Nevertheless, the movement of forces and military on the ground has been reduced. I hope that it is true and will remain so that we are witnessing one of the quietest periods of the conflict. That is no small thing, and the fact that, as I mentioned, it has been sustained even during a period of crisis is notable. These efforts should be judged not by whether they achieve a perfect ceasefire, but by whether the parties' energies are directed thereto and away from war. Experience, however, tells us that military de-escalation cannot be sustained without political progress among the parties, and that has become the next challenge. Secondly, I would like to comment on progress in implementing the Riyadh agreement. I want to praise the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council, which made that agreement, supported by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for their diligence and their commitment to implementing those commitments. The relative improvement in security in Aden also bodes well for their efforts. The parties' recommitment to time-bound measures to support the implementation of the Riyadh agreement is a very positive sign. I know first-hand that there are daily detailed negotiations, as we sit here, and I hope that we will see key appointments in Aden in the coming days. I am fairly confident that the implementation of that agreement is moving in a positive direction. Overall, that is good news, not least because it is also a starting point for opening a new page to be dominated, highlighted and shaped by sincere consultations among the Yemeni parties to reach a political solution to end the Yemeni crisis. With regard to the Stockholm Agreement, in particular as it refers to Al-Hudaydah, none of us should be satisfied with the record of its implementation, but we can take comfort in the fact that the United Nations and the parties remain committed and as active as ever in implementing the commitments they made more than a year ago in Stockholm. The parties work together on a daily basis aboard the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) vessel, moored in the port of Al-Hudaydah, as well as at the joint observation posts, and continue with efforts to further the implementation of the Agreement. Although violence unfortunately continues in the southern districts of the governorate, the relative calm at the front lines in the city of Al-Hudaydah shows that the measures to enhance the de-escalation and ceasefire mechanism are working, and that is something we can and should build on. The Redeployment Coordination Committee that was established by the Agreement has engaged in discussions on a road map for opening humanitarian corridors that will improve access for humanitarian agencies - Mr. Rajasingham will focus on that later - and civilian movement in the governorate. I hope that they can reach an agreement on those corridors in the coming weeks to pave the way for further discussions on the implementation of the redeployment of forces. I should note that, despite the achievements in Al-Hudaydah, the persistent restrictions on the freedom of movement of UNMHA personnel remain a concern. I raised that in Sana'a before Christmas 2019. The restrictions of UNMHA's patrols to the city and the ports, together with their logistical and support activities, contradicts the spirit of the Stockholm Agreement, and | reiterate my call, together with those of others, for their immediate resumption.I mentioned before to the Council (see S/PV.8672) that we have seen considerable progress related to the entry of fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah and the collection of revenues, as agreed in the Stockholm Agreement. From the establishment of that mechanism in November 2019 until the end of the year, more fuel has been delivered to Al-Hudaydah than in any other equivalent period in 2019 and the taxes have been collected and deposited in an account in the Central Bank in Al-Hudaydah. We are working with the parties to reach an agreement on how those revenues can be used urgently to contribute to paying the salaries of civil servants, as set out in the Stockholm Agreement. Turning briefly to further confidence-building measures, the proposal for so-called mercy flights refers to a World Health Organization (WHO) project negotiated by WHO with the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah over many months. Those flights will transport patients who need medical attention unavailable in Yemen to agreed locations abroad. In recent weeks, WHO has benefited from an extraordinary array of diplomatic support to make those flights happen. Indeed, the coalition has provided its own support for the project in a statement of 26 November 2019 and a number of Member States have intervened at the highest levels to clear away any obstacles to that project. We thank them for their diligence. We are very close to seeing the first flight move 30 patients, who are waiting in Sana'a, for their treatment. I truly hope that, by the time we meet next month, we will have seen the first flight completed. Certainly, the release of six Saudi detainees by Ansar Allah on 1 January is further evidence of good will between the parties. I thank Ansar Allah for that important humanitarian gesture and the International Committee of the Red Cross for its support in moving the detainees from Yemen to Saudi Arabia. However, it falls short of the aspirations of the parties under the Stockholm Agreement and discussions on the release of many thousands of prisoners and detainees. We continue to hope that the parties can make that happen soon, and, for our part, I intend to convene the prisoner- exchange committee created under the Stockholm Agreement in the coming days with the intention of achieving substantive numbers of prisoner releases. All of these initiatives and the measures associated with them support the urgent search for a political solution and the end of the conflict in Yemen. That pursuit is not dependent on the success of any one of them but reinforced by the success of all of them. With each positive step, we are brought closer to formally launching political consultations between the Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah. I have spoken about that in the Council on a number of occasions, with the hope that we see that happen soon. Indeed, the significance and meaning of the initiatives to which I have alluded will become real only in the context of such a political solution to end the conflict. We have discussed in this Chamber and at consultations the need for impatience in that respect. Yemen has recently been brushed by potential tragedy from regional tensions and, so far, appears to have emerged unscathed. That is evidence of the leaders' desire to keep Yemen safe from such tensions, but it is a fragile safety and one that needs our diligent and continuing attention if we are to deliver on our promise to the people of Yemen so that, this year, they may see the peace they so evidently deserve.
