Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba
for their comprehensive and very informative briefings.

While carefully studying the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/724), we are also closely
following developments on the ground. Kazakhstan is
concerned about the humanitarian situation in south-
western Syria. There can be no alleviation of the
suffering without a political agreement in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and other platforms aimed at
bringing peace to Syria.

We are also alarmed at the significant increase in
the scale, frequency and severity of grave violations
affecting children in Syria. Last year was the deadliest
for children since the beginning of the conflict, as a
result of which 2 million Syrian children became
refugees and 2.5 million were internally displaced.

We therefore call on the parties to fulfil their
obligations under international humanitarian law to
reverse the growing number of child victims. Parties
need to protect the civilian population and avoid
attacking civilian infrastructure, especially schools and
health facilities and their personnel. It is equally critical
to implement the demining programme to save lives
and prevent lifelong injuries. There is also a need for
increased support for reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes for children formerly associated with
armed groups.

Children have been the most vulnerable and affected
victims of this seven-year conflict. Every effort must
therefore be made to provide schooling, health care and
social services so as not to have a lost generation, as
they are the country's richest resource.

Resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions
pertaining to cross-border operations and all other
methods of delivery are also essential for a needs-
based response. It is crucial to ensure safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access for all civilians in
need, especially children, if further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis is to be averted. That is particularly
vital across conflict lines under circumstances of
changed control.

Kazakhstan endorses the Secretary-General's call
to ensure that the necessary security guarantees are in
place for the continued rapid and unimpeded delivery
of assistance, which must be impartial and unbiased in
character. Civilians wishing to flee the fighting should
be allowed to do so without hindrance and in full
dignity and safety, while those wishing to stay need to
be protected. We need to ensure accountability and end
impunity for those who perpetrate violations.

The humanitarian crisis requires a holistic and
comprehensive approach that goes beyond the mere
delivery of aid. It is obvious that the military option
is not a solution. Kazakhstan therefore assures its full
support for the relaunching of the political negotiations
through the Astana Process and its guarantor countries.
That in turn would also lead to the mitigation of the
humanitarian crisis. A durable solution can be reached
only through an inclusive dialogue of all stakeholders,
including women and young people.

