Mr. Daccord: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council today.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been high on the international agenda for the past
decade. On one level, progress has been impressive.
Never before have there been so many policy
statements and resolutions, so much global information
and advocacy, and such a proliferation of actors
professing to carry out protection work. Sadly, these
fine words and good intentions are rarely matched by
the reality on the ground. While there may still be
diverging views on what protection actually is, there
can be little doubt about what happens when there is no
protection.

This is the reality facing the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in our daily work
in far too many armed conflicts and other situations of
violence around the world. The reality is that, in some
places, men, women and children are being killed or
raped, forced out of their homes, losing all their
possessions and living in a state of fear. Hospitals are
being bombed and health workers attacked.

Beyond the deliberate targeting of civilians, the
reality is also the countless numbers of other, often
forgotten victims who are equally in need of protection.
The reality is that in war people go missing. People
have the right to know what happened to their missing
relatives. Governments, military authorities and armed
groups have an obligation to provide information and
assist efforts to put families back together. In addition,
the hundreds of thousands of people in prisons or
detained in armed conflict must not be forgotten.

So why is the reality on the ground so often
dismal compared to the progress in policy and
doctrine? The fundamental reason is as obvious as it is
challenging. It is the lack of respect for international
humanitarian law by State and non-State actors. That,
coupled with the prevailing culture of impunity, is the
main cause of the human suffering we are witnessing.

Various factors compound that challenge. The
increase in non-State armed groups in some contexts is
one. When armed actors are motivated by crime or
banditry, it is harder to talk to them about their
obligation to protect civilians. The constant evolution
in the means and methods of warfare is another factor.
Waging battle in densely populated urban areas,
sometimes with highly explosive weapons, is just one
example.
10-64592
Yet despite, or rather because of, the flagrant
violations committed by parties to conflict around the
world, the ICRC firmly believes that the relevance and
importance of international humanitarian law is
reaffirmed, not weakened. That is echoed in the five
core challenges in the Secretary-General's reports in
2009 (8/2009/277) and 2010 (S/2010/579) on the
protection of civilians.

Working to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in situations of armed conflict
remains at the heart of our mandate and our missions.
For the ICRC, protection and assistance go hand in
hand. Our presence on the ground ensures our
proximity to the victims. We engage in confidential
dialogue with State and non-State actors to uphold the
rights of people affected, aiming as much as possible to
prevent violations. We remind parties of their
obligation to protect civilians, and we promote
compliance with international humanitarian law. That
includes supporting authorities' efforts to incorporate
international humanitarian law into national legislation
and into army training. It also includes working to
clarify or develop international humanitarian law
through extensive consultations with States and other
stakeholders.

At the same time, the ICRC works to address
victims' needs - food, water, shelter, other essential
items or medical care - tracing missing family
members and re-establishing links between them, and
ensuring that people in detention are treated well.
Protection can facilitate assistance, and vice-versa.

The ICRC approach is only one of many among
an increasing number of civilian and military actors,
with different mandates, objectives and ways of
working.

The United Nations has gone a long way in
including protection activities in the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions and in improving protection for
specific groups such as women and children, refugees
and internally displaced persons. The ICRC will
continue to work for the protection of civilians within
the limits of our mandate and expertise, based
explicitly on a neutral and independent approach.

True consensus on the meaning of protection may
be hard to achieve. It is essential to have clarity and
transparency on the objectives of different actors, be
they civilian or military, and to clearly distinguish
between them. To avoid unrealistic expectations, it is
important to distinguish between physical protection -
which humanitarian actors cannot provide - and
protection by promoting compliance with the law.

In any event, women, men and children in need
of protection must truly be at the centre of any action
that is undertaken. The challenge of turning words and
intentions into concrete, meaningful action is one we
all face. That challenge ultimately rests with States and
non-State actors, both bound by international
humanitarian law. I end by making a sincere plea to
them and to the Council to show the necessary political
will and good faith to turn legal provisions into
reality- to take seriously the obligation to protect
civilians. That would be the most meaningful progress
of all.

