The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Togolese delegation, and in particular His
Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe', President
of the Togolese Republic, for having organized this
important meeting.

Terrorism is a threat to peace, security and
development in Africa. From Al-Shabaab in the east,
to Boko Haram in the west, to Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb in the north, extremist groups and terrorist
entities have entrenched their presence in several parts
of the continent. In Somalia, significant progress has
been made towards restoring stability since Al-Shabaab
was expelled from several strategic locations.

However, if we are to consolidate these gains and
prevent the resurgence of that group, much remains to
be done with respect to the rule of law, development
and the political transformation of the country. The
new United Nations Mission in Somalia will contribute
to the Federal Government by providing strategic
guidance in the reform of the security sector and by
helping it to strengthen the police, judicial and prison
systems.

In recent months, the international community has
resolutely faced the rapid deterioration of the situation
In Mali and the Sahel in general. The Security Council
is not unaware that we have deployed a peacekeeping
operation mandated with assisting the Malian
transitional authorities in extending the authority of
the State and in building instruments of legitimate
governance. The Mission will operate in conjunction
with the action taken to fight the insurgency in a new
geopolitical situation that presents great challenges
to the security and authority of United Nations
peacekeeping, humanitarian and other personnel.

(spoke in English)

Military advances, important as they are, will not
by themselves bring an end to terrorism in Africa. This
struggle must go forward on many fronts, including
by addressing the conditions that are conducive to
the spread of terrorism. In the Sahel, for example, the
United Nations is developing an integrated strategy
that aims at enhancing governance and the rule of law,
strengthening the capacity of national and regional
security mechanisms, and integrating development
and humanitarian activities in order to build resilience.
Without such a holistic and sustained approach, we risk
simply pushing the threat from one area to another.

Terrorism thrives where borders are weakest.
Poorly guarded and stored ammunition stockpiles
provide unfettered access to weapons, in particular
the components for improvised explosive
devices - the terrorist's frequent weapon of choice.
The lack of development and the absence of the rule of
law allow terrorist groups to recruit across communities
and build their ranks. Opportunistic links between
terrorist and transnational organized criminal groups
ensure the constant flow of people, money, weapons
and illicit goods across borders, contributing to the
survival and proliferation of such groups.

In such a climate, the international community
and the United Nations must do more to strengthen
the capacities of affected Member States. Throughout
Africa, United Nations missions are helping
Governments to strengthen police and law enforcement,
and to implement the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) is active in West
Africa, including in Nigeria and Burkina Faso. The
CTITF is also involved in North Africa through the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, working
on the issue of border management. In Central Africa,
we are focusing on reducing the flow of small arms.
In East Africa, the United Nations is facilitating the
development of a regional strategy, and in southern
Africa, where the threat of terrorism is less imminent,
the United Nations is working with the African Union
on the crucial issue of prevention.

The United Nations Mine Action Service is
working with the African Union and countries across
the continent on the safe management of munitions
and the disposal of improvised explosive devices. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
continues to facilitate technical assistance and to help
Member States in developing the right legislative tools.

I welcome the initiative undertaken by several
regional and subregional organizations to formulate
counter-terrorism strategies. These will help us to
identify common threats and challenges, prioritize
responses, strengthen collaboration, improve
coordination and target international assistance to
themes and areas where it is most needed. Our joint
efforts must be carried out in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
and with due respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
The United Nations is strongly committed to doing
its part to combat terrorism in Africa. Success is crucial
for enabling Africans to meet their aspirations to live in
dignity and peace.

