Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of China,
for his distinguished efforts during his presidency in
the month of January. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad
Melkert, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, and to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in Iraq and New York
for their tireless work to assist the Government and
people of Iraq.

Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council, the friendly
countries of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria on assuming their duties as non-
permanent members of the Security Council. We wish
them success in their work. I wish to express Iraq's
deep appreciation to those members of the Security
Council whose terms ended in December - the
friendly countries of Burkina Faso, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Viet Nam -
for the great efforts exerted throughout their
membership in the Council to assist the Iraqi people.

My delegation took note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of UNAMI, issued in
document number S/2010/76, and would like to make
the following comments.

On the political and security levels, on
7 December 2009 the political blocs were able to adopt
an amended Election Law and came through this
difficult phase in which heated political controversy
threatened to disrupt the political process. The Iraqi
people have overcome many difficulties and challenges
and are determined today to benefit from this
experience, which gives them a strong motive for
broad participation in the upcoming elections to select
their representatives wisely.

The approval of the amended Election Law
proves that the Iraqis have the ability to overcome their
differences through dialogue in order to resolve
outstanding issues. They were able to lift the final
obstacles in order to pave the way to an epic campaign
to strengthen national unity, build the rule of law and
institutions, consolidate the democratic experience and
achieve their national aspirations.

The Iraqi Government is working now to develop
a security plan for the coming elections so that the
atmosphere is conducive to holding elections on
7 March 2010, as specified in the Constitution, despite
the determined efforts of the enemies of Iraq and the
Iraqi people - such as Al-Qaida and the remnants of
Saddam's dictatorial regime - to block the march of
democracy, freedom and the rule of law. Two days ago,
the leader of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq, which
is affiliated with the Al-Qaida terrorist organization,
threatened to disrupt the election process and to attack
Iraqis who would participate in the elections.
In the context of developments in the upcoming
national parliamentary elections, I would like to stress
that the Accountability and Justice Commission is a
constitutional and legal body, the establishment of
which is stipulated in the Iraqi Constitution. The Iraqi
Council of Representatives has also approved the
Accountability and Justice Law. Today, however, we
are witnessing political debates concerning the
decision of the Accountability and Justice Commission
to exclude a number of candidates. Following the
recent meeting of the Presidency Council, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of the House, attended by the
Chief Justice, it has been agreed that the Court of
Cassation will only review the files of 177 candidates
excluded from the elections and reach a decision before
the start of the election campaign.

In an Al Arabia interview on 12 February, Prime
Minister Nuri Al-Maliki emphasized that the majority
of those excluded from the upcoming elections are Shia
and that the majority of Sunnis are happy with the
steps that have been taken and are expected to
participate widely in the elections. The Prime Minister
also mentioned that many senior military commanders
from the time of Saddam are still in their positions
because they did not commit any crime against the
Iraqi people. Many were forced to join the Baath Party,
the Prime Minister acknowledged, and will have no
action taken against them so long as they respect the
new Iraqi Constitution and laws.

It should be noted that the exclusion of certain
candidates is related to the issuance of court rulings for
non-political crimes or false documentation, and is not
because of the Accountability and Justice Law.

The Independent High Electoral Commission
announced on 9 February, at the Rashid Hotel in
Baghdad, that the date of the start of the election
campaigns of the candidates nominated by political
entities and of the advertising campaigns would be
12 February 2010. The President of the Independent
High Electoral Commission announced the preparation
of 52,000 voting stations and the appointment of
350,000 staff members to manage the electoral process,
which will involve 19 million voters. The Commission
is also preparing for the voting that will take place in
16 countries in which Iraqis live abroad. Iraqis will be
able to vote from Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt, the
United Arab Emirates, Iran, Austria, Sweden, Germany,
the Netherlands, Denmark, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Turkey, Canada, and the United States of
America.

The security situation in Iraq continues to
improve, despite occasional attacks targeting Iraqi
civilians. The latest statistics from the Ministries of
Defence, Interior and Health indicate that 196 Iraqis
died in attacks during the month of January 2010 - a
56 per cent decrease from December 2009, which
witnessed 306 casualties.

I should also point out that the recent terrorist
attacks that killed dozens and wounded hundreds of
unarmed civilians, including men, women and children,
targeted visitors who walk on foot from various regions
of Iraq to visit the holy shrine of Imam Hussein bin Ali
bin Abu Taleb, the grandson of Prophet Mohammad
who was killed along with all of his family and
followers in 680 A.D., during the time of the Umayyad
Dynasty. Since that time, visitors have traditionally
visited his grave. Saddam's regime tried to prevent
visitors to the Imam Hussein shrine from travelling on
foot, but they insisted on continuing to practice their
faith, whatever the sacrifice, which led to clashes
between the repressive apparatus of Saddam's regime
and the visitors, who were killed and injured. The
bombings prove that the enemies of Iraq, such as
Al-Qaida and the violent remnants of Saddam's regime,
will not hesitate to kill innocent men, women and
children, and that there is no alternative for the Iraqi
Government but to fight and destroy them in order to
preserve the lives of its citizens.

Here, I would like to recall the letter of the Prime
Minister dated 30 August 2009, in which he requested
the establishment of an independent international
commission of inquiry to investigate the terrorist
attacks that rocked the country, since key elements
involved in these attacks fell outside the jurisdiction of
the Iraqi State. Hundreds of Iraqis have been killed and
thousands wounded in these attacks, and my
Government still looks forward to a positive response
from the Security Council to stop the bloodshed in
Iraq.

As part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
improve the security situation in the city of Baghdad,
the Ministry of Planning is now studying a project to
install 10,000 surveillance cameras in Baghdad, aimed
at securing greater monitoring and investigation
capacity. Also, with a view to strengthening the
capacity of the Iraqi Air Force, the month of February
witnessed the graduation of 17 helicopter pilots who
completed their training, the first group of its kind
since 2003.

The improved security situation and the
systematic plans for the Iraqi Government to bring
home Iraqis displaced abroad have led to an increase in
the number of Iraqis who have returned to the country.
For example, the latest report issued by the
International Organization for Migration indicates the
return of 350,000 displaced Iraqis to their home areas.
The problems faced by the majority of these people are
the lack of employment opportunities and the lack of
resources. In this context, the Ministry of Displacement
and Migration, in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration, has implemented the
Programme of Human Security and Stability in Iraq to
help some 8,500 families who have returned to their
homes across Iraq, through financial support and the
creation of jobs to eliminate unemployment in these
families.

The recent poll conducted by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said
that about 200,000 displaced people want to return to
Iraq, and explained that many Iraqis were eager to
return home given the remarkable stability of the
security situation. On 3 December 2009, the Iraqi
Government signed a memorandum of understanding
with the International Organization for Migration to
facilitate that organization's work in providing services
to displaced persons and returnees and to strengthen
the ties of cooperation with the Iraqi Government,
especially after the significant improvement in the
security situation.

The Iraqi people's enjoyment of their
fundamental rights, especially the freedom of
expression, as stipulated by the constitution, is a
cornerstone of the ongoing political process in the
country. Iraq's participation in a recent poll by World
Opinion in Washington which was conducted in 24
countries demonstrates that Iraq has become one of the
countries that make and adopt opinion polls in
complete freedom and transparency, and represents
international recognition that Iraqis enjoy freedom of
expression.

For the first time, Iraq was elected to membership
of the Executive Board of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, for the period from
2010 to 20l2, during the Meeting of States Parties to
the Convention held at The Hague from 30 November
to 4 December 2009.

On the social and economic level, under the
auspices of Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki, on
11 December 2009 the Iraqi Government held a second
round of competition for offers for oil-field service
contracts. Here the Prime Minister stressed that the
Government will provide all facilities for those
companies that win oil licenses. This resulted in 15
companies from around the world winning service
contracts for seven Iraqi oil fields. The holding of this
round of oil and gas licensing is a second important
turning point in the process of construction and
reconstruction through open and transparent
investment of oil wealth and is in the interest of the
Iraqi people after decades of oil wealth having been
disabled because of the policies ofthe former regime.

It is expected that oil-field development projects
will increase Iraq's oil production and that average
production will reach 6 million barrels per day during
the next six years, and nearly 12 million barrels per
day by 2020 - a strategic objective that the Iraqi Oil
Ministry is now working towards. Exported oil
production for the month of January 2010 increased to
1.98 million barrels per day, and the Iraqi Government
is planning to increase the amount of oil exports in
2010 to 2.325 million barrels per day.

The Oil Minister, Mr. Hussain al-Shahristani, has
announced the establishment of a fourth national oil
company to oversee the development of oil fields in the
middle of Iraq. This company will also be responsible
for developing the oil fields located in Baghdad and
surrounding provinces. Oil commissions have also
been established in Dhi Qar in the south and Nineveh
in the north in order to oversee the implementation of
oil contracts in those provinces.

The Iraqi Government is working to ensure that
its citizens benefit directly from the projected increase
in oil production. Studies indicate that the average
person's share of Iraqi oil revenues will rise from
$1,534 in 2010 to $3,361 in 2015, and to $9,488 in
2020. Federal budget expenditures in Iraq are also
predicted to increase, to $132 billion in 2015 and to
$256 billion in 2020, which will be reflected in
accumulated investment allocations totalling $138
billion between 2010 and 2015, and $496 billion
between 2010 and 2020. These accumulations will
attract and encourage both domestic and foreign
investment in Iraq.

As part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
ensure the highest degree of transparency in the
investment and management of oil wealth, on
10 January 2010 Iraq joined the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI) following the
recommendation of the EITI Initiative Department that
Iraq be among the 34 countries that have joined so far.

Last month, the Iraqi Council of Representatives
approved a federal budget for 2010 totalling
$72.4 billion, which includes $51 billion to fund
operating expenses and $19.5 billion to be invested in
financing reconstruction projects in the country.

On 29 January 2010, Baghdad witnessed the
laying of the foundation stone of the largest tourist
hotel in Iraq, with twin 26-storey towers and 550
rooms at an estimated cost of $150 million. The mayor
of Baghdad announced the beginning of more than 25
such investment projects in the third instalment of
investment projects for the development of the city.
These will include the establishment of major
residential, industrial and shopping areas, hotels,
modern restaurant chains and infrastructure projects.
The National Investment Commission is also working
to make 2010 a year of achievement, and has
developed an investment plan involving 750 projects in
Iraq.

The Iraqi Council of Ministers approved the
national poverty reduction strategy recommended by
the Ministry of Planning and Development
Cooperation in collaboration with the World Bank.
This strategy aims to increase the income of the poor
and improve the quality of health and educational
services provided to them, with the provision of
adequate housing and effective social protection, in
order to reduce poverty by 30 per cent from 2007
levels.

As part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
reactivate the central supermarkets, the Central
Supermarkets Company made profits estimated at
$15.8 million in 2009, an increase of 169 per cent on
2008 profits.

In the context of regional and international
openness, the recent period witnessed the visit of
United States Vice-President Joseph Biden to Baghdad
on 22 January 2010 to discuss strengthening bilateral
8

relations, and the visit of Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic
Mr. Jan Kohout on 25 November 2009. The visit of the
European Union Commissioner for Energy, Mr. Andris
Piebalgs, on 18 January 2010 witnessed the signing of
a cooperation agreement in the field of energy between
Iraq and the European Union.

On 7 January 2010, Iranian Foreign Minister
Manouchehr Mottaki visited Iraq and held talks about a
number of files of bilateral interest to both countries
and the formation of many of the relevant functional
commissions to resolve outstanding issues. Of special
importance was the issue of borders and the entrance of
the Iranian forces into the Alfaka oil field inside Iraq,
where the Iraqi Government was able to resolve the
problem through negotiations that led to the
withdrawal of Iranian forces from Iraqi territory.

Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki visited
Cairo on 21 December 2009 and met with His
Excellency President Mohamed Hosni Mubarak to
discuss the prospect of developing bilateral relations,
and with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, Amr Moussa, to discuss ways of enhancing the
Arab presence in Baghdad. Vice-President Adil Abdul-
Mahdi visited Washington, DC, on 14 January to
discuss the withdrawal of United States forces from
Iraq. On 1 February, Vice-President Tariq a1-Hashemi
also visited Washington, DC, where he met with a
number of senior United States officials to discuss
political developments in Iraq. The Kurdistan Regional
President, Mr. Masoud Barzani, also visited
Washington, DC, on 25 January in response to a
formal invitation from President Barack Obama.

The Foreign Minister, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
visited Rome and met with his Italian counterpart,
Mr. Franco Frattini, during the meeting of the Iraqi-
Italian Joint Commission on 14 December, and on
14 January participated in the Manama Dialogue
conference, which discussed issues of regional security
in the Gulf. Mr. Zebari also visited Oslo and met with
Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Store on
17 January to discuss the opening of a Norwegian
embassy in Baghdad, its role in the development of
bilateral relations, and the role of Norwegian
companies in the development of the Iraqi oil industry.

On 1 February, in the framework of Iraq's efforts
to resolve outstanding issues with Kuwait, the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs published an announcement
10-24053
requesting that Iraqi citizens possessing documents or
any other Kuwaiti property seized by the former
regime during the occupation of Kuwait in 1990
deliver them to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in
order that they be returned to Kuwait.

In his report to the Security Council on the
review of resolutions pertaining specifically to Iraq,
the Secretary-General states:

"It is important to recognize that the Iraq of today
is very different from Iraq prior to 2003. It is my
hope that the Security Council will consider this
report with a view to taking appropriate decisions
that would help Iraq to fulfil its outstanding
obligations in a timely manner." (S/2009/385, 
para. 6fl

In regard to this, I refer to the letter from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs to the President of the
Security Council, dated 19 January 2010, regarding the
obligations of Iraq in the field of disarmament, which
requested that the Security Council urgently look into
the removal of all restrictions imposed pursuant to its
resolutions on Iraq pertaining to disarmament and
weapons of mass destruction, including resolutions 687
(1991) and 707 (1991).

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude to the Security Council for the
role played by UNAMI in Iraq and for Mr. Melkert's
support, offered at the Government's request and based
on mutually agreed mechanisms.

