Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like tojoin
everyone in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council and to thank him for his
report (see S/2012/813). As always, it is a detailed report,
documenting objectively but also starkly the range of
serious ongoing challenges in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United Kingdom would like to express its gratitude
to the High Representative for his ongoing commitment
to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
against such a challenging political backdrop.

The United Kingdom shares the concern of the
High Representative over the current political situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This has been a year of
contrasts. The optimism in the early part of the year,
with the formation of the Council of Ministers and the
passing of key legislation, was replaced by a return
to political inertia. Serious disagreements within the
governing coalition after only four months stalled
progress on the country's European Union (EU) and
NATO paths and frustrated progress towards delivering
the five objectives and two conditions necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

This lack of progress is a symptom of a wider
political reality, in which Bosnia and Herzegovina's
elected leaders are unwilling to put the needs of the
country and its citizens above their own narrow
interests. Political inertia is now in danger of becoming
established practice, and we urge the country's leaders
to focus on the reforms necessary to deliver a better
future for its citizens. It is the foremost responsibility
of democratically elected politicians to govern in a
way that promotes the interests and welfare of the
population they represent. This is a responsibility that
is being neglected by the political leadership of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Making progress on the EU path and entrenching
fiscal sustainability will require a commitment to
reform and functionality that has so far been absent.
Last month's local elections were a stark reminder of
the continued dominance of nationalist politics, but
with local elections now over, there is a period of
opportunity that the political leaders must seize.

In this regard, we share the High Representative's
concern, and that expressed by many representatives
aroundthistable,abouttheintensificationofnationalistic
rhetoric and challenges to the State. During the recent
election campaign and even before it, Republika Srpska
authorities increased the intensity and frequency of
their attacks on State-level institutions and sought to
undermine the functionality of the Government.

For anyone who doubts the seriousness of these
challenges to the Dayton framework, I recommend
that they read carefully some of the footnotes to the
High Representative's report, which catalogue a range
of public statements that I trust that all around this
table would find completely unacceptable, as they
seek to undermine the principles of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. Such an approach will only obstruct the
reform process and offer no benefit to any section of
the population.

Let me emphasize once more the position of the
British Government, quoted by the High Representative
in his statement earlier in this meeting. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will join the European Union only as a
single, sovereign State.

The country has a clear route towards EU and NATO

membership, which will provide a proven framework of
peace, security and regional cooperation. The United
Kingdom is fully supportive of this goal and will do
everything it can to facilitate progress, but Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders need to help their own citizens
towards this positive future. This is a future that the
population of Bosnia and Herzegovina deserves no
less than the populations of the other countries in
the region, including those that have been making
good progress in recent years towards European and
Euro-Atlantic integration. The political leadership in
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to transform its current
approach and to focus with energy and commitment on
the reforms that will carry the country down the path
towards eventual EU and NATO membership. That,
rather than the protracted power struggles among the
leaderships of the various Bosnian political parties,
represents the way forward for the country.

We strongly support the roles of the EU Special
Representative and of the EU Head of Delegation,
Mr. Peter Sorensen, who is doing an excellent job in
placing EU accession at the forefront of the country's
political agenda. We also commend the collaborative
working relationship forged between him and High
Representative Inzko. Moving forward, the EU Special
Representative's role will be Vital in re-energizing the
EU's approach in-country.

While we understand some of the difficulties on
reaching agreement on essential reforms, it is clear that
Sarajevo has fallen further behind its neighbours on the
path towards EU accession. We urge political leaders
to focus on the swift implementation of the road map
they agreed with the European Commission in June.
Only then can it move forward with its Stabilization
and Association Agreement and consider submitting a
credible membership application.

The political situation is also having a negative
impact on economic confidence. We share the
High Representative's concerns about growth, high
unemployment and the accompanying social problems.
They have been compounded by endemic corruption
at all levels of Government. Local officials must take
determined action to eliminate corruption in all its
manifestations.

It is because ofthose underlying political challenges
and risks to stability that the United Kingdom supports
the High Representative's assessments that the
European Union Force-Operation Althea continues
to play a central role in efforts to maintain a safe and
secure environment, and that it remains a Vital factor
in stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. International
safeguards remain essential, alongside a reinforced EU
presence. We therefore welcome the agreement reached
at the October EU Foreign Affairs Council to continue
to fulfil EUFOR's executive mandate. We look forward

to the Security Council agreeing on a renewed mandate
for EUFOR shortly.

