Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by
expressing our outrage at last night's attack on United
Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We offer our deepest condolences to the
familiies of the victims and to the Government and the
people of Tanzania. That deliberate attack constitutes
a war crime and should be condemned in the strongest
terms. Perpetrators must be brought to justice. Indeed,
it is a sad day for the United Nations family and for
United Nations peacekeeping.

Sweden voted in favour of resolution 2391 (2017)
because the endeavours for peace, development and
security in the region by the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel deserve our full support. In order
to achieve sustainable peace and stability in the Sahel,
our primary focus must remain on addressing the root
causes of instability. Any security initiative in and for
the region must therefore be part of a holistic approach
that in particular encompasses governance and
development aspects. As such, the Joint Force needs
to be framed within, and accountable to, a broader
political framework. Coordination with the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and other
regional initiatives and partners, such as the African
Union, will be important.

Today's resolution further states that United
Nations support to the Joint Force through the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) must not affect the
Mission's capacity to implement its mandate and its
strategic priorities. In that regard, we look forward to
the follow-up reporting, as stipulated by the resolution.

The interlinkage between security, human
rights and development has been demonstrated on
many occasions. Today's resolution calls for the
establishment of a robust human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework and calls on
the United Nations, as well as partners, to support its
implementation. That is paramount if the Joint Force is
to be successful in its fight against terrorism, as is strict
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy.
Sweden is ready to contribute to the establishment of
the compliance framework, in addition to our existing
support to the Force through the European Union (EU).

We believe that the Security Council's repeated
calls for regional ownership, our expectations for the
Force and our demand for accountability should be
matched with adequate resources and support. In this
regard, it is also our hope that the EU-coordinated
mechanism envisaged for channelling voluntary
contributions to the Joint Force and ensuring full
financial reimbursements to MINUSMA, in close
coordination with other donors, will guarantee reliable
and consistent funding streams. We look forward to
continued discussions on this matter.

Let me conclude by reiterating that the full inclusive
and effective implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including by ensuring
the participation of women, must remain a priority. The
peace agreement is our best chance at preventing further
spread of instability and building sustained peace.

