Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): We are grateful for
the important contributions made today to our debate
by Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy,
Ambassador Tete Antonio and President Romano
Prodi. I would also like to acknowledge the presence
here today of Under-Secretary-General Malcorra.
I would like to join others in thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/470) on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations. Austria fully
supports the statement to be delivered later in our
meeting by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union.

Since earlier this year, the Security Council has
been examining key questions of United Nations
peacekeeping. The Council does so in response to the
increased demand for more complex peacekeeping
activities and the subsequent new approach that is
required towards the successful implementation of
these activities. The Secretary-General's report,
following up on the work of the African Union-United
Nations panel (see S/2008/813), provides us with one
more important contribution to our discussion of this
very pertinent issue. It rightly focuses on areas of
particular relevance to the close cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union.

The strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations with regard to
peacekeeping is of great importance to international
peace and security. In this context, the close
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the African Union, including the regional
economic communities, have been of vital importance
to conflict resolution, prevention, early warning and
mediation on the African continent. Austria strongly
welcomes the increasingly important role of the
African Union in this regard.

Strengthening the African Union's institutional
capacities for peacekeeping operations is essential if
the African Union is to take on a more significant role
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa. The
Secretary-General has made several proposals on how
to address this issue, including the development of a
comprehensive plan and road map for capacity-
building to be drawn up by the African Union with the
support of the United Nations and other relevant
partners. Austria welcomes this recommendation and
believes that its implementation needs to be considered
in the light of ongoing efforts in capacity-building,
supported by the European Union and other
international actors with a view to ensuring African
ownership and close coordination among all relevant
activities and actors.
In this context, we would also like to commend
the current African Union Commission for its
leadership in strengthening African capabilities, and
would like to invite all African Union member States to
lend their full support to these efforts. We hope that
important and courageous decisions will be taken in
the near future.

We are of the opinion that the partnership among
the African Union, the United Nations and the
European Union has been extremely beneficial to crisis
management on the African continent. The Africa
Peace Facility, as well as the close coordination and
cooperation among the three organizations in specific
peacekeeping situations - such as we experienced in
the case of the transition from the European Union
military operation in the Republic of Chad and in the
Central African Republic to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad -
demonstrate that this triangular partnership is
beneficial to all.

In his report, the Secretary-General also outlines
possible ways to support African Union-led
peacekeeping missions under a United Nations
mandate. As I have said on an earlier occasion at which
we discussed this matter, Austria warmly welcomes a
stronger role for the African Union in conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa. We therefore
believe that all options - and I insist on all -
outlined by the Secretary-General in his report, aimed
at supporting African Union-led peacekeeping missions
under United Nations mandates should be seriously and
substantively considered further. I listened very closely
to what my colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, just said on this subject.

The question of establishing adequate
accountability mechanisms for the different support
activities to the African Union is also critical. We
concur with the assessment of the Secretary-General
that donors and all other stakeholders should
harmonize their respective reporting and accountability
standards to alleviate the burden imposed on the
African Union by numerous existing requirements.

Austria believes that the use of lessons learned is
of great relevance to future cooperation between the
organizations and would allow them to identify
measures for improving their cooperation even further.
We welcome the idea of drawing up such lessons, and
we believe that this exercise should be undertaken with
all partners involved in order to benefit from their
respective comparative advantages and insights.

Austria is convinced that, in our way ahead,
important cross-cutting issues such as respect for
international law and human rights - especially the
rights of women and children in armed conflict - and
the protection of civilians should be integral parts of
our approach. We further believe that it is essential to
take into account the views and concerns of troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Finally, let me express my delegation's full
support for the draft presidential statement and thank
Uganda for drafting it and for leading the negotiations
to a successful conclusion.

