Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
Russia regards the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement as a real
basis for a political settlement of the problem in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the restoration of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country and
for reaching consensus on ways to achieve national
reconciliation and unity and democratic development in the
country.

We attach great importance to close coordination
between the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community in the provision of assistance for the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement and in the
mobilization of international support. Russia welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Berhanu Dinka as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
region and of Mr. Kamel Morjane as Special Representative
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the same time, it is clear that the primary
responsibility for observing the ceasefire and for
implementing other specific commitments lies with the
parties that signed the Lusaka Agreement, which are
committed to taking the necessary steps to ensure the
effective work of the Political Committee and of the Joint
Military Commission.

We are sorry to see that, despite some positive
movement, there has still been no implementation of the
provision in resolution 1234 (1999) regarding the
withdrawal of uninvited forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, there are still massive Violations of
the ceasefire, the humanitarian situation remains dramatic
and the national dialogue has not begun. We hope that the
facilitator appointed by the OAU, President Masire, will be
able to get things moving.

Russia supports a further expansion of international
efforts to find a settlement to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including deployment of a United
Nations mission in the country. The timing of such a
deployment should respond to the rate of progress in the
peace process and, when the necessary conditions exist,
should comprise a large-scale peacekeeping operation. The
necessary conditions are that the belligerents actually
respect the ceasefire, that the will to constructively resolve
disputes is clearly demonstrated and that the security of
...-J "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 

international personnel is assured. All of this is essential
to ensuring a successful operation. The failure of such an
operation would have extremely negative consequences
for the further development of the situation in the region,
and also for the authority of the United Nations and the
Security Council.

Because of the complex nature of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, any settlement will
necessarily also be complex. One of the key elements in
the process is finding the right political solution, one that
ensures security and the inviolability of the borders of all
the States in the region and that strengthens cooperation
between these States on the basis of the principles of non-
intervention in the internal affairs of other States and the
non-use of force, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

The specific mechanisms and guarantees for ensuring
security and shared borders after the withdrawal of
foreign forces from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can be worked out within the
framework of the Lusaka Agreements on a bilateral and
regional basis with broad international support. In this
context, we support the idea of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes
region.

Russia will continue to provide assistance to the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the context of the Lusaka Agreement and through
Security Council decisions. We are also willing to study
the possibility of Russian participation in international
efforts to respond to the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region as a
whole.

