I thank the briefers for their insightful remarks. Permit me also to extend our gratitude to the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), Ambassador Dyani, for his leadership of the Committee. I am also pleased to see the Afghan youth representative to the United Nations at this virtual table. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its strong support for an Afghan- led and Afghan-owned peace process aimed at finding a lasting political resolution to nearly 20 years of conflict. The start of the negotiations on 12 September represents an opportunity to find sustainable peace in Afghanistan. In that regard, we appeal to the Government and the Taliban negotiating teams to remain committed to a just and inclusive political settlement that caters to the needs and interests of all Afghans, including women, youth and victims and survivors of the war. All stakeholders must be involved in the trust and reconciliation process to create an environment conducive to ending decades of conflict. We look forward to the resumption of the intra-Afghan talks in January following the 20-day recess. My delegation remains deeply concerned about the continuing high level of violence, particularly in the south. Our primary goal should continue to be the prevention of violence and the condemnation of terrorist attacks. The recent attack that claimed the lives of 13 police officers offers a stark reminder of the human costs of war. For the civilian population, which continues to bear the brunt of the conflict, an end to the hostilities will provide much-needed hope. Consequently, we reiterate the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and the immediate reduction of violence. It is critical that the Afghan Government and the Taliban enhance their cooperation and negotiation efforts, with a view to promoting sustainable and durable peace in Afghanistan. The economic, environmental and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan necessitates urgent action and sustained attention from the international community. It is vital that climate-fragility risks be considered in the creation and implementation of policies, including those aimed at creating peace and stability in Afghanistan. The ongoing violence, natural disasters, heightened levels of food insecurity, and the coronavirus disease pandemic threaten the lives of millions of people. We welcome the outcomes of the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, and we encourage all international donors to honour their commitments to supporting Afghanistan's peace, prosperity and_ self-reliance. Improved development cooperation, enhanced trade and investment and expanded economic opportunities for all Afghans are critical for lasting peace. In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms our commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, and we commend the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for its continued support to the Government and people of Afghanistan.
