Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Sweden welcomes
the renewal of the sanctions regime and the extended
mandate for the Group of Experts for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and wishes to thank the
delegation of France for its work on resolution 2360
(2017). It is imperative that the Group of Experts can
continue its important work, including by completing
its final report, and that the Council subsequently
follow up on its recommendations.

It is a grave concern that the humanitarian and
security situation continues to deteriorate in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with harsh
implications for its population. Horrific violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including sexual violence and other rampant abuses,
as well as increased recruitment and the use of child
soldiers, reinforces the vicious cycle of violence. It is
important that the international community continues
to monitor and address the situation. The sanctions
regime plays an important part in that endeavour.

As members of the Group of Experts, Zaida
Catalan and Michael Sharp were vital to this effort. We
again strongly condemn their murder. It is intolerable
that those tasked by the Council with investigating
grave abuses and violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law, for the sake of peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are brutally
killed. The safety of United Nations personnel must
be ensured. In the light of the killings, Sweden put
forward and actively supported the inclusion of attacks
against members of the Group of Experts as an explicit
designation criterion.

In the case of the murders of Catalan and Sharp,
our continued priority is to determine the facts and
ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must swiftly and
fully investigate the killing of the two members of the
Group of Experts and bring all perpetrators to justice.
FulI cooperation by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with United Nations inquiries, as well as our
own and the United States criminal investigations is
essential, as highlighted by today's resolution.

No stone should be left unturned in our efforts
to deliver justice for those who lost their lives in the
service of the United Nations. Sweden, in cooperation
with the Secretary-General and partners concerned,
will continue to look into concrete proposals on how
the United Nations system, including the Council, can
further support the ongoing national investigations, in
order to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators to
justice. One such option would be a special investigation
mandated by the Secretary-General.

We must also draw lessons from possible failures
in the system so that what happened to the experts
cannot happen again. Sweden supported the prompt
establishment by the United Nations of a so-called
Board of Inquiry. We look forward to the report to be
presented by the Board of Inquiry next month. The
Council should follow up on its recommendations,
including when the resolution is discussed again in
the fall.

