Mr. Baja (Philippines): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for ably
steering the presidency of the Council in an excellent
fashion. We also commend the Brazilian presidency for
convening this wrap-up meeting on the African
dimension of the Council's work for March. The focus
on Africa reflects the importance the Council attaches
to its work on the continent. It is only fitting that we
discuss African issues, since at least two thirds of the
Council's work concerns Africa. This month alone, 19
of the 30 meetings scheduled in the monthly
programme were related to Africa.

We have chosen three points to highlight the
work of the Council in Africa.

First, a significant part of the Council's
involvement in Africa concerns peacekeeping
operations. We take this opportunity to acknowledge
the efforts of the Secretariat in promoting inter-mission
cooperation, particularly in the context of the work of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in West
Africa and Central Africa. The United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
continue to actively collaborate with one another, just
as do the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Operation in Burundi. Such inter-mission
cooperation is necessary to rationalize and maximize
the utilization of the assets on the ground.

Our second point concerns Security Council
action in Africa. Most of the issues in a country are
interlinked, and the approach to problems should be as
comprehensive as possible. For example, since
sanctions should be treated in the context of the
broader peace processes, political issues and sanctions
issues should not be considered separately. As a
corollary to that, Council outputs, such as resolutions,
should be as holistic as possible in scope.

In that connection, to share the views just
expressed by the representative of Benin, the history of
sanctions resolutions shows that they do not lead to
immediate and full compliance. There is always a gap
between the establishment of sanctions and their
enforcement. The effectiveness of the Council's action
in that regard boils down to the question of respect for
its authority, and that respect is diluted and the
message becomes blurred when fault lines between
members accompany a particular Council action.

Finally, I have some general comments on the
situation in Africa to which the Security Council
should pay particular attention. There are two kinds of
death in Africa: on the one hand, there is death due to
machete wounds caused by militias and violations of
arms embargoes by Governments, and, on the other,
there is death due to malaria, meningitis, measles and
HIV/AIDS. The figures are staggering: 3.8 million
dead in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2
million in the Sudan, 200,000 in Darfur, 100,000 in
northern Uganda, and so on. Thus, the nexus between
security and development is more pronounced in Africa
than in any other region.

In considering African issues, the Security
Council should bear in mind that the shape of the
Africa it is trying to manage has, in large part been
defined by colonialism. Boundaries were set without
sufficient regard to the ethnic, cultural, tribal and other
dynamics that exist on the ground. We believe that
Council positions and its approach should therefore be
part of a broad strategy of international diplomatic
engagement and pressure, taking into consideration the
historical and the current realities on the ground.

