Ms. Jarhum: I thank the Council for providing me
with the opportunity to brief the Council on behalf of
the Peace Track Initiative and the Women's Solidarity
Network - a coalition of 250 Yemeni women and
women-led organizations working on the protection of
women and peacebuilding in Yemen.

Yemen has been spiralling into a devastating war
for over four years. In our country, there is a bleeding
wound in every home and a story of continuing loss and
despair. Dying children scream "Do not bury me!" as
the conflict rages, but their cries go unnoticed. The use
of explosive weapons by the forces affiliated with the
internationally recognized Government and its allies in
the Arab coalition, as well as the Houthis, has resulted
in many civilian casualties. The warring parties
continue to disregard international humanitarian law
with virtual impunity in Al-Hudaydah, Taiz and across
the country. Meanwhile, actors directly or indirectly
involved in the conflict are disregarding the main
principles of the Arms Trade Treaty. The extensive use
of landmines by the Houthis has resulted in hundreds
of deaths and injuries and is a direct impediment to
accessing aid. Future generations will pay the price.

As we prepare for the upcoming International Day
for the Elimination of Violence against Women, I would
like to remind the Council that Yemeni women were
already suffering from legal, institutional and social
violence. As a result, they now bear the burden of the
multidimensional insecurities of this war. Documented
cases of gender-based violence, including rape, rose by
70 per cent in the first five months of the war. Child
marriages increased by 66 per cent.

Women in the besieged city of Taiz spend long
hours walking through rough terrain or traversing areas
controlled by armed groups, where they are repeatedly
harassed. They do that to provide their families with
basic living necessities and to protect their men
from forced recruitment, abduction, detention and
torture. Young women, including Sana'a University
students, have been subjected to violent repression
by Houthi armed groups, including by women thugs
known as Al-Zaynabiyat. Some women have been
beaten, electrocuted, arrested and released only on the
condition that they refrain from engaging in activism.
Others have had male family members detained on
their behalf.

We have supported many women human rights
defenders in providing their safe exit to neighbouring
countries, assisting in filing for asylum and seeking
resettlement in third countries. Unfortunately, none of
those cases have resulted in resettlement. Although the
Yemen refugee crisis does not in numbers amount to
the Syrian one, it is still a problem affecting hundreds
of thousands of Yemenis. Policies such as the European
Union Dublin Regulation, the United States executive
order to ban citizens from seven nations, including
Yemen, from entering the United States, and the recent
Saudi policies to deport Yemenis have all contributed
to separating families.

On the situation in the south of the country, we
echo the voices of the southern Yemeni women on the
importance of reaching a just solution to the southern
cause and realizing their right to self-determination.
Today, after three decades of strife, southern grievances
have still not been addressed. We have also seen the
total exclusion of southerners and their cause from the
current peace framework and negotiations, usually
justified by the limitations of resolution 2216 (2015),
which has been interpreted to limit negotiations to
two sides.

We as women have the highest stake in peace.
Members of the Women's Solidarity Network work
relentlessly to end the bloody conflict over water and
land resources, evacuate schools from armed groups
and restore the rights of our sons and daughters to
education, and we risk our lives on a daily basis to rescue
families trapped in conflict zones. Many members
of the Network play a leading role in alleviating the
suffering of citizens by conducting relief projects and
negotiating the opening of humanitarian corridors.

We are particularly proud to share the news that
the Mothers of Abductees Association, which regularly
demonstrates and calls for the release of its members'
sons while enduring risks and abuse, was able to
secure the release 336 detainees. That is compared to
zero detainees released through the United Nations-
sponsored process. Other members of the Women's
Solidarity Network are actively working to stop the
recruitment of children as combatants. They do so
despite the limited means to help those children.
Meanwhile, the United Nations has, since 2016,
suspended its own disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes targeting children, citing
security concerns and awaiting a political solution.

The comprehensive National Dialogue Conference,
organized under the auspices of the United Nations and
supported by the Council, was an important milestone
in the country's history. Yemeni women participated
effectively to produce a landmark framework and a
charter for their rights and freedoms. That was later
reflected in the draft constitution of 2015 and should
remain fundamental in moving forward with any
political resolution in Yemen.

Although women continue to play a leading role
in peacebuilding, and despite presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/7 of 2017, explicitly calling for the
meaningful inclusion of women, women are still
largely excluded from the peace negotiation process.
We attribute that to the patriarchal philosophy of peace
mediation, which rewards violence by granting space at
the negotiation table only to holders of weapons, rather
than the real peacemakers.
We welcome the recent efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen to support the
engagement of women, starting with the expansion of
his gender team and the establishment of the women's
technical advisory group. However, we emphasize
that women's engagement must not be restricted to an
advisory role in the mediation efforts. Women must
be meaningfully represented, present at the table and
engaged in decision-making.

Wejoin the many voices calling for a ceasefire and
the resumption of the peace process. We affirm that
there can be no just and sustainable peace without an
inclusive process. As the Council moves forward in its
discussions, resolutions or other actions, we strongly
urge it to adopt the following recommendations.

On security measures, it should demand an
immediate ceasefire, starting by ending the air
bombardments led by the internationally recognized
Government and its allies in the Arab coalition and
pursue confidence-building measures towards restoring
State institutions. It should call for the disarmament of
all outlawed armed groups, demand the relocation of
military camps and depots outside of cities and request
the revival of the local security apparatus.

It should enforce a ban on the Houthis' use of
landmines, urge them to submit a landmine map,
request the commencement of demining operations
and call for support for landmine victims. It must call
for the prevention of the transfer and use of arms in
Yemen. It should demand the lifting of the restrictions
on ports and the normalization of air traffic in all
governorates, allowing commercial aviation to operate.
It should enforce a ban on child recruitment and request
the immediate revival of the mobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programmes for child combatants. It
should call for the release of all arbitrarily detained and
forcefully disappeared persons, particularly civilians,
politicians, journalists, activists and members of the
Baha'i minority, and demand an end to the issuance of
the death penalty.

It should send peacekeepers to Yemen from neutral
States that have not engaged in any way in the conflict in
Yemen. It must call for immediate action to address the

logistical challenges preventing the peace negotiations
from taking place, and urge a comprehensive and
inclusive process that is guided by the implementation
mechanism and the National Dialogue Conference. It
should adopt all papers submitted during the National
Dialogue Conference, including the final document
and visions submitted by all groups to inform the
framework for a political solution in Yemen. It must
demand the establishment of an international fund for
the reconstruction of Yemen in a transparent manner,
to be co-financed by the Arab coalition countries and
the international community. It should enact measures
to support economic stability, reconstruction and
the restoration of social services, while urging the
establishment of anti-corruption mechanisms.

It must recognize the rights of southerners through
a just solution that speaks to the demands of the
southern people. It should demand a local ceasefire in
Taiz governorate and support our five-point initiative
to protect civilians in Al-Hudaydah. It must demand
the initiation of resettlement programmes and asylum
facilities to address the situation of Yemenis abroad.
It should request a gender audit of ongoing relief
operations, demand a solution for humanitarian
diversion and reiterate the importance of integrating
gender issues into the humanitarian response plans. It
should demand the establishment of a mechanism to
hold perpetrators accountable within a wider context
of transitional justice and reparations, and impose
individual targeted sanctions against warlords and those
who obstruct the peace process. It should request that
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) include gender expertise and gender-responsive
reporting mechanisms.

On strengthening the engagement of women
policymakers, the Council should recognize the
priorities of women identified in the national agenda
for women and peace and security, submitted in 2016,
and call on the Government to report on the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
It should refer explicitly to resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, as well as subsequent
resolutions, clearly demand no less than 30 per cent
participation by women in delegations and all related
ceasefire and peace processes, and impose vacant seats
if women are not included.

It should mandate an independent women's
delegation at the peace negotiation table. It should urge
the Special Envoy to ensure that women have equal
representation in the peace consultations process and
address the demands that we sent to him in our letter
of March 2018. It should call for the establishment of
a mechanism to hear the voices of rural women, as
well as women victims and survivors of war, ensuring
that their priorities are integrated into the negotiation
process and the political solution. It should demand
support for women peacemakers and urge the allocation
of funding directly and flexibly to grass-roots women,
activists and women's movements in order to support
their efforts. It must call for the establishment of a
clear mechanism to protect women and women human
rights defenders and address their integrated protection
needs, including their physical, psychological, digital
and collective security.

We hope that those recommendations will
be adopted and that they will make a significant
contribution to ending the conflict in Yemen. The lack
of action on those recommendations is a moral failure
that contributes to the continued suffering of more than
27 million Yemenis.

