Socrates spoke the truth when he said: "Humanity is not a religion but a rank that some people reach". In that context, it is certain that the Governments of some Western countries that are trying to promote themselves as paragons of humanity and ethics have failed to rise to that rank. That was confirmed once again by those very same Governments when they turned a deaf ear to the appeal made by the Secretary-General on 23 March to waive unilateral coercive measures. On the contrary, they hastened to announce the extension, even the tightening, of those measures. Consequently, they failed the test of credibility and humanity. Is the suffering of 2 billion people caused by unilateral coercive measures not worth holding emergency meetings of the Council in order to put an end to that crime against humanity and hold accountable those responsible for it? Is lifting those measures against 24 million Syrians not worth immediate action by the so-called humanitarian co-penholders instead of what we have witnessed today and at other relevant meetings of the Council - feverish efforts to promote false allegations and accusations, and failed attempts to evade responsibility for the economic terrorism and collective punishment practiced against millions of Syrian civilians? How could one expect any sane person to believe that Germany and Belgium, as the humanitarian co-penholders and, behind them, the United States, the United Kingdom and France harbour any goodwill or humanitarian concern for the security and welfare of Syrians, at a time where they are targeting all Syrians by damaging their livelihoods, impeding their access to medicine and food for children, security and the resources of their country? In addition, those countries support the American- Turkish-Israeli occupation of parts of my country and the crimes committed directly or indirectly through proxy separatist militias and terrorist organizations. It is terribly sad for those in the world who are free to see that those countries are assuming the role of judge, jury and executioner in the Council. The Governments of some of the members of the Council have insisted on their hostile policies towards my country to the degree that they are completely unable to play any positive or constructive role regarding the situation in my country and the region. That is attested to by the silence and pressure imposed on the Security Council by those Member States that are trying to make it into a platform for NATO. The Governments of these countries seem to be surrendering to the whims and ambitions of the American Administration and are fond of the policies of occupation and Turkification and of the support for terrorism practiced by the Erdogan regime on the territories of my country. Those Governments also support Erdogan's expansionist ambitions and crimes against Syria, Iraq, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Armenia, Greece and Cyprus, as well as his violations of the rights of all his opponents from the friendly Turkish people. Such violations were clear in the aftermath of the alleged coup attempt. All present are fully aware of the fact that the coup was followed by massive violations of the rights of tens of thousands of civilians and Turkish State employees. Let me be clear: even if some people dream of repeating the experience of the Turkish occupation of parts of Cyprus since 1974 in my country, we will not allow that to happen even if NATO itself is behind Erdogan. Iinvite my fellow NATO representatives in the Council to answer our questions openly and without equivocation: do they support international law and the United Nations Charter, or do they support the United States-Turkish-Israeli occupation of parts of my country? Do they respect what is stated in the resolutions of the Council on the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of my country, or do they support endeavours aimed at abandoning or partitioning and continuing to destabilize the security situation and undermine stability in our region? Do they believe in the feasibility of combating terrorism and ridding civilians of control by terrorist organizations, or is investment in terrorism permissible and desirable when it serves their agendas? Do they believe in the principles of humanitarian work, or is the besieging and intimidation of and fighting against Syrians legitimate as long as it serves their interests and agendas? And how do they explain their silence about Erdogan's preventing humanitarian convoys from inside Syria from reaching the areas he occupies in the north-west, as was the case with the convoy, approved by the Syrian Government on 14 April, that was supposed to go to the Al-Atarib region and its surroundings but that has not yet been delivered by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)? If they prevent the Council from fulfilling its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, then what is the alternative international reference that can be entrusted with the purposes and principles of the United Nations? Once again, the co-penholders are preparing a draft resolution to extend the effects of resolution 2165 (2014), on cross-border activities. I will not elaborate on my country's well-known position that rejects such resolutions, which completely depart from the assumed humanitarian goals and the provisions of General Assembly resolution 46/182. Such resolutions aim to serve the agendas of hostile Governments and infringe on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic on the basis of OCHA's politicized allegations and distorted reports. Such resolutions ignore the tremendous efforts exerted by the institutions of the Syrian State and its partners in humanitarian work, in cooperation with allied and friendly countries. Resolution 2165 (2014) was an exceptional, temporary measure taken by the Security Council in specific circumstances that no longer exist. Its sustainability cannot be permitted, nor can it be strengthened by including additional crossings that serve the occupation and threaten the integrity and unity of Syrian territories. OCHA is able to operate from inside Syria and use the official approved crossings, including the Abu Kamal and Nasib crossings and Aleppo and Al-Qamishli airports. Instead of wasting time on misleading OCHA reports and their pointless details, the Council must address the root causes of the crisis, which would consequently restore security and stability and improve the humanitarian situation. That means ending the United States-Turkish occupation and its crimes, including the destruction of Syrian infrastructure, the looting of various resources and the burning of agricultural crops. Addressing the root cause of the crisis entails supporting the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies in combating terrorism, in addition to the immediate lifting of unilateral coercive measures. The effects of those measures are not limited to the livelihoods of millions of Syrians but are also aimed, among other things, at dividing my country. That is confirmed by the notorious Caesar Act, which excluded north-eastern Syria from its provisions in order to encourage separatist tendencies among the proxy militias of the occupation and try to create new facts on the ground. My delegation reiterates its call on countries that have pledged and committed to respecting international law and the maintenance of international peace and security to put an end to the politicization of the humanitarian issue in my country and support the efforts of the Syrian State in the humanitarian and development domains. Those countries should also reject the political conditions and dictates set by some Governments with the aim of obstructing reconstruction and recovery efforts as well as the return of displaced Syrians. My Government reiterates its position regarding the Brussels Conferences and stresses the fact that those conferences are nothing but a propaganda showdown aimed at implementing the agenda of certain countries that organize and participate in those conferences in a clear politicization of humanitarian work, and the imposition of their conditions, with deep-rooted obstinacy. My Government reaffirms that it does not recognize any initiatives or meetings that are held on Syria without its participation and full coordination. My Government also reiterates its demand that the United Nations not participate in such conferences, in order to maintain its impartial role and respect humanitarian work parameters under resolution 46/182. Finally, inviting false witnesses to brief the Council is not in the interest of the noble issue that the Security Council has been striving to deal with at almost 100 meetings so far. Such invitations are a deliberate misuse of the Council's mechanisms aiming at distorting facts and misleading Member States' representatives. The repetitive invitation of tools of fabrication to Council meetings, whether it is related to the humanitarian situation or to the political or chemical file, highlights the degree of prejudice that the enemies of Syria in the Council hold against my country and how desperate they are because they lost the bet on terrorism and sanctions during the years of the crisis. The role of the guests invited by the Council presidency to brief it on a humanitarian situation should be a responsible and humanitarian one, not a critical, prejudiced and inciting role against my country's Government and people. Whoever speaks about a humanitarian situation, wherever it may be, should be trustworthy and well versed in the provisions of the Charter and communication discipline.
