Mr. Churkin (spoke in Russian): Mr. President,
allow me to welcome you here today as the President
of the Security Council. We also appreciate the
presence here today of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

The convening of this meeting of the Security
Council offers us an opportunity to consider once again
some very topical issues: how the international
community must act in the face of the global threat of
terrorism today and how we can strengthen solidarity
against terrorism without which it is impossible to
ensure international peace and security.

The heinous attack in Mumbai was evidence of
the scale of the continuing threat and it was also a
serious reminder of the shared responsibility we all
bear for eradicating terrorism. The Russian Federation
confirms its position of principle, namely,
unconditional condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We believe it is the United
Nations that must provide solid political leadership and
coordination of international cooperation in combating
terrorism.

In an increasingly interdependent world,
strengthening the central role of the United Nations in
building the political, legal and organizational
foundations for counter-terrorism security is essential -
there is no other option. There are different ways of
looking back at the road travelled in recent years by the
United Nations and the Security Council in solving the
complex and multifaceted problem of terrorism, but it is
quite self-evident that without those efforts the world
today would be even less safe.

The Security Council played a key role in
establishing a first line of defence. It prescribed initial
measures for States to take to strengthen their counter-
terrorism potential. I am referring, of course, to the

fundamental resolution 1373 (2001) and some
subsequent decisions. We attach paramount importance
to strengthening the potential for the political
leadership of the Council through its subsidiary anti-
terrorist bodies, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the 1267 and 1540 Committees. Those Committees
complement each other as instruments in the fight
against terrorism.

We have to enhance the effectiveness of steps
taken by the Council to prevent the terrorist threat. We
have to help it develop its dialogue with States on
implementing the relevant resolutions and on the
timely assistance to States to carry out the obligations
provided for in Security Council resolutions. In
practical terms, it is still extremely relevant for our
common security to expose and neutralize terror
networks, to block the movement of financial flows, to
stop other support to terrorists and to put an end to the
safe havens they have set up.

Many of these issues have now become clearer to
us than they were before. For example, Russia no
longer has to, as it did a few years ago, convince its
partners about the dangerous mix of drug trafficking
and terrorism, especially in Afghanistan. The Security
Council must continue giving paramount attention to
reacting effectively to terrorist threats and to
encouraging the development of international
cooperation on the topic.

At the same time, we have to ensure that law
enforcement measures against terror are supplemented
by efforts on a broad scale to prevent terrorism, inter
alia by trying to eliminate the various social factors
that fuel terrorism. We have to develop a dialogue
between civilizations and between religions and we
have to actively counter the ideology of violence and
extremism. The United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly,
offers us a way of moving to a comprehensive United
Nations system of eliminating international terrorism
rather than just reacting to it, and we must make full
use of the potential of that Strategy. We support every
part of the Strategy and we call for active
implementation. We intend to do our utmost to further
this process.

There is one huge potential that has not yet been
used fully by most States: the development of a
partnership between the private and public sectors in
counter-terrorism. It is not just from our own

experience that we see that if States meet certain
conditions, then the business community is quite
willing to cooperate.

The future of combating international terrorism
is, as we see it, directly related to building a more
foreseeable and stable world order based on
international law. I think it is clear to everybody today
that terrorism is not an enemy which, when fighting,
you can draw the battle lines on military maps. If we
are to talk about the real direction for stopping
terrorism, one of the most important conditions is a
comprehensive strengthening of the international legal
counter-terrorism basis. There are still lacunae, for
example, it has become increasingly clear that we need
further international legal regulations so as to ensure
that cyberspace is never used for terrorist purposes.

At the political level, it is crucial to keep and
strengthen the broad international coalition formed in
response to the terrorist act of September 2001. The
Russian Federation will continue to work closely and
actively with other States to strengthen the
international community and the United Nations
potential to deal with issues relating to insecurity
resulting from terrorism.

