Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries during this open
debate on a matter of great importance.

At the outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, as well as Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Maria Grazia Giammarinaro,
Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially
women and children, for their presentations.

The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently
expressed its concern about trafficking in persons in
the belief that such trafficking is increasingly becoming
a global challenge that affects all countries around
the world, as demonstrated by the growing number
of victims. The issue therefore requires a concerted
national and international response in order to fulfil the
commitments made by adopting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, among other reasons.

Moreover, States members of the Movement are
particularly concerned about the serious humanitarian
emergencies that have been triggered by various factors,
including armed conflict, poverty, gender inequality,
human rights violations, violations of fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law, at both the national and
the international levels, injustice and impunity, political
instability, the breakdown of democracy, foreign
occupation, terrorism, genocide and ethnic cleansing.
All those elements have caused millions of people to
become displaced in their own countries or to migrate
or to seek refuge overseas in the pursuit of safety,
stability, opportunities and development at the risk of
greater vulnerability by being subjected to crimes such
as human trafficking.

In that regard, while recognizing that victims
of those crimes are particularly exposed to racism,
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
among others, we reaffirm the Movement's
commitment to preventing human rights violations
in line with the rule of law and its obligation under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, and in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions.

Likewise, States members of the Movement
underscore the need to ensure that people who have been
trafficked, with whom they express their solidarity, are
treated as victims of crime and, in line with national
legislation, are not penalized or stigmatized for their
involvement in unlawful activities in which they have
been forced to engage. Similarly, it is imperative to
break any cycle of impunity that may exist and to hold
accountable those responsible for committing such
crimes, which, in some circumstances, may amount to
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

As rightly noted in the concept note for this open
debate (S/2017/972, annex), human trafficking is both
a cause and a consequence of conflict and instability,
affecting in particular women, children, refugees,
migrants and internally displaced persons. That
phenomenon must be addressed both collectively and
comprehensively, including by examining its root causes
and drivers and taking into account its multidimensional
nature, in order to adopt a consistent, comprehensive
and coordinated approach. At the same time, it is also
important to recognize the role and responsibilities
of the countries of origin, transit and destination in
effectively promoting and protecting the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of individuals subjected
to such crimes and in committing to coordination of
their efforts and active cooperation with one another.
That means adopting a preventive rather than a military
approach to address such a complex issue, including
through enhanced international cooperation.

In addition, as noted earlier, that global phenomenon
has been triggered by, inter alia, armed conflict, which
serves as a breeding ground for terrorism. In that
regard, the Movement expresses its concern over the
growing links between that scourge and transnational
organized crime, taking into account that human
trafficking is being used as a way to finance and to
recruit for terrorist activities. In recent years, that
situation has been exacerbated by situations of armed
conflict in various regions of the world. One of the
many examples that we could unfortunately mention
is the current situation in the Sahelo-Saharan region,
where hostage-taking, involving ransom payments, and
terrorist acts threaten regional security and stability due
to, among other factors, the ever-increasing links among
the illicit trafficking of firearms, illicit drug trafficking
and trafficking in persons, hence the importance of
resolutely and effectively combating transnational
organized crime, including human trafficking.

In that regard, the Movement urges States to address
that issue through international, regional and bilateral
cooperation and dialogue and, inter alia, to implement
and to strengthen effective measures to combat and to
eliminate all forms of transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, in order to counter
the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the
victims, in particular women and children subjected
to forced labour, sexual or commercial exploitation,
violence and sexual abuse, and to bring to justice
the perpetrators of those crimes. At the same time,
we underscore the importance of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and call on States that have not yet done so to consider
becoming parties to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. Likewise, States
members of the Movement call on the international
community to consider establishing national and local
institutions dedicated to the fight against that scourge.

Moreover, while stressing the importance of the
full and effective implementation of the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons
in the comprehensive fight against that scourge, States
members of the Movement commend the high-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the implementation
of that Plan of Action, held in New York on 27 and
28 September, and the political declaration adopted at
that time. We would also like to take this opportunity
to emphasize the historic opportunity presented by
the intergovernmental conference on migration to be
held from 10 to 11 December 2018 in Morocco, and
to express our commitment to contributing actively to
the negotiation process on a global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration.

In discussing the central theme of today's open
debate, we must also take into account the current
unprecedented flows of refugees and migrants, an
issue that was discussed at length at the seventeenth
Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Countries, held
in September 2016 on Isla de Margarita in Venezuela.
The Heads of State and Government at the Summit
acknowledged the humanitarian emergencies that this
global and growing phenomenon has created, along
with an enormous number of refugees, chiefly the
result of conflict, with particular repercussions for
women and children.

The member States of the Movement also
emphasize the importance of ensuring that all States
address the problem of trafficking in persons and
international migration through a cooperative dialogue
on an equal footing. In that regard, we strongly urge
the international community to refrain from taking
any measures that stigmatize particular groups or
individuals, including third-country nationals and their
families. We should also point out that there is no one
solution to the problem of trafficking in persons. We
must therefore formulate strategies adapted to national
ownership and aimed at preventing and combating
illegal practices such as these that violate victims'
human rights.

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement,
in rejecting any politicization of the fight against
human trafficking and attempts to use it as a tool for
undermining States' political stability, would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate its concern about
the Security Council's continued usurpation of the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council by its consideration
of issues that traditionally fall within the remit of
those bodies. In that regard, and on the subject under
discussion in today's open debate, the member States
of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirm the role and
authority of the General Assembly, including in matters
related to international peace and security, as the main
deliberative, normative and representative organ of the
United Nations, in line with the provisions ofArticle 12
of the Charter of the United Nations.

