Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here today. We acknowledge Jordan's
efforts to promote a Middle East peace, and we thank
Jordan for bearing such a difficult burden in sheltering
so many of those who have fled the Syrian conflict. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

We all know that 2014 will be a critical
year - maybe a decisive year - for the Middle East
peace process. The final status negotiations under
way offer the best chance for peace in the region, and
Australia of course fully supports those negotiations
towards a just and lasting two-State solution, with
Israelis and Palestinians living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.
We appreciate United States Secretary of State Kerry's
perseverance and the effective engagement of all parties
in the negotiations. Great courage and statesmanship
will be required in equal measure to achieve peace, and
we offer our full support to Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas at this critical juncture in the
negotiations. For this best chance to succeed, we call
on both parties to avoid any provocative actions that
would undermine confidence in the talks. Australia
itself stands ready to assist in any way it can to support
the negotiations.

At the same time, we remain deeply concerned at
the growing impact of the Syrian conflict on peace and
stability in the region. We welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations to start a
process this week that will hopefully lead to a political
solution based on the principles agreed at the first
Geneva conference in 2012. Australia has accepted the
Secretary-General's invitation to participate. The goal
of the the second Geneva Conference on Syria must
remain the establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers, as agreed in the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We urge the
Syrian Government and the Syrian National Coalition
to participate constructively, and countries with
influence to lend their full support to the process. The
Syrian parties should also heed the Secretary-General's
insistence that their delegations to the Conference
include broad and substantial representation of women.

We are concerned by the increasing presence
in Syria of groups with links to Al-Qaida. Those
organizations have no place in Syria's future, and
existing Council sanctions against them must be
implemented by all States.

The recent admission by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
situation on the ground in Syria is now so bad that it can
no longer update its estimates ofthe conflict's death toll
is a chilling fact. It is obvious that a political process
that can bring an end to this conflict is desperately
needed. The urgency of the humanitarian crisis was
underscored last week by the discussions in Kuwait,
where States met to discuss the unprecedented appeal
by humanitarian agencies. We welcome the pledges that
were made, and urge that they be swiftly honoured and
coordinated closely with the United Nations.

We are also pleased to have been able to make
our own contribution to the joint mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the United Nations and its vital work in removing
all chemical weapons from Syria. We must not allow
that work to be delayed, and Syria itself must meet its
obligations to eliminate all elements of its chemical
weapons programme.

Foreign Minister Asselborn has just described
the terrible magnitude of the humanitarian crisis.
We endorse his comments. It is imperative that
humanitarian assistance reach people in need. We again
call on the parties to the conflict to adhere immediately
to the provisions of the Council's presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of October 2013 regarding access for
humanitarian workers and supplies. We are especially
concerned about the large numbers of civilians still
trapped in besieged towns. All parties to the conflict
must ensure that humanitarian supplies can get
through, including through the development of urgent
local ceasefires. Those States with influence with the
parties should reinforce this message in accordance
with the work plan agreed in the high-level group on
humanitarian challenges in Syria convened by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

As we know, the conflict has had a hugely
destabilizing impact on Syria's neighbours. One
year ago, neighbouring countries were host to over
half a million Syrian refugees. Today, the number is
almost 2.5 million - more than 10 per cent of Syria's
population. The Council must be conscious of the
fact that Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq are all
shouldering enormous burdens as part of the conflict.
That underlines the need for continued efforts by the
Council on Syria.

In Lebanon, the destabilizing effects ofthe conflict
are all too apparent, given the recent spate of car
bombings, including the assassination of the former
Finance Minister and the attack on the Iranian Embassy.
We commend the efforts of the Government of Lebanon
and the Lebanese Armed Forces to maintain security
and urge all parties to adhere to President Sleiman's
policy of disassociation from the Syrian conflict.
Lebanon's political parties need to work together
and form a Government quickly, so that Lebanon's
challenges can best be addressed.

In concluding, we condemn the violence perpetrated
in western Iraq in recent weeks by the Al-Qaida-linked
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its associates.
We must continue to support the ongoing anti-terrorist

efforts of the Iraqi Government, together with tribal
leaders, in combating that aggression. Resolving that
threat will be important so as to ensure that there is
no delay in the 30 April electoral timetable. Timely
credible elections will help to facilitate an inclusive
political dialogue in Iraq. Such an inclusive dialogue
is essential. We encourage Iraq's various community
leaders to continue to work together to achieve that and
to resolve the country's challenges.

