Mr. Se'epanovic' (Montenegro): I would like to
thank the French presidency for organizing this open
debate and for preparing the concept note (S/2016/503, annex) before us. I also thank the briefers for their
valuable contribution to this debate.

My country fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. I would
like, however, to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.

As stated in last year's report of the Secretary-
General's report,

"Despite some progress at the normative level,
the general state of the protection of civilians on
the ground remains bleak" (S/2015453, para. 9).

Civilians, unfortunately, account for the vast majority
of victims of armed conflicts. We live in an era in which
the extensive harm civilians endure and the widespread
violations of international law during armed conflicts
are almost accepted as a given, which is unacceptable.
In trying to remedy that fact, allow me to single out the
following two areas.

First is prevention and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. These are obviously the most effective way to
protect civilians. Placing primacy on political solutions,
as well as strengthening preventive measures, is
therefore essential. That will, inter alia, require greater
utilization of mediation and closer collaboration of the
United Nations with regional arrangements.

When an end to violence is not possible, respect
for international law is crucial to ensuring that human
suffering is minimized. States and non-State armed
groups have the duty to protect, not target, civilians
and civilian objects, and to facilitate, not hinder, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. In that sense,
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas is
especially concerning. All those who violate the law
must be held accountable for their actions. Otherwise,
violations will continue unabated. The Security Council
should consider applying targeted measures against
parties and individuals who systematically violate their
obligations to protect civilians.

The second area I would like to focus on is the design
and implementation of protection of civilian mandates.
If we want to ensure that peacekeeping missions
provide safety for civilians, protection of civilians
mandates must be tailored to the conditions on the
ground, rather than following a pre-established pattern.
Missions operate in ever more complex environments,
with peacekeepers being deployed in different types of
dangerous situations. That calls for improved conflict
analysis in the pre-mandate assessment phase, with
particular emphasis on how United Nations missions
can better respond to threats posed to civilians on
the ground.

Peacekeepers must be given the resources and
capabilities necessary to act more effectively through
improved mobility, proper equipment and medical
evacuation. New technologies can significantly help to
improve the security and safety of peacekeepers and
assets, as well as the United Nations capacity to protect
civilians and implement mandates more effectively.

I would like to highlight the fact that Montenegro
endorsed and fully supports Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians. We hope that more countries
will recognize the merits of the Principles in our
common quest to further improve the implementation
of protection of civilians mandates. We also expect
that the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty
will contribute to alleviating the suffering of civilians
by preventing irresponsible flows of weapons and
ammunition to conflict-affected areas.

In conclusion, allow me to refer to cases of sexual
exploitation in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in the Central African Republic and other countries,
which Montenegro strongly condemns. Such criminal
activity and abuse has no place in United Nations
flagship activities in any circumstances. It is our
collective duty to ensure thorough investigations into
those cases, accountability and justice for victims.
Zero tolerance and zero impunity have to prevail as our
only option in order not to tarnish the United Nations
credibility again.

