Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank you, Sir, for convening the
open debate. I would also like to thank our compatriot,
Mr. Juan Mendez, Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide and Director of
the International Center for Transitional Justice, for his
very useful and interesting statement. We would also
like to thank Mr. Mark Malloch Brown of the United
Nations Development Programme for his interesting
statement this afternoon, which injected the
development perspective into our debate.
The Secretary-General dedicated his inaugural
statement at the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly to underlining the importance of law and
justice at the national and international level. This is
not the first time the Security Council has analysed the
question of the rule of law and justice. In our opinion,
it is fitting that, under the presidency of the United
Kingdom, we should again follow up on developments
in this field.

One year ago, Argentina concluded its statement
in the debate on this same topic with the following
words,

"imagination, flexibility and resources will
always be indispensable. But perhaps the most
important of all is for the Security Council, the
Secretariat and all organs of the United Nations
to institutionalize once and for all in their
procedures, strategies and policies the elements
that the United Kingdom has invited us to
consider today. Justice and the rule of law are
prerequisites for community life. Peace is not
possible without them". (S/PV.4835, p. 29)

The Secretary-General, in the report before us
today (S/2004/616), has presented a series of forward-
looking recommendations along these lines. We
consider them essential for the future efforts of the
United Nations in strengthening the rule of law and the
reign of justice in societies where conflict has taken
place or exists and in places where institutions have
collapsed.

As stated in the report, the United Nations has
accumulated great experience in the task of
reconstructing peace after conflict, such as in Timor-
Leste and Kosovo. We know that this task has not been
easy. The United Nations is also committed to it in
Haiti. It is important, then, not to waste the experience
but to transform it into something productive.

One specific point in the report that we would
like to emphasize, is that, as the Secretary-General
noted, the United Nations, and the Security Council, in
particular, must conduct a careful analysis of specific
needs in terms of the rule of law and justice in every
country hosting peacekeeping missions or assistance
programmes. Such an analysis is also necessary in
order to identify the part to be played by the United
Nations in peacekeeping operations. Peacekeeping
operations, especially the most complex ones - and
most of the current operations are complex - must
include from the outset strengthening the rule of law
components within their mandates.
As the Secretary-General has stated, we must
avoid the introduction of foreign models. The affected
societies must have ownership of the reconstruction
process, and in that sense, the active participation of
civil society is fundamental.

We must, therefore, work on preparing a set of
practical proposals or guidelines to assist and guide the
work of the organs and areas involved. The opportunity
to do so is here and now, while we are all involved in
the process of reforming and strengthening the
Organization. This is why the recommendations in
paragraphs 64 and 65 of the report should be carefully
followed up. We must find a suitable way of putting
them into practice, so that the ideas expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General and this debate can
produce tangible results.

We consider that recommendations (a) and (b) of
paragraph 65 should serve as the initial point of
departure for work on the institutionalization of the
issue in the agenda of the United Nations. In
recommendation (a), the Executive Committee on
Peace and Security is asked to craft proposals to
improve the ability of the United Nations system to
support the rule of law and justice. In
recommendation (b), the integration of those
considerations into the planning of peacekeeping
missions is requested.

The legal basis for United Nations response and
international action must include, in addition to the
Charter, the legal framework at the international level
covering human rights, international humanitarian law,
international criminal law and the international rights
of refugees.

We would like to emphasize that the international
community can currently rely on a number of
instruments created to bring to justice the perpetrators
of serious violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, in keeping with that legal framework.

The Security Council, in a creative interpretation
of its powers under article 39 of the Charter, has
created special tribunals to judge the most serious
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and to respond to situations in Sierra Leone,
Kosovo, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan. We must
mention the important role played by truth and
reconciliation commissions, as in the case of Sierra
Leone.

However, the main instrument available to the
international community in its fight against impunity is
the International Criminal Court (ICC). We agree with
the Secretary-General that it is extremely necessary to
promote and support the Court's central role in the
effort to strengthen the rule of law.

We must ensure that the Court has the necessary
resources to be able to fulfil its functions. During these
early years of its existence it is indispensable to
support the work of the Office of the Prosecutor in the
investigation and to prosecution of persons responsible
for war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide,
whenever national authorities are unable or unwilling
to do so.

International tribunals can act as a deterrent
within the scheme of international security that has
emerged over the last few years. They are a useful tool
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is the responsibility of the United Nations, and
in particular of the Security Council.

To our way of thinking, there are no prefabricated
solutions. That is why, in addition to the measures
which the United Nations and the international
tribunals take in order to strengthen the rule of law and
justice, it will also be of vital importance to carefully
analyse and learn from the experience accumulated at
the national level in individual countries.

Argentina is a democracy where the rule of law
prevails. The institutional stability which our country
has enjoyed for more than 20 years demonstrates its
strength. We therefore believe that our experience in
successfully transitioning to democracy, as well as the
experience of other States Members of the
Organization in that respect, could be of use to those
societies that are undergoing the process today.

