Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Security Council for this opportunity to brief
it on the recent efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to better protect civilians in
the framework of the seven peacekeeping operations
with such a mandate, which daily respond to constantly
evolving challenges. There have been several
significant developments since the Council last debated
this issue, on 22 November 2010 (see S/PV.6427).

We have of course maintained regular dialogue
with Member States on this important issue, and in
particular with the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations - the so-called Committee of Thirty Four
(C-34). This year, the Committee has held several
useful in-depth discussions on this issue. We have
developed a strategic framework for the protection of
civilians that includes the use of the political process to
provide protection, protection against physical violence
and the medium- and long-term establishment of an
environment in which the rights and security of
civilians are protected. The C-34 has taken stock of the
progress that has been made, in particular in the areas
of training, supporting missions in developing
strategies to protect civilians and identifying the
necessary resources and capacities to carry out
mandates to protect civilians. We have been
encouraged to continue to work with missions to
improve our implementation of protection mandates, in
particular by improving coordination both at
Headquarters and in the field and by evaluating how
tools such as benchmarks can help to measure the
progress made in protecting civilians.

With regard to direct physical protection by
peacekeeping operations, it seems to me important to
point out that, during the deliberations of the Special
Committee, some Member States expressed concerns
with regard to relations between missions and host
Governments when it comes to protecting civilians.
Those concerns focused on host Governments' primary
responsibility to protect civilians, as well as no the fact
that peacekeeping operations are there to support the
authorities of the host country to that end. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations continuously

reiterates that Security Council mandates for the
protection of civilians do not take the place of
sovereign responsibilities. The protection of civilians
is, and will continue to be, primarily the responsibility
of the host Government. Allow me to give some
examples in that regard.

In Cote d'Ivoire, as the Council is aware, the
United Nations Operation implemented the robust
provisions of resolution 1975 (2011), which required
the use of all necessary means to prevent the use of
heavy weaponry against civilians. As in the past, the
Mission today continues to carry out its clear mandate
to protect civilians.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
continues to improve its methods - through temporary
bases, its well-known joint protection teams, its liaison
officers to various populations groups and many other
means - to provide additional and improved
protection to civilians on a daily basis. In the past
month, the Mission has achieved a certain degree of
success in combating impunity for those who
perpetrate violence against civilians.

Similar efforts are being undertaken in the other
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates, namely,
in Liberia, Haiti, Lebanon, South Sudan and, of course,
Darfur. With regard to the latter, members may perhaps
have taken note of the recently improving access by
humanitarian workers to the Jebel Marra region.

(spoke in English)

As we plan for the United Nations role in South
Sudan, we see that the protection of civilians will play
an important role in the context of supporting State
authority. With the primary objective of strengthening
the capacity of the nascent Government of South Sudan
to assume its sovereign responsibilities, and taking into
consideration the requirement to protect civilians in
what is still a potentially volatile security environment,
we have looked at how the successor to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) could provide
the required support during this critical time.

The Mission's potential role in protecting
civilians is not about replacing the Government of
South Sudan's responsibility in this respect, but about
assisting it to protect civilians where it does not have
the capacity to do so. In this regard, many elements,
including civilian peacekeepers, have a critical role to
play. We count on members of the Security Council
and other Member States to ensure that the successor
mission to UNMIS will have the adequate
capabilities- inter alia, in terms of mobility and
engineering - to fulfil this important mandate.

Supporting host Governments to ensure that their
civilians are protected in the immediate aftermath of
conflict is, as we all know, an immensely complex
endeavour. On our end, we are working closely with
our missions, as well as with the Member States that
contribute troops and police to them, to improve both
our understanding and our implementation of
protection of civilian mandates. To this end, we have
now finalized guidance to assist missions in developing
comprehensive protection of civilians strategies and
developed scenario-based protection of civilians
training modules, and we will soon be consulting with
troop and police contributors on a detailed matrix that
identifies the resources and capabilities required for the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates. We
will be undertaking additional initiatives to ensure that
this work translates into improved protection in the
areas in which we work.

These efforts must be complemented by the
Council's sustained political support. The protection of
civilians in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
often carried out in extremely challenging
circumstances, in many cases with tremendous political
complexities. Ultimately, the protection of civilians is
assured by stable political outcomes, and the Security
Council's role in ensuring that parties stay on the path
to peace is always critical. The Council's role in
helping us to ensure that we have the right and
adequate capabilities to implement this kind of
mandate is, of course, critical. The Council's
unflagging support in these situations is a sine qua non
if we are to take forward our mandated tasks and
improve the lives of civilians whom we are deployed to
support.

