Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): Like others, I
too would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary General Tom Koenigs for his briefing.

I would also like to associate myself with the
statement delivered by Mr. Andrey Denisov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, on behalf of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization.

I join my colleagues in commending the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
different aspects of the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2006/145). We agree in particular with the idea in
that report that the situation requires sustained
attention in order to strengthen ties between
Afghanistan and its neighbours.

Viewing Afghanistan as an integral part of
Central Asia, Kazakhstan welcomes its positive
achievements in the political, social and economic
spheres and its involvement in regional affairs. We are
strongly committed to continuing to contribute our
share to the reconstruction of Afghanistan, in
partnership with the Afghan authorities and the
international community.

At the same time, the security situation in
Afghanistan is under pressure from the rising level of
insurgent attacks, particularly in the south-east and
south-west of the country. In that regard, the
International Security Assistance Force and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
are playing an important role on the ground. We fully
support the renewal of UNAMA's mandate, as well as
the central role of the United Nations in leading
international efforts to assist the Afghan authorities in
bringing lasting peace and prosperity to that country.

Kazakhstan welcomes the steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan to deepen interaction with
international institutions involved in the counter-
narcotics programme in Afghanistan, which resulted in
the decline of opium cultivation in 2005. However, we
still have a long way to go. During the last 10 years,
the level of drug-related crimes in Central Asia has
increased five-fold, and the situation tends to get
worse. In our view, much work has to be done to
remedy the situation with regard to illegal drug
production and drug trafficking, both inside and
outside of Afghanistan. We believe that one key
element of the overall strategy must be the further
enhancement of existing, and the establishment of new,
anti-drug security belts.

With respect to the London Conference, which
was attended by the Kazakhstan's Foreign Minister,
Mr. Tokaev, at the invitation of the organizers, I would
like to reiterate our deep gratitude to the Governments
of the United Kingdom and Afghanistan for the
outstanding preparation and organization of that event.

In London, Kazakhstan proposed concrete steps
to support the implementation of the Afghan Compact.
Kazakhstan is ready to grant scholarships to Afghan
students, to sign a bilateral agreement on cooperation
in the field of education and to launch a civil aviation
training programme for Afghan pilots.

Kazakh companies are looking forward to
participating in developing oil fields and in the
construction of electricity transmission lines, pipelines,
roads and houses. We hope that the established
Kazakh-Afghan Joint Commission on Trade and
Economic Cooperation will be instrumental in further
stimulating bilateral economic interaction. Kazakhstan
has a particular interest in assisting Afghanistan's
farmers by providing them with grain, mineral
fertilizers, agricultural equipment and mini-complexes
for processing agricultural products.

In our view, the accession of Afghanistan to the
United Nations Special Programme for the Economies
of Central Asia in 2005 will greatly contribute to its
further integration into the regional economy. That
programme was initiated by President Nazarbaev of
Kazakhstan in 1997, with the support of the Secretary-
General, and is being pursued under the auspices of
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific and the Economic Commission for
Europe.

I would like to reiterate our full support for the
coordinated efforts under Afghan leadership aimed at
building a peaceful, viable and prosperous State.

