Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let mejoin colleagues
in thanking the briefers: Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO); Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo,
President of the Commission electorale nationale
independante (CENI) of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; His Excellency Mr. Joseph Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, who spoke on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), and Monseigneur Utembi, President of the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO).
We welcome Ambassador Ignace Gata Mavita Wa
Lufuta, Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council's involvement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been one of
the most protracted, heavily invested and multiphased
engagements in the history of the United Nations.
Today, we meet at one of the most critical junctures
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's process
of consolidating democracy, nearly 60 years since
its independence from Belgian colonial rule. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is larger than the
entire Western Europe. It is less developed and has a
far less developed physical and social infrastructure.
The challenge to organize presidential, legislative
and provincial elections in such a vast country is
therefore enormous.

South Africa welcomes the announcement of
the provisional election results, and we commend
the Commission electorale nationale independante
for its hard work under difficult circumstances. We
further congratulate the Commission on managing the
electoral process. The Commission electorale nationale
independante is the official legitimate authority
mandated to manage and conduct the elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is the delegated
authoritative body to pronounce on the results of the
elections and must be accorded the right to do so. It
remains imperative that the Commission's actions and
declarations, including with regard to the outcome of
the elections, should be respected by all, especially the
Security Council.

South Africa calls on all parties to preserve
the generally peaceful climate of the elections and
to take up any reservations or disputes through the
proper mechanisms and processes provided for in the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its electoral laws, thereby refraining from any
violence or incitement thereof. We must ensure that,
as members of the Security Council, our words and
actions should contribute positively to the aspirations
and collective will of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is rich but
the Congolese people are poor. South Africa remains
concerned about the continuous illicit exploitation
of the natural resources of the country. Since its
independence, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been subjected to interference in determining its
future by external factors. The abundant resources with
which the country is blessed have in many ways led
to the scramble for those resources, to the detriment
of the Congolese people. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, parts of the economy are informal and
the sometimes illicit links between politics and illegal
economic activities have long existed. The estimated
value of the illicit exploitation of natural resources
in the eastern part of the country is billions of
dollars annually.

South Africa has keenly supported efforts to
ensure peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of Congo. In 1998, our late President, Nelson Mandela,
hosted a historic meeting between the former leaders
of Zaire/Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mobutu
Sese Seko and Laurent-Desire' Kabila, off the coast
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and averted
a potentially destructive civil war. In 2002, South
Africa hosted the groundbreaking Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, which led to drafting of the Constitution
and the hosting of the first-ever inclusive multiparty
democratic elections in that country. Such elections
took place again in 2011 and now in 2018.

President Ramaphosa issued a statement in which
he congratulated all the parties and stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on ensuring peace
and stability during the election process and urged
all regional, international and interested parties to
refrain from speculation and to allow the Commission
electorale nationale independante to complete the
process. The President also urged all political parties
and their supporters to allow the Commission to
perform its legal and constitutional duties without
interference or pressure.

We expect the Security Council to be at the forefront
of providing support to the Congolese authorities to
maintain a peaceful and stable environment following
the landmark elections, and to discourage any violence
after the conclusion of the electoral process. That is
necessary in order to facilitate the historic outcome
of the first-ever democratic transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. South Africa
welcomes the reports of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and the electoral observer missions
of SADC and of the African Union, and takes note
of CENCO's concerns. We welcome their continued
commitment to assisting the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in achieving sustainable peace, security and
stability. The continued support and partnership of the
United Nations, the African Union, SADC and other
regional and international actors are necessary for the
consolidation ofpeace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

MONUSCO played an important role in creating a
climate ofrelative peace for the conduct of the elections
in some difficult regions of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The provision of timely logistical support
assisted in containing the spread of the Ebola virus in
parts of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Intervention Brigade, which is part of the MONUSCO
force, comprising brigades from South Africa, Malawi
and Tanzania, have successfully neutralized the threat
posed by negative and belligerent armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

South Africa calls for greater inclusion of women
peacekeepers and an increase in the civilian component
of MONUSCO, increasing the role of women mediators
in dealing with conflict mediation at the communal
level in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
recall the role that women played at the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue in South Africa.

We would like to pause and pay tribute to the men
and women who paid dearly and made the supreme
sacrifice in carrying out their international duty on
behalf of us all around the table and in protecting the
Congolese people.

The international community should not lose sight
of the importance of addressing the peace and security
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which preceded the election process about which we are
talking. Addressing the root causes of conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo requires recognition
of the nexus between development and peace. In that

regard, South Africa emphasizes the need for post-
election support in the context of peacebuilding and for
the Security Council to mobilize to the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) to provide the necessary support
for the broader Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. The PBC Framework is the most
holistic peace mechanism for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is guaranteed by the United Nations,
the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community and has been signed by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and all the countries
in the region.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has come a
long way in its quest for peace and security.

The elections that have just taken place will lead to
the first democratic transfer of power in the country's
history. The community ofthe Congolese people should
be commended for this process. We therefore call on the
international community and the Council in particular
to continue to support the process with a balanced and
measured approach. The road ahead may be difficult
and long, but the journey to long-term stability, peace
and happiness for the Congolese people has begun. As
a Council, let us accompany them.

