Mr. llkin (Turkey): Let me begin by extending a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nicola Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thanking him for participating in our
debate today. The messages he gave are clear. I would
also like to extend my congratulations to Mr. Inzko on
his appointment as High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We wish him all success in his work. He
can always count on my country's support and
cooperation.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Inzko for his report
(see S/2009/246). We welcome it, and we agree with its
tone and content. Bosnia and Herzegovina occupies a
distinct place on our foreign policy agenda.
Considering ourselves a part of the Balkans and
attaching great importance to the maintenance of
peace, security and stability in the region, Turkey
provides troops, civilian police and other experts to the
European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (EUFOR) and to the European Union
Police Mission. And as a member of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council, we follow the
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina closely and
would like to see the country firmly integrated into
European and transatlantic institutions at an early date.

To achieve all of that, consolidation of an
effective, stable and viable State structure in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as foreseen in the Dayton Peace
Accords, is essential. In this vein, we appreciated and
supported all the efforts made by the leaders of the

three political parties to establish trust and find
common ground in order to carry out the reform
agenda. At the same time, I would like to underline that
we need to understand some of the concerns of the
political parties that have not yet signed that Agreement.

In this vein, we encourage the three parties to
seek broader agreement with all others and welcome
the process as a sign of ownership of the future of the
country. Indeed, initially there were some concrete
outcomes, as the High Representative has informed us.
Still, we are far from the end of the road, and further
efforts are needed to tackle certain difficult issues. But
we are afraid that momentum is being lost. What is
even more important and worrying is the increase in
nationalist, anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions, especially
by the leaders and institutions of the Republika Srpska,
that inevitably challenge the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and constitutional order of the country.

As is well known, the Peace Implementation
Council set five objectives and two conditions for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the European Union Special Representative, about
one and a half years ago. Let me underline that we do
not want the Office of the High Representative to
remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever - and that
is clearly not the wish of the peoples of the country.
However, for the Peace Implementation Council to
make a positive assessment and to start the process of
transition, the international community needs to be
convinced that all in Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
common vision for the future of the country.

That is not the impression we have at this
moment. We do not yet see a country whose people and
entities are fully united around the common goal of a
peaceful, stable and prosperous State fully anchored
within the Euro-Atlantic community of nations. What
we see, rather, is a country of opposing views and
divisions. Definitely, this is not the point that Bosnia
and Herzegovina should have reached more than
14 years after the Dayton Agreement.

Time is of the essence for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would very much like to see the
reform process revived so that the five objectives and
two conditions are completely fulfilled. We know that
this can be done as long as there is the political will. In
that respect, we call on all the leaders and authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to work and cooperate
closely with the High Representative.

The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina have in
the recent past shown their determination and
resilience in putting an end to the conflict and setting
up a partnership State. We are confident that they will
also succeed in achieving those reforms. As has been
the case in the past, Turkey remains ready to assist the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in any way it can,
in achieving their aspirations.

