The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rowe
(Sierra Leone) took a seat the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
twenty-third report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, document
S/2004/724. Members also have before them document
8/2004/741, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1562 (2004).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.

