Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this open briefing on the
situation in Burundi and in particular the presence of
President Nelson Mandela.

 

The analysis that President Mandela has shared with
us and the excellent briefing by the Secretary-General have
enabled us to better understand the deep-rooted causes of
the conflict in Burundi and the vital commitments that are
necessary to reach a peaceful, negotiated and participatory
solution. We believe that this solution should reflect the
reasonable aspirations of the majority while fully
safeguarding the legitimate rights and interests of the
minority.

The first step towards reconciliation is an immediate
ceasefire and the cessation of all attacks on the civilian
population by armed groups. These indiscriminate attacks
deserve our strongest condemnation. Moreover, we are
deeply concerned about the policy of forced regroupment of
more than 340,000 persons ordered by the Government of
Burundi. We believe that this policy contravenes recognized
principles of international humanitarian law and must cease.
In this context, and bearing in mind the difficult living
conditions in the aforementioned camps, we call on the
Government of Burundi to give full access to humanitarian
personnel and human rights monitors.

There can be no doubt that the internal partnership
between the Government and the National Assembly as
well as the Arusha process are forums for negotiation and
dialogue that must be maintained and enhanced. Otherwise,
the political arena will be taken over by extremists, and the
forces of moderation, Hutu and Tutsi alike, the very ones
who worked to launch the peace process, will, regrettably,
be marginalized. With regard to the Arusha process in
particular, we believe that in order to be effective it must
reflect the realities on the ground and be open to the
participation of all groups and sectors, with no exclusions
or self-exclusions. We also trust that all of the parties will
heed, in good faith, with an open mind and a sense of
compromise, the advice and proposals provided by
President Mandela on the basis of more than 30 years of
tireless struggle for freedom, human dignity and the rule of
law in Africa.

We believe that the economic and social situation in
Burundi is not unrelated to the growing climate of tension
in that country. The data on malnutrition, infant mortality,
basic services and health care speak for themselves. Despite
the lifting of regional economic sanctions in February last,
Burundi has not regained the market share it lost as a result
of the economic embargo, and the people are not receiving
their "peace dividend". That is why we call upon the donor
States to consider resuming development assistance, to the
extent that security conditions permit. We believe that
making conditions for economic assistance more flexible
will strengthen the Arusha process.

Another cause for concern is the security and
freedom of movement of United Nations and associated
personnel operating in Burundi. We call on all the parties
to the conflict to respect their status. In this context, we
reiterate our condemnation of the assassination of United
Nations Children's Fund and World Food Programme
personnel which took place in Rutana on 12 October
1999. This crime cannot go unpunished. Its perpetrators
must be tried and punished in accordance with the law.

We believe that the question of Burundi is
inextricably linked to the regional context. Peace and
stability in Burundi will be strengthened through the
consolidation of the rule of law in all countries of the
Great Lakes region. We do not believe that the problems
afflicting the Great Lakes region are exclusively political
or security-related. For that reason, we would like to
support France's proposal to convene, when conditions
are favourable, a general conference on the Great Lakes
region under the joint auspices of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations.

