Mr. Lancry (Israel): On behalf of my
Government, I wish to express our satisfaction at the
convening of this debate. Protection of the rights of the
child, particularly in areas of conflict, has been a
matter of concern to the international community for
some time. This concern stems from our recognition
that childhood is a period of innocence and dreams,
and yet, all too often, the harsh realities of war and
unrest have denied children the right to grow and
develop in a nurturing environment of peace and
stability.

Israel wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his excellent report on children and armed conflict, and
for the many insightful and important
recommendations contained therein for protecting and
defending the rights of the child.

The situation of children in areas of conflict is
one of the most heart-wrenching issues we address in
the United Nations. The images of suffering that we
have all seen emerge from virtually every corner of the
earth. The manner in which so many children around
the world are taken from their homes and schools,
physically and emotionally abused, and forced to fight
in wars they did not start is a matter that must be of
concern to all of us.

The international community has repeatedly
affirmed that children must be spared the horrors of
armed conflict. The Secretary-General's report offers
important recommendations, first and foremost among
which is adherence to the relevant international
conventions, which, if they were widely respected,
would almost entirely solve the problem of children in
armed conflict.

In our region, children have suffered terribly from
decades of conflict and from the still-looming threat of
terrorism. The Middle East has endured more than its
share of wars, which have left scars on all people in the
region, but particularly on children.

For these reasons, Israel has supported
international initiatives aimed at protecting children
from the devastation of armed conflict, including the
landmark Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Israel's accession to the Convention was followed by
the adoption of "Basic Law: Human Dignity and
Liberty", a law that ensured that the rights of the child
were guaranteed constitutional protection. The
adoption of that law sparked a flurry of judicial and
legislative activity that broadened and extended the
commitment of Israeli society to the principles of the
Convention.

Our Foreign Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, who
was in New York last week for the general debate,
signed the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, and on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography, signifying Israel's
enduring commitment to preserving the innocence of
youth, as part of a fundamental right enjoyed by all
children. Israel's becoming a signatory to the Optional
Protocols is sure to inspire yet more revisions to Israeli
legislation.

The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/2000/712 correctly draws attention to the
importance of education and to its potential for use and
misuse in times of conflict. The report refers to
separate curriculums that must be unified, and, in
paragraph 46, to "distinct history lessons... [that]
obstruct long-term reconciliation". It draws attention to
the phenomenon whereby schools are used as
recruitment centres and teachers are instructed to
convince children of the nobility and glory of war and
martyrdom.

The significance of these factors cannot be
underestimated. Children who are taught to hate and to
embrace death and violent struggle will not grow up to
be responsible adults prepared to live in peace and to
resolve differences peacefully.

They will, instead, believe in the power and
virtue of force and violence. Conflicts will be
perpetuated in every corner of the globe if teaching the
next generation the skills it needs to succeed in the
world is supplanted by indoctrination into endless
struggle. When it comes to the education of our
children, we must take a long View of the situation and
consider their well-being and the nature of the society
they will inherit.

The scars that war and terror inflict on children
are immeasurable and can result in psychological
problems and antisocial behaviour long after the
conflict has ended. Children will be truly sheltered
from the horrors of war only when terrorism comes to
an end and they are no longer viewed as pawns in a
larger struggle.

In this respect, I would like to express my regret
that the Permanent Representative of Egypt, speaking
about the plight of Palestinian children, did not find it
necessary to utter a single word of concern about the
dozens of Israeli children decimated by Palestinian
terrorism this last year. The 23 Israeli children and
adolescents savagely assassinated by a Palestinian
suicide bomber last June in the Dolphinarium
discotheque attack in Tel-Aviv were totally ignored by
the Permanent Representative of Egypt, as if this
horrific event had never occurred. That is only one
dramatic example in a series of gruesome carnages in
which scores of Israeli children met their deaths. The
fact is that Israel deeply regrets any harm to civilians,
both Israeli and Palestinian, but especially to children,
who should be kept in school rather than on the front
lines of conflict.

I should also like to remind the Permanent
Representative of Egypt that those who incite others to
violence, encourage extremism and tolerate the most
vile anti-Semitic rhetoric in their official media also
bear responsibility for the abuse of Palestinian children
and the continued suffering on both sides.

In closing, I would like to reaffirm our position
that the protection of children in armed conflict is best
achieved by ending armed conflict. Our attempts to
protect the lives and well-being of our children cannot
be separated from our broader efforts to ensure that
peace, security and prosperity extend to every region of
the world.

Promoting peaceful means for the resolution of
conflicts, widening educational opportunities and
teaching our children to value life and the lives of
others will protect not only our children but all of us
from the horrors of war.

