Mr. Burian (Slovakia): As Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), I would like to brief the Security Council on
the progress made by the Committee since the last joint
briefing to the Security Council on 28 September 2006
and to outline some of its forthcoming activities in
2007 in promoting the full implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).

First of all, allow me to provide a few details
about the priorities of the programme of work for the
Committee. On 3 October 2006, the 1540 Committee
adopted its fifth programme of work for the period
loctober 2006 to 30 September 2007. It covers all
aspects of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006),
and reflects the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee to the Security Council of
25 April 2006.

During the past eight months, the Committee has
focused its activities on the following two main areas
of the programme of work: first, increasing its
knowledge by examination of the information on the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including through encouraging the submission of
national reports and additional information and through
further examination of information on the status of the
implementation of all aspects of the resolution; and
secondly, outreach, dialogue, assistance and
cooperation to promote the implementation of all
aspects of the resolution, including through the
following activities: dialogue with States and regions
about full implementation, the sharing of national
experiences, and facilitating technical assistance and
cooperation with other international, regional and
subregional organizations.

With respect to reporting on the implementation
of resolution 1540, the Committee considers the
submission of national reports to be among its top
priorities. Since the last briefing in September 2006,
four States - Antigua and Barbuda, Nicaragua, Tuvalu
and Vanuatu - have submitted their first reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), bringing the
total number of reporting States to 136. Fifty-five
States, mostly in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific
islands region, have yet to submit their first reports. In
order to assist those States in the preparation of their
first reports, in October and November 2006 the
Committee sent them a legislative database and a
partially completed draft matrix prepared by the
Committee's experts for each State to serve as a
starting point. The draft matrices contain relevant
information obtained from official sources, especially
from the websites of Governments and relevant
international organizations. The Committee urged the
States that have not yet reported to do so as soon as
possible. Of the 136 reporting States, 85 have so far
provided additional information and the remaining
States are also encouraged to update their first reports.

The new information has been used to revise the
first matrices. Those will be returned to each State to
review for any missing information and used as a tool
to identify potential gaps that may require further
measures to achieve the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

With respect to outreach activities, on the basis of
an informal paper submitted by the Chairman, the 1540
Committee has adopted a detailed approach to
priorities in organizing outreach activities to promote
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through
dialogue and cooperation among Member States and to
facilitate bilateral and multilateral assistance when
required.

The Committee is engaged in two kinds of outreach
activities: those organized by the United Nations
Department for Disarmament Affairs and those organized
by Governments and other entities, in which
representatives of the Committee or the expert group
make presentations and conduct informal dialogue. Since
the last joint briefing to the Security Council, two
regional outreach seminars have been organized by the
United Nations on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

The Committee's first seminar on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in Africa
was held in Accra, Ghana, on 9 and 10 November
2006. It was organized by the Department for
Disarmament Affairs and cosponsored by the European
Union and the Government of Norway. The seminar
was designed as the first part of an outreach activity
for the 35 African States that have not yet submitted a
first report to the Committee. Fourteen of those
non-reporting States were among the 21 African States
represented at the meeting. The seminar also included
participants and panellists from some reporting African
States, from donor countries and from the relevant
international organizations. Two African subregional
organizations were also represented at the seminar.

Participants at the seminar discussed reporting
requirements, offers of technical assistance from
bilateral and multilateral sources, and the clearing-
house function with respect to the technical assistance
of the 1540 Committee. Future activities in the region
may include another outreach seminar for the
remaining non-reporting States in Africa and
subregional workshops and training programmes
geared to implementation measures.

The second seminar, also organized by the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, was held in
Lima, Peru, on 27 and 28 November 2006 as a follow-
up to the Buenos Aires regional seminar held in
September 2005. It was sponsored by the European
Union and the Government of Spain. The purpose of
the seminar was not only to intensify awareness of the
obligations derived from resolution 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006), but also to discuss ways and means to
achieve the full implementation of those resolutions
and to explore the possibilities for channelling
assistance. Participants from 26 Latin American and
Caribbean States attended the seminar, along with
representatives of the Organization of American States,
the Caribbean Community and the Andean Community.
The seminar also included participants and panellists
from seven Member States outside the region and from
the relevant international organizations.

The seminar recommended that further activities
focus on thematic workshops and training activities at
the subregional level. Accordingly, three such
workshops are being planned in Jamaica, Buenos Aires
and in Brazil - the latter organized by members of the
Common Market of the South and to be held in the
second half of 2007.

In both the Ghana and the Peru seminars, the
participants benefited from presentations made by
representatives of the European Union, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. A useful
contribution was also made by the World Customs
Organization (WCO) at the Ghana seminar.
Representatives of the Committee have also
participated in at least 11 activities organized by
Governments or other entities since the last report to
the Council; this information appears in an annex to the
report. These include activities organized by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Organization of
American States (OAS), the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF), the
Governments of Norway, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, the United States of America and others.
Included among the results of these activities are
recommendations made by the OSCE and the ARF that
their members develop road maps to implement the
resolution; more reports and additional information;
developing points of contact at the national and
international levels; and exploration of practices for
addressing emerging issues such as weapons of mass
destruction, brokering and financing assistance. The
importance of organizing technical and other assistance
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) was
emphasized in all the outreach activities.

In order for the Committee to act effectively as a
clearing house on assistance, it is essential that States
indicate specific areas for facilitating matching
requests with offers of assistance. In view of the
crucial role of assistance for many countries in
facilitating full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), the Committee held a thematic discussion on
this issue on 14 May 2007.

As regards cooperation, the Committee and its
experts have continued to maintain close relations with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1267
Committee. The three teams of experts are focusing on
applying their joint paper on a common strategy for
non-reporting and late reporting States in order to
accelerate the pace of reporting to their respective
Committees.

Concrete steps are now being taken by the three
expert groups, in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to organize subregional
workshops for non-reporting and late reporting States
in Africa, the Caribbean region and from among the
Pacific island States. Other joint efforts pertaining to
reciprocal participation in outreach activities will
continue to develop.
07-35274

The importance of cooperation with relevant
organizations was underscored by resolution 1673 (2006)
and was recently given special emphasis when the
Security Council devoted an open meeting on
23 February (see S/PV.5635), at which States, as well as
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization, explored modalities for practical
cooperation. The Council reiterated its determination to
enhance its cooperation with international organizations
and to develop preferred mechanisms for cooperation
with them on a case-by-case basis, reflecting the
variations in each organization's capacity and mandate,
including in assisting States in their implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006). In future, we
want to expand this cooperation and use the comparative
advantages, potential and expertise of those international
organizations in advancing the process of the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006).

Accordingly, right now a mission of our experts
is visiting the headquarters of the IAEA and the OPCW
to discuss practical arrangements to strengthen our
cooperation. I myself will join them in a few days for a
high-level discussion at the OPCW. In addition to
acknowledging with appreciation the work of
organizations with expertise in the non-proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery, one of the most important results
achieved at the Security Council's open debate was the
affirmation of the Council's determination to promote
increased multilateral cooperation as an important way
to boost worldwide implementation of its three-year-
old resolution 1540 (2004).

As was clearly confirmed in the outcome of that
open debate, the presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/4)
on the issue reminds us, inter alia, that the Security
Council is mindful of the need to further explore with
international, regional and subregional organizations
experience-sharing and lessons learned in the areas
covered by resolution 1540 (2004) and the availability of
programmes that might facilitate implementation of the
resolution.

The Committee will continue to interact and
cooperate with other relevant international
organizations and arrangements and with regional and
subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

On 18 October 2006, the 1540 Committee was
briefed by three representatives of the Nuclear
Suppliers Group on the Group's work having particular
relevance to the work of the Committee; a similar
briefing was given in 2005. On 14 March 2007, the
Committee was briefed by three representatives of the
Missile Technology Control Regime on the role and
activities of the Regime as they relate to the work of
the Committee.

Finally, I will talk about the next steps the
Committee will take. Over the next six months, the
Committee and its experts plan to intensify their efforts
to increase the number of reporting States and the rate
of such reporting through more dialogue with Member
States and tailor-made outreach activities at the
subregional level; some of these will be in cooperation
with other bodies of the United Nations. Furthermore,
the Committee is currently assessing its function of
facilitating bilateral and multilateral assistance for the
implementation of all aspects of resolution 1540
(2004).

In accordance with its current programme of
work, the Committee will explore with other
organizations and with Member States experience-
sharing and lessons learned to facilitate
implementation. It will continue its thematic
discussions on implementing various aspects of the
programme of work. The Committee's website and
legislative database will be regularly updated and
further developed to assist Member States with the
relevant information.

Finally, the Committee will encourage States to
provide additional information on national
implementation as an ongoing process.

