Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

We welcome recent positive signals coming from
Afghanistan. As the transition approaches completion,
we see promising signs that Afghans are ready to
assume responsibility for their future.

We are moving towards the fifth tranche of
transition, with 87 per cent of the Afghan population
already under Afghan-led security. The decline in
security-related incidents is a positive signal. The
capabilities of Afghan security forces are developing.
Boosting their capacities and competence further, under
the rule of law framework, remains a key priority.

The preparations for the 2014 elections are well
under way. We support all efforts towards achieving
a democratic and inclusive political process through
independent, free and fair elections, with the
participation of political parties and civil society. In
that regard, we commend the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United
Nations Development Programme.

Transition and reconciliation processes are mutually
reinforcing. The successful continuation of Afghan-led
peace and reconciliation efforts will constitute another
important step towards security, stability and political
transition. We welcome progress in that area under the
successful guidance of Mr. Rabbani, head of the High
Peace Council, as well as the political facilitation efforts
of UNAMA. The concrete support by the Government
of Pakistan for Afghan peace and reconciliation efforts
is noteworthy. Turkey will continue to support the
process, keeping the best interests of the Afghan people
in mind.

Despite those positive signs, major political,
economic and security challenges remain. The
security situation continues to be a matter of grave
concern, leading to unacceptable human costs. Natural
disasters, chronic poverty and development challenges
pose grave threats. The most vulnerable segments of
society, especially children, women and girls, are
under heightened risk. The potential humanitarian and
economic consequences of transition are worrisome.

As Afghanistan moves forward towards political and
security transitions, we must remain in touch with those
realities on the ground. We commend the constructive
steps taken by the Afghan people and Government to
overcome those problems. The continued display of
will from the international community will strengthen
the hopes of the Afghan people for the future and help
to ensure that a smooth transition is under way.

In that regard, we are glad to see increased efforts
to move to substantive issues in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, both from the Afghan
Government and the international community, to ensure
the concrete implementation of mutual commitments.
We commend the endorsement of the new national
priority programmes and the aid management policy.

As the international presence is being reduced,
regional cooperation is gaining momentum. The
Istanbul Process has surpassed all expectations with
its speedy progress. The spirit of regional ownership,
the engagement and technical support of the United
Nations and its agencies and the interest and support of
the international community have made that possible.
We were pleased to see the endorsement, at the meeting
of senior officials held in Baku on 6 February, of the
implementation plans for the six confidence-building
measures. The next meeting of senior officials, which
is to be held on 25 March in Kabul, will smooth out
the final details of the implementation plans, which
have been endorsed in principle. The momentum will
be strengthened even further at the next ministerial
meeting to be held in Almaty on 26 April 4 the only
meeting on Afghanistan thus far scheduled at the
Foreign Ministers' level for 2013.

Trilateral and quadrilateral initiatives are
important tools for fostering regional ownership in
the Heart of Asia process. In that spirit, the trilateral
summit process among Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Turkey has contributed to regional dialogue and
cooperation through the seven meetings held since
2007. The most recent trilateral meeting, convened in
Ankara last December under the theme "Connectivity",
focused on political dialogue, military and security
issues, peace and reconciliation efforts, and economic
development and partnership. Further connectivity will
facilitate economic development, stability and self-
sustainability. We attach particular importance to the
completion and maintenance of local railroad and land
routes, the development of regional economic projects
and the enhancement of civil aviation capabilities.

We welcome all projects and cooperation efforts
to foster further regional connectivity and economic
growth. The constructive engagement of Afghanistan's
regional partners will remain key to addressing
common challenges, such as terrorism, barriers to trade
and investment, drug-trafficking and refugees.

As Afghanistan's regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to
the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is in all of our mutual interests.
Turkey will always remain in solidarity with the Afghan
people and will continue to contribute to a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done for many
decades.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
belief that the United Nations will continue to play its
crucial role after the transition. I would like to take this
opportunity to especialy commend the valuable efforts
of the United Nations, and of UNAMA in particular, in
taking the Istanbul Process further, as well as to express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative Jan
Kubis and his hard-working team.

