Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As
indicated in his report (S/ZOll/682, annex), the
situation in the country is still complex. However, a
number of positive achievements must also be noted.

Although we have not achieved all that was
planned with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
integration into European Union (EU), strong
commitment, support and dedication to that aim exists,
not only among the political leadership but also among
the wider population of the country. We are dedicated
to fulfilling remaining conditions to receive candidate
status for European Union membership as early as
possible.

Furthermore, we welcome the decision of the
European Union to appoint Mr. Peter Sarensen as its
Special Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That decision represents a welcome consolidation of
the European Union's presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which should result in better guidance of
the reform process towards the country's accession to
the European Union.
11-59360

We welcome the decision of the High
Representative to lift the sanctions against certain
individuals from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unfortunately, since the holding of elections on
3 October 2010, a new Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has not yet been formed. However,
we have established all of the country's other
institutions, which are fulfilling their responsibilities.

Moreover, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has played an important role in advancing
and promoting relations with neighbouring countries
and strengthening regional cooperation. The
Presidency has also met important challenges with
regard to foreign policy, such as extending the mandate
for Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces in the
International Security Assistance Force, as well as the
decision to recognize the National Transitional Council
of the Libyan Republic.

Regardless of the political difficulties, we have a
secure and safe environment and a positive security
situation. The overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been calm and stable for several
years, as reflected in reports of the European Union
Force and European Union Operation Althea, with
which our armed forces have very good and productive
cooperation. During the reporting period, law
enforcement agencies in our country have had good
cooperation with the European Union Police Mission,
particularly in fighting organized crime and corruption,
as well as in promoting accountability within police
bodies.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has also had good
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, not only during the
reporting period but for years. The State strategy for
processing war crimes has contributed significantly to
reconciliation in our country. Furthermore, a database
on war crimes has been established, while
categorization and determination as to the level -
whether State or entity - at which identified war
crimes cases shall be investigated and/or tried is under
way. The prosecution of all those responsible in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is a precondition not only for
reconciliation, but for the peace and stability of our
country and entire region.
The economic and social situation in the country
is difficult. In our view, one of the main causes for
such a situation is the world economic and financial
crisis. However, as indicated in the report, economic
data for 2011 show some signs of improvement.
Exports from Bosnia and Herzegovina have increased,
while total industrial production rose by 7.7 per cent.

Bearing in mind the positive developments, we
are convinced that there is a way to overcome the
current situation, which is complex but not
un-resolvable. We must build a constructive
atmosphere that will foster positive political processes
and a spirit of cooperation in resolving existing
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same
time, we appreciate the valuable support of the
international community in realizing our goals of
Euro-Atlantic integration.

