Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia would like
to thank the United States for convening this very
important debate. We also thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, along with the other briefers, for their
valuable comments.

Let me begin by quoting from Article I of the
Charter of the United Nations:

"The Purposes of the United Nations are: To
maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace".

Now, even though United Nations peacekeeping is
not present in the Charter in letters and words, it has
become an indispensable tool for enabling international
peace. It has become the flagship of the United Nations.
We should be mindful that, since United Nations
peacekeeping is a collective undertaking, it best
achieves its aims when all stakeholders f the Security
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, the

host Government and the Secretariat - are on the
same page.

Today I am accompanied by Police Brigadier
General Krishna Murti, who sits behind me. He is
the Head of the Bureau of International Missions of
the Indonesian National Police. He is in charge of the
deployment of police peacekeepers and also served
in the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium and
in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. I am also accompanied by Army Brigadier
General Fulad, who also served in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.

The point is simple. Sometimes we tend to speak
in this Chamber without knowing what is happening
on the ground. With these two people, and those that
have been serving in various missions, we could have
a clearer picture of what is happening and what the
problems are. I have not brought these two gentlemen
here to showcase them; it is to help them understand
what we are talking about here in the Chamber so that
they can transpose this information back to the troops
as to what should and should not be done. That will
provide a clear linkage between those that are serving
bravely as Blue Helmets on the ground and us sitting in
this nice air-conditioned and well-furnished Chamber.

I start with this very important point simply to
stress once again that I will not simply repeat that
which has been stated by my colleagues before me, but
I shall highlight several pertinent points that we deem
necessary. This is an opportune moment and I believe
our time to make a real contribution to peacekeeping
is now.

Considering the dangerous security environment
for many peacekeeping missions in recent years, we
in Indonesia commend the Secretary-General for his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We were involved
in that because we believe that what we are doing is
something that should be done correctly. We would
also like to highlight that all clusters under Action for
Peacekeeping are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
In that context, we would like to present a few points.

First, since the mandate ofa peacekeeping mission
is the logical basis for setting its key performance
indicators, the mandate can no longer be a Christmas
tree. Peacekeeping missions cannot be a substitute for
United Nations special political missions and other
peacebuilding work. The primacy of politics and the
realization of credible peace agreements on the ground
must be among the priorities in designing mandates.
There should be clear, focused, sequenced, prioritized,
realistic and achievable mandates that should be
backed up with required resources. I think many of
us have elaborated on this. The Secretariat will also
need to propose robust parameters for sequencing and
prioritizing mandates in close consultation with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs).

Secondly, the necessary capabilities must be
deployed so that peacekeepers can protect themselves
and the local population. We need to better train, prepare
and equip peacekeepers, including through triangular
partnerships and co-deployments. We need to utilize
peacekeeping centres with the ability to adequately
train peacekeepers in keeping with the flavour of the
region. I am not trying to promote our peacekeeping
centres - we have centres in Indonesia that have
been doing quite well, with more than 30 countries
involved - but the point is that we must share all this
knowledge with all other peacekeeping centres around
the world so that we all have the same understanding
and feeling of what should be done.

Thirdly, all United Nations peacekeeping
components should be up to the mark. In this respect,
we thank the Secretary-General for his commitment
to developing an integrated performance policy
framework based on common parameters and clear
standards for all actors. As one of the largest troop-
and police-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping, we would like to appeal to the Council
not to design a performance system that will create
competition for TCCs and PCCs. Peacekeeping is
supposedly a platform on which nations can work hand
in hand in contributing to international peace and
security, not the other way around.

One prevailing example is regarding repatriation
due to underperformance, It would be more efficient
and less costly if the United Nations or other Member
States could help the underperforming contingent with
the necessary capabilities and in-mission training,
rather than having them repatriated and getting a fresh
contingent to replace them. That is the most cost-
effective way, as the new selection process will only
cost us time and money.

Finally, Indonesia stresses the meaningful
participation of women in peacekeeping. A recent research
study noted that involving women - be it as witnesses,
signatories, mediators or negotiators - increases the
probability of achieving successful peace agreements
that will last at least two years by 20 per cent. That figure
has risen over time, with a 35 per cent increase in the
probability of achieving successful peace agreements
that last for more than 15 years. It is also evident that
the involvement of female peacekeepers in missions
has been effective in preventing and combating sexual
exploitation and abuse.

We are pleased to say that Indonesia is taking direct
action; we are walking the walk and talking the talk.
We have embedded 40 brave women into our recent
rapidly deployable battalion for deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and our formed
police unit to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic later this year. Another 40 women will be
deployed under the wing of my Brigadier General,
and I have his assurance here that he will fulfil his
promise. This will add to our total of more than 3,600
peacekeepers on the ground, making Indonesia the
seventh highest-ranking troop-contributing country.

Let me conclude by reiterating the fundamental
importance of strengthening the United Nations
peacekeeping partnership as a genuinely cooperative,
well-supported and collective undertaking, with
realistic expectations and clear benchmarks. For its
part, Indonesia will always support initiatives that
bolster United Nations peacekeeping substantively
for its ultimate aim of helping to spawn a nationally
owned endeavour to build and sustain long-term peace
and development.

I would like to echo my dear sister, the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, who spoke a few moments
before me, who said simply "just do it". I would like to
that add that we should not only just do it, but that we
must do it much better this time.

