Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the victims and to all
those affected by the earthquake that struck Haiti
yesterday. Our support goes to the Government and the
people of Haiti in their rescue and recovery efforts.
Our sympathy also goes to the families of all United
Nations personnel currently in Haiti; our thoughts are
with them.

Mr. President, we would like to thank you for
convening today's debate on improving cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. We would also like to thank
the representatives of those organizations for sharing
with the Council their latest accomplishments,
challenges and experiences with respect to enhanced
cooperation and coordination among themselves and
with the United Nations. This debate is timely, given
the new and enduring threats and obstacles to
international peace and security. Some of these
challenges call for determined action and more
coordinated and vigorous engagement.

One of the most complex examples of regional
and international collaboration to date took place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Even though the cooperation
in peacemaking and peacebuilding was complex and
difficult, the process ultimately resulted in peace.
Moreover, the experience in Bosnia and Herzegovina
contributed to the development of institutional
knowledge, strategies and tools subsequently applied in
other war-torn regions.

As a result of our own experience, we believe
that international organizations can ultimately
complement one another's efforts. While regional
organizations can contribute knowledge of local
circumstances in pursuit of peace and security, the
United Nations possesses legitimacy, the power to
mandate, institutional knowledge, resources and
experience.

The complementary roles of the United Nations
and regional organizations in several key spheres have
contributed to peace and security. For instance,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nation, regional and subregional organizations
have worked together in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. Operations in Liberia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the
Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo, Afghanistan and
other places have been carried out jointly between
regional organizations and the United Nations. We
should reaffirm once again our commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes within such
frameworks.

There is an increasing awareness that some
peacekeeping missions may need to grow into
peacebuilding missions. We should support such
transformation because, more often than not, long-term
regional peace and security depends upon the internal
stability of States. Regional organizations can act as
bridges when ownership of a peace process is
transferred from international organizations to
domestic authorities.

The fight against international terrorism is
another area where the aforementioned cooperation is
required, as is the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Regarding the latter issue, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) has called for closer
coordination of efforts on the international, national,
regional and subregional levels. Sharing information in
a timely manner can prove essential in addressing these
issues.

The roles and responsibilities of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention are
important. In this context, cooperation and
information-sharing can enhance early warning system
for conflict prevention. Hence, the development of
regional safeguards should be encouraged, so as to help
create coherent and well-built frameworks to address
such security concerns.

In addition, it is essential to tackle cross-border
problems, for the sake not only of regional but also of
global peace and security. Issues such as illicit drug
trafficking, crime prevention, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
problems of displaced persons and refugees and
trafficking in human beings, to name but a few, can be
further integrated into existing frameworks of
cooperation.

To streamline efforts between regional
organizations and the United Nations is particularly
critical when dealing with the response to natural
disasters. Natural disasters require a quick and well
managed response. This is especially relevant and
challenging, since there is always a link between
natural disasters and long-term economic and other
kinds of security.

The success of cooperation between regional
organizations and the United Nations relies on a
common vision and common goals. Moreover, reaching
those goals will require a flexible but systemic
approach in which coordination mechanisms ensure the
optimal use of time and resources. Such cooperation
enables countries which only yesterday were subjects
of international peace endeavours to actively take part
in such efforts today.

In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement that has been circulated.

