Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's important discussion. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for their very valuable inputs into this
important issue.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be made
on behalf of the European Union and the statement to be
delivered later today by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Nordic countries.

We live in a world where most of the challenges we
face are common and increasingly interconnected. The
issues of transnational crime, illicit financial flows,
the negative effects of climate change and the threat
of terrorism - to name but a few - have little respect
for national borders. This is no less true on the African
continent than anywhere else. The security threats
facing African countries are the threats that face us all.
They are regional manifestations of global phenomena.
Thus, when African countries respond, they respond on
behalf of us all.
Supporting and further strengthening African
capabilities to deal with threats to peace and security
is therefore essential to our common and global efforts.
In Africa, the African Union (AU), working with other
regional and subregional actors, is already playing a
central role in enabling regional unity and action. The
recently adopted resolution 2359 (2017), welcoming
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, is
an important example of how the Security Council
is moving towards supporting enhanced regional
cooperation and ownership to address such common
security threats.

As we all know, prevention is the best cure. The
response to the crisis in the Gambia earlier this year
illustrates how active diplomacy at the subregional
level, through the Economic Community of West
African States - reinforced at the regional level by
the African Union and with the strong backing of a
united Security Council - contributed to ending the
crisis. There are important lessons to be learned from
the Gambia experience, particularly regarding the
importance of regional unity and aligned action, which
can help guide action in similar situations in Africa
and beyond.

Tomorrow, we will discuss the crisis in the South
Sudan. Close coordination among the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
United Nations is essential to achieving a ceasefire and
resuming an inclusive political process.

Enhanced regional capacities will allow regional
actors to undertake operations and work in environments
where they are best placed to do so. We welcome the
current momentum around the United Nations-African
Union partnership agenda. We must now act to seize
this win-win opportunity. The leadership is in place.
Since the very beginning of his tenure, the Secretary-
General has rightly underscored the importance of the
mutually beneficial partnership between the United
Nations and Africa as central to the sustaining peace
agenda. The Secretary-General has a partner in the
African Union leadership, represented here today by
the Commissioner for Peace and Security.

The framework for collaboration and cooperation
is also in place. The recently signed Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security underlines our
shared commitment. The joint efforts of the Secretary-
General and the Commission Chairperson to advance
the partnership, not least through recent reports and the
implementation of resolution 2320 (2016), are welcome
and encouraging. With the leadership and framework in
place, what is now needed to realize the full potential
of the partnership is the stronger financial and better
calibrated political support.

We recognize the need for flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions, and we
look forward to continued discussion on the modalities.
Sweden is ready to play its part and looks forward to
engaging further on this issue, based on the proposals
laid out in the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/454).
In addition, as a member of the European Union (EU),
we are proud of the long-standing and considerable EU
support to the African Union's peace operations and
the African Peace and Security Architecture, not least
through the African Peace Facility.

In Somalia, we see important work being carried
out by the African Union, the European Union and the
United Nations, separately as well as through genuine
collaboration. In this context, let me also underline the
need for continued financing for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which is crucial to stability and
peace in Somalia. We understand that the fight against
Al-Shabaab in Somalia is part ofthe global right against
terrorism. Based on the positive experience in Somalia,
we would welcome further opportunities for a trilateral
collaborative platform among the three organizations.
Moving forward on this agenda will require substantial
and sustained political investment, including on the
part of the Security Council.

Our efforts to enhance African capabilities must
go beyond strengthening military responses. Holistic
approaches to peacebuilding across the conflict cycle are
needed. Such approaches include structural prevention,
as well as building strong and inclusive institutions.
They also require scaled-up efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and underdevelopment, including by
ensuring respect for human rights, also within peace
operations, and the inclusion of women in mediation
and peace processes. Taken together, the AU Agenda
2063, the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustaining peace agenda can offer
a framework for this work.

The upcoming annual consultation with the AU
Peace and Security Council, followed by the plenary
session of the General Assembly, both in September;
the AU-EU Summit in Abidjan in November; as well
as a sequence of discussions planned in the Council all
offer opportunities to move forward with this agenda.
Let us fully seize these opportunities.

