Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by expressing my congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to pay tribute to the
representative of Guinea-Bissau for the manner in which
he guided the Council during last month.

We welcome the initiative of the Security Council to
consider the situation in Afghanistan, in accordance with
the Almaty declaration. The problem of Afghanistan, the
untold suffering and misery of its people, and the
instability it has caused in the region have received only
scant international attention in the past five years. The
international community, and particularly those with a
greater degree of influence, have long been aloof to the
violence, bloodshed and collapse of the collective-security
doctrine in Afghanistan.

 

Following the withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan, the people of that country were, regrettably,
trapped in a vicious circle of violence and fratricide, which
further added to the terrible plight of the Afghan people and
the destruction of the country's infrastructures.

As a neighbouring country linked to Afghanistan by
many commonalities beyond merely having common
borders, the Islamic Republic of Iran has adopted a twofold
policy towards the situation in Afghanistan from the very
beginning. We have rendered humanitarian assistance to the
people of Afghanistan by hosting millions of its refugees
and by sending the basic needs of the Afghan people to that
country, often on a daily basis. At the same time, we have
spared no effort to encourage the warring factions in
Afghanistan to settle their differences through dialogue and
peaceful means.

High-ranking officials of the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran have spent weeks and months in
different parts of Afghanistan to facilitate such a dialogue
between different factions. The fratricidal conflict between
Afghan factions - all of which are Islamic - was so
appalling to the Islamic Republic of Iran that our leader
found it imperative to intervene above and beyond
Government contacts and to appeal in the name of Islam to
all Afghan leaders to put an end to violence and bloodshed.

In August 1995, the personal envoy of the leader of
the Islamic Republic of Iran met with the leaders of Afghan
factions and delivered the personal message of Ayatollah
Khamenei to the effect that, in his judgement, further
violence, bloodshed and fratricide in Afghanistan are
unjustified on the basis of Islam, and thus Afghan leaders
are under Islamic duty to proscribe them.

Despite the recent developments and the escalation of
violence in Afghanistan, our basic policy towards that
country remains the same. We continue to believe that this
unfortunate conflict in Afghanistan has no military solution.
All Afghan parties and those who are concerned about the
situation in Afghanistan should be cognizant of the fact that
peace and stability cannot be restored to that country
through war. In our opinion, there is no justification for the
violence and bloodshed in Afghanistan and no faction or
State can endorse the ongoing violence in the name of
Islam. There is already a convenient tendency to label Islam
as a religion of the past, ill-equipped to deal with modern
problems. Muslims must therefore avoid attributing to Islam
policies and practices that are evidently not only un-Islamic
but also anti-Islamic, so as not to fuel this flame.

 

The transitory and temporary nature of ongoing
developments in Afghanistan is indicative of the fact that
only through the cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of a broad-based Government composed of
all religious and ethnic groups and supported by the
people of Afghanistan can peace and security be
guaranteed in that country. The international community,
countries in the region and others with influence should
support and facilitate the establishment of these two
important goals. The Security Council should play its role
in this regard and adopt effective measures to set in place
mechanisms for the immediate cessation of hostilities and
the establishment of a broad-based Government. Likewise
the General Assembly, which mandated the Special
Mission to Afghanistan, should redouble its efforts to
fulfil the obligation of the Organization towards one of its
Members. Needless to say, only a broad-based
Government free from foreign interference can protect
and guarantee the rights of all Afghan people.

Afghanistan has been a united and sovereign State
and should remain so. Any idea of undermining the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Afghanistan will
surely have a disastrous impact on the security of the
region as a whole. In this context, while underlining the
right of Afghan people to choose their own path, the
Islamic Republic of Iran cannot remain indifferent to
developments that might affect its national security.

We are determined, as we were in the past, to
cooperate and coordinate with the neighbouring State of
Afghanistan, the United Nations and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference to bring peace and security to
Afghanistan and to our region. In this context, given the
recent developments in Afghanistan, we have redoubled
our efforts to convene a regional conference in Tehran
later this month, with the participation of regional foreign
ministers and representatives of the United Nations and of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Furthermore,
we believe that the idea of holding a United Nations
meeting of interested countries to emphasize the concerns
of the international community on the situation in
Afghanistan is attractive and deserves serious
consideration.

After nearly two decades of harsh reality, misery and
loss of life, it is time for the international community to
set aside political expediencies and narrow national
interests and rivalries to enable the Afghan people to
enjoy a life of peace, security and tranquillity. The
international community should shoulder its responsibility
and help the Afghan people to realize this long-overdue

 

but simple dream. The Islamic Republic of Iran stands
ready to actively participate in any initiative or measures
which aim to stop further violence and bloodshed, and
bring peace and security to Afghanistan and to the region
as a whole.

