Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation
commends, with thanks, the French presidency for
convening this briefing on the cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union (EU). We thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks this morning.
Let me warmly welcome Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union. We thank Ms. Mogherini for
her very comprehensive briefing, especially on the

global challenges we face in the world today and on the
multifaceted cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.

It is well established that the cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations strengthens
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security, prevent conflict and restore stability in
post-conflict situations. Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations provides the framework
for the participation of regional and subregional
organizations in matters related to international peace
and security under the Security Council's authority.
Such organizations complement the work of the United
Nations with comparative advantages, providing
knowledge of specific regional issues and better
understanding of the causes of conflict.

The current security challenges demand the
strengthening of cooperation between the UnitedNations
and regional organizations in crisis management,
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, which no country or
organization can meet alone. We therefore acknowledge
the European Union's commitment to multilateralism.
Its cooperation with the United Nations, in focus and
scope, is a clear demonstration of that.

Angola values greatly the Joint Africa-EU Strategy
and the road map adopted at the fourth EU-Africa
Summit, held in Brussels in April 2014, which provides
the long-term framework for Africa-EU relations, to be
implemented on the basis ofj ointly identified priorities,
including peace and security, democratic governance,
human rights, sustainable development and global
and emerging issues. The Africa-EU partnership also
enhanced the dialogue between the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council and the EU Political and
Security Committee. The annual meetings between
these two bodies are important tools in supporting AU
efforts in the area of peace and security.

The EU provision of capacity-building in Somalia
and its direct and sustained effort in support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia from its beginning
has played an instrumental role in bringing stability
and, we hope, sustainable peace to that country. We are
now beginning to see some good signs of this.

In Mali, the EU remains committed to supporting

the stabilization process at the political, security,
humanitarian and development levels through the
implementation of the framework of the EU Strategy
for Security and Development in the Sahel in response
to the complex challenges in Mali and in the region of
the Sahel. We welcome the launching on 19 January of
the EU Common Security and Defence Policy mission
in Mali to help Mali ensure the return of constitutional
and democratic order.

The Central African Republic is one of the most
notorious cases of extensive cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations, as well as
other regional organizations. The establishment, on
19 January, of an EU military advisory mission to
provide expert advice on the reform of the security
sector is a decision that will have an important impact
on the country's stabilization.

I strongly commend the EU for its support to Guinea
Bissau, a brother country to which we are particularly
attached. As Guinea Bissau's main development partner,
we are particularly pleased that the European Union has
lifted the restrictions to cooperation with Guinea Bissau
after the return of constitutional order to the country
and the push made by the present authorities to change
the military leadership. The cooperation extended by
the EU to Guinea Bissau in conflict prevention and
the provision of water and energy, aimed at restoring
the basic livelihood of the people of Guinea Bissau,
is most welcome. The budgetary support that is being
given to the State is another means to provide the
conditions for a decent life to the country's citizens. We
also value the cooperation in capacity-building aimed
at strengthening institutions, improving governance,
promoting national reconciliation and macroeconomic
stability, and the allocation of resources for projects
addressing cross-cutting issues, such as gender, child
protection, the environment and the support of civil
society organizations of Guinea Bissau.

We acknowledge and welcome the leading role the
EU is playing in finding solutions to crisis situation in
the Western Balkans, in particular the involvement of
the European Union in the normalization of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo. Angola also commends the
commitment of the EU towards the diplomatic efforts
aimed at finding a political and peaceful solution to
the Ukrainian conflict and the continued economic and
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine.

Angola encourages the EU to maintain the
influence it is exerting towards finding solutions to a
number of global issues, which have been presented
very well today to the Security Council by the High
Representative. We therefore would like Ms. Mogherini
to come back to the Security Council to strengthen this
important cooperation between our two bodies.

