Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I first wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the entire team of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for their valuable
assistance in updating the aide-memoire that we expect
to adopt today on issues pertaining the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

It has been more than five years since we last
revised the aide-memoire, in 2003 (S/PRST/2003/27, annex). Since then, the substance of the matter has not
changed much, except that it has become more
compelling for the international community to act in
unison with a view to protecting civilians in an
increasingly volatile security environment. Indeed, it is
extremely unfortunate - and, in fact, unacceptable -
that the majority of casualties in armed conflicts
continue to be civilians. Therefore we condemn in the
strongest possible terms all deliberate attacks on
civilians and the deaths resulting from the
indiscriminate and excessive use of force.

Actually, what is happening in Gaza today is a
living example of the tragedy that the civilians suffer in
such armed conflicts. Indeed, the crisis, which has
entered its nineteenth day with more than 900 dead and
over 4,000 injured - one third of whom are children -
comprises all the elements set out in the aide-memoire,
ranging from misconduct of hostilities and the plight of
the displaced people to lack of humanitarian access.

I am aware that this is not a specific debate on the
tragic situation in Gaza, but it is absolutely relevant to
what we are discussing today. So allow me to express
our strong appeal to all the parties involved to cease
the hostilities without further delay and comply with
the terms of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).

In view of the time constraints and the long list of
speakers, I shall be brief.

First of all, I wish to underline that protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is a common concern for us
all and constitutes an issue of top priority for the entire
international community. Of course, the best protection
that can be offered to civilians is to prevent armed
conflicts in the first place. However, we do not live in a
perfect world. Therefore, in cases when prevention of
armed conflict is not possible, protection of civilians is
of utmost importance.

There is no doubt that the primary obligation for
protecting civilians lies with States. However, the
international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. Therefore, we need to build
a collective awareness of the importance of this
responsibility and must be able to agree on the
fundamental guidelines.

The new aide-memoire that we expect to adopt
today thus provides us with a convenient guide. We
now need to make best use of these guidelines in
addressing the actual problems on the ground,
including in our decisions on peacekeeping mandates,
because these problems lie with implementation rather
than norm-setting. For instance, we are pleased to see
that the legal framework for the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts is largely in place. Nevertheless, the
implementation of international instruments continues
to face serious challenges, for manifold reasons. We
must thus be able to translate our legal commitments
into practical deeds and action.

A case in point is related to the fight against
terrorism. Indeed, terrorist organizations, whose
primary aim is to inflict random violence on civilian
and military targets alike, do not feel bound by any
international legal framework. However, a number of
members of the international community still fail to
implement their commitments in the face of terrorist
threats and acts.

Therefore, we must look into ways and means to
further improve and coordinate our joint fight against
this scourge, which is an integral part of our
responsibility to protect. This is another area where
individual endeavours of countries can achieve only
limited objectives. It should thus be a collective effort
in which all Members of the United Nations unite
around common principles and goals. It is with this
understanding that we join the presidential statement's
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

There are still many aspects of the responsibility
to protect civilians in armed conflicts that require
further and careful elaboration, including the dire
circumstances faced by displaced people, including
children and women, as well as the issues of small
arms and land mines. But even more importantly, we
should approach the question of protecting civilians
from a much wider angle, ensuring continued stability
and peace in conflict-ridden States, in particular
through strengthening the rule of law, human rights,
democracy and good governance, which is crucial for
long-term and lasting protection of civilians.

Likewise, we should ensure that the perpetrators
of violence against civilians are held fully accountable
for their actions. They should be fully aware that they
will face justice in all cases, for sustainable prevention
and protection would be impossible if there is
impunity. The international community has a duty to do
more in this direction through capacity-building and
technical assistance.
In closing, I should like to underline once again
that the issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a cause that the international community must
pursue with total determination. Two further reports of
the Secretary-General, on protection of civilians and on
sexual violence, are expected to be published in late
May and June 2009 respectively, and Turkey will
assume the presidency of the Security Council in June.
Thus, protection issues are likely to be prominent on
the Council's agenda during that period, and we will do
our best to contribute to the work of the Security
Council on this topic.

