Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation, I
wish to thank the delegation of Lithuania for organizing
this briefing and to warmly welcome you, Foreign
Minister, to preside over this meeting.

I also thank your Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, Sir, for the leadership she has
provided during your delegation's presidency of the
Security Council. Both our Missions are led by women
of considerable ability; perhaps that lends itself to the
close affinity and cooperation that we enjoy.

I should like to thank Her Excellency
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the European
Union, for her briefing today, as well as to inform her
of the very close cooperation that we have with the
delegation of the European Union (EU) in New York on
all matters in the General Assembly and the Security
Council. On behalf of my delegation, I also wish to
personally thank Baroness Ashton for the budget
adopted in 2013 for the Africa-EU strategic partnership
initiative, amounting to approximately €30.5 billion,
which her delegation kindly informed us about.

We wish also to thank His Excellency the Secretary-
General, with whom we enjoy a very close - almost
daily - relationship and contact, for his leadership in
consolidating and engaging the relationship between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly his commitment to the New Partnership for
Africa's Development and the African Union's peace
and security initiatives.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
was visionary as it laid the foundation for the United
Nations and regional organizations to work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises. Indeed, many
regional and subregional organizations have developed
strategies to effectively engage in conflict prevention
and mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, while
drawing on lessons learned from the efforts of the United
Nations in those areas. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and securiy
is a growing trend and a win-win partnership. It has
been demonstrated time and again that regional and
subregional organizations can contribute their usually
proximate understanding of local and regional conflicts
and their root causes, as well as their capacity to
respond.

The long-standing cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations now covers the entire spectrum
of response to international crises - from immediate
crisis reaction, humanitarian action, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding to development - even beyond the
European continent. It must also be acknowledged that
the EU is a committed partner that provides substantial
support in capacity-building for regional organizations.
We note the significant contributions of the EU to
economic development and the stabilization of the
Western Balkans region in order to further promote
democracy, economic prosperity, stability and regional
cooperation. We encourage the parties to deepen their
constructive engagement.

The EU remains an important partner, as the
African Union continues to develop the African Peace
and Security Architecture. In Somalia, for instance,
European initiatives such as Operation Atalanta
and EUCAP Nestor have contributed significantly
to improving security in the Horn of Africa. We
acknowledge the ongoing efforts of the EU in attempting
to stabilize conflict situations in Mali and the Central
African Republic. The provision oftechnical assistance,
expertise and capacity-building to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is a clear demonstration of the EU's commitment
to the security and development not only of Mali,
but of the broader Sahel region. The decision of the
EU to establish a temporary operation to support the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic in order to protect the civilian
population and aid in the provision of humanitarian
assistance is yet more evidence of the way in which
regional organizations can cooperate with each other in
the interest of peace and security.
The credentials of the EU also reflect the values,
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Its support for the promotion of
security, development, good governance and human
rights across the world is well documented. The EU has
also been strident in supporting concerted international
action in the protection ofcivilians in situations ofarmed
conflict. Those and other humanitarian endeavours,
including its support for enhancing the role of women
in conflict resolution, demonstrate the capacity of the
EU for cooperation on a global scale.

I should also take this opportunity to underline
the importance of the cooperation that exists between
the United Nations and the African Union. In 2006,
the AU and the United Nations reached an agreement
on a 10-year capacity building programme for the
AU, which provides the main framework for United
Nations assistance to the AU. Under the programme,
the United Nations has supported the AU in areas such
as capacity-building for mediation, electoral assistance
and technical assistance to the AU's Peace and Security
Council. The United Nations and the AU have also
worked for the maintenance of peace and security
through collaboration in peacekeeping operations on
the African continent. The Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council have, through their annual
consultations, held discussions on issues of common
interest, especially conflict situations in Africa. Those
consultations are mutually beneficial, as they allow for
close coordination of the actions of the AU and United
Nations in matters of peace and security. We believe
that the process could benefit from a strengthening
of the policy-level coordination between the two
organizations.

We would like to reiterate our strong support for the
engagement between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in line with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. We see the EU as
a good example of how that engagement can work for
the maintenance of international peace and security. As
reflected in S/PRST/2014/4, which was just adopted, we
would like to see that engagement strengthened.

