The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Antonio for his briefing.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/20l4/917, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, the Russian Federation, Rwanda and the
United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2195 (2014).

I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and African
Integration of Chad.

I would like to thank all colleagues who travelled
here to take part in this meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
for their briefings.

I welcome the fact that Chad, as a member of the
Security Council for the first time, took the initiative
on the first resolution on the dangerous and growing
linkage between terrorism and cross-border crime. It
highlights the importance of enhanced cooperation
among States and the strengthening of capacity-
building and coordination of the United Nations in
the efforts to combat these two phenomena, which are
mutually strengthening in many cases. We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2195 (2014).

Terrorism and cross-border crime are two
phenomena that have a very negative impact on
international peace and security, particularly in the
Middle East, in Central Asia and in Africa. The African
continent, unfortunately, is facing more and more these
two phenomena. In recent years, the terrorist and
criminal acts that have been perpetrated by groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the
Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa, Ansar
Al-Sharia, the Lord's Resistance Army and Al-Shabaab,
to just mention a few, have stepped up their intensity
in the Sahel, in the Maghreb and in West, Central and
East Africa. Those groups have shown themselves to
be the most dangerous, stepping up attacks against
civilians, including women and children, and United
Nations personnel, particularly peacekeepers, and their
installations and infrastructure. They finance their
activities through the payment of ransoms and all sorts
of trafficking.

The factors that contribute to that state of affairs
are, among others, the weakness of States with regard
to extending their authority over their entire territory:
weak cooperation and coordination between States
in legal and security matters; a high level of youth
unemployment; and broad poverty. Groups of terrorists
and criminals use those weaknesses to recruit and to
grow. Faced with the scale of the threat, the actions
taken by States and organizations against terrorists and
criminals must be reinforced.

With regard to Africa, we must seek to strengthen
our cooperation and coordination through the
mechanisms set up by the African Union, the regional
economic communities and individual States. From
that point of View, the summit of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union held in Nairobi on
2 September, under the chairmanship of Chad, called
upon the African Union Commission to consider,
among other measures, establishing a special fund to
combat terrorism, establishing special combat units
at the subregional and regional levels, strengthening
the legal framework for combating terrorism through
cooperation among police forces, and establishing an
African arrest warrant against those who carry out and
abet terrorist acts, as well as a mechanism to help to dry
up the sources of funding for terrorism.

In that regard, we should point out that one of the
principal sources for the financing ofterrorism in Africa
is the payment of ransoms to terrorist groups. Despite
the decision of the African Union against the payment
of ransoms and despite Security Council resolution
2133 (2014), we note with regret that terrorists continue
to benefit, directly or indirectly, from the payment

of ransoms or from political concessions by States
whose citizens are taken hostage. Furthermore, drug
trafficking, often linked with other forms of organized
crime, including trafficking in weapons and in human
beings, the illicit trafficking of natural resources, such
as wildlife and coal, corruption and money laundering
are all a source of growing destabilization and a brake
on the development of African States.

We must redouble efforts to combat corruption,
particularly within services for security, the
suppression of fraud, and border control. We have no
other choice but to strengthen and ensure respect for
our legislative and regulatory measures against such
crimes. We remember the Boeing 727 nicknamed "Air
Cocaine," which landed in northern Mali in December
2009, carrying about six tons of the drug. The value of
the cocaine transited through Africa, by sea or by air,
and using the Sahel route to the Mediterranean coast, is
estimated in the billions of dollars.

At the national level, Chad is particularly concerned
by the crises and areas of tension surrounding it.
The Libyan crisis has had, and continues to have,
serious consequences for the stability of a great part
of the Sahel. We note with concern that the situation
prevailing there has allowed terrorist organizations to
establish safe havens. The growing threat represented
by the barbarians of Boko Haram in Central and West
Africa, instability in the Central African Republic
and in Darfur, and Al-Shabab's asymmetric war in the
Horn of Africa are all major challenges that require
pooled efforts by the countries concerned and greater
mobilization by the international community .

In that regard, we pay tribute to the commitment
of the group of countries neighbouring Libya, not only
in supporting peace and reconciliation within those
countries, but also for ensuring greater monitoring of
the common borders in order to contain the terrorist
threat. In that light, Chad is making efforts to ensure
security within its borders, despite its huge territory
and its limited resources. Together with the Sudan,
we have established a joint force that operates joint
patrols along our common border to deter criminals
and bandits of all natures. Under the Lake Chad Basin
Commission we have revitalized the joint multinational
force to confront the terrorist threat in the subregion.

Chad is also giving particular attention to regional
security. The Chadian army has been active in Mali,
where, at great cost, it has helped hunt down terrorist
groups and narco-traffickers. Chad is very involved,
with other States, in the Nouakchott Process, launched
by the African Union in March 2013, with a View to
strengthening cooperation in security matters and the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the Sahel.

It lies primarily with us to enhance our respective
national capacities with a View to fully ensuring our
own security. We must work, with the assistance of
partners, on effective operationalization to confront
terrorism, cross-border crime and radicalization and
violent extremism. In that regard, we would like to
pay tribute to France's engagement at our side, through
Operation Barkhane, and to thank the United States and
the European Union for their support.

Furthermore, we call upon the United Nations
entities, particularly the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Office for Drugs and Crime, to redouble their efforts.
We urge those States that have the resources to do so
to enhance their capacities, particularly in terms of
materiel and technical and logistical assistance. That
support is particularly necessary for the African States
in the Sahel and the Sahara, which have to control
immense areas. Most often, criminals and terrorists are
heavily armed and are often in complicity with terrorist
groups.

Beyond enhancing interregional cooperation and
coordination to counter the phenomena of terrorism and
cross-border crime, including trafficking in weapons
and drugs, we must emphasize the fight against
poverty. Young people are easy prey for terrorist
groups, which have considerable resources coming
from drug trafficking and other illicit trades. To put
a stop to practices that seriously threaten the security
of the continent, it is important for the international
community to support development programmes and
projects launched within the framework of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

As we await the Secretary-General's report
requested in resolution 2195 (2014), we hope that
the ratification and implementation of conventions,
protocols and relative instruments will allow us to
respond to the challenges represented by the linkage
between terrorism and cross-border crime.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.


