Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to
congratulate Egypt on its assumption of the presidency
for the month of May.

It was our honour to co-sponsor resolution 2286
(2016), which was just adopted. We are grateful to the
delegations of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay for their timely initiative, as well as for taking
on board Ukraine's proposals.

We thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
contribution to our debate. However, our main thanks
should go to today's briefers. We highly appreciate the
work their staff has been doing for years.

Although the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has become an increasingly complex challenge,
this complexity must not in any way dissuade us from
our collective efforts to address the issue. Armed
conflicts inflict all kinds of hardship and suffering
on civilians. It is our deeply held conviction that all
sides in conflicts have both a legal and a fundamental
moral obligation to provide all possible medical care
for the sick and injured, as well as to protect medical
personnel, who often put themselves in harm's way to
save lives.

Yet, in today's conflicts hospitals are increasingly
becoming common targets. When medical facilities
come under shelling or bombs, it is an unspeakable
tragedy. When they are attacked on purpose, it is an
example of abhorrent barbarism that has to be combatted
in our presumably civilized times. What is really
horrific is that the number of such instances continues
to grow. We are seeing it happen in Afghanistan, Yemen
and elsewhere. Especially worrying is the situation in
Syria, where there have been dozens, if not hundreds,
of attacks against medical facilities. In the past six
months that trend has only gotten worse.

Last week's attacks on the Al-Quds hospital in
Aleppo reminded us of the enormous difficulties
and dangers that health workers face every day. Two
doctors, including the only paediatrician in the city,
three medical support staff and dozens of patients,
among them children, lost their lives in this horrific
incident. It cannot be left without reflection. Therefore,
we fully support the requestjust made by the delegation
of the United Kingdom for a briefing on Aleppo. It
speaks volumes about the horrendous humanitarian
situation in Syria and the complete disregard for all
relevant norms of international humanitarian law.

Attacks on medical facilities are a blatant violation
of international law. Strict and long-established norms
of international law provide for an absolute inviolability
of medical facilities and workers in conflict zones.
Physicians for Human Rights, a non-governmental
organization that documents and advocates against
mass atrocities and severe human rights violations
around the world, reported 16 attacks on Syrian
hospitals in October 2015 alone. According to that
organization's data, since 2011 at least 610 medical
personnel have been killed in Syria. Furthermore, 183
medical facilities in that country have been the targets
of military attacks on 233 occasions.

The World Health Organization reports that more
than 99 health facilities, including hospitals and clinics,
have been damaged or destroyed in Yemen. Attacks
on health facilities and personnel in Afghanistan
have risen 50 per cent in the past year, as per data of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
reports that in 2015, health workers and institutions in
this country were subjected to arbitrary searches by
Government forces, threats from armed groups, looting
and abductions.

It is of utmost importance that those responsible for
such war crimes be held accountable. Ukraine calls on
all States to cooperate fully with existing international
criminal justice institutions, including the International
Criminal Court, to combat impunity and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law.

The terrible statistics I have just mentioned make
the resolution adopted today all the more topical. The
Security Council is uniquely positioned to send a
strong message concerning this problem. That is why
we hope that resolution 2286 (2016) will serve as a clear
political signal to all parties concerned that the Security
Council will remain extremely vigilant on the issue of
the protection of humanitarian, medical and health-care
workers and medical facilities in situations of armed
conflict. As Ms. Liu so emotionally put it only moments
ago, we should make this resolution save lives.

