Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I thank the
Prosecutor for her briefing on Libya and for introducing
the report submitted to the Security Council pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011).

The United Kingdom is concerned about the
continued violence and political instability in Libya.
The recent Supreme Court ruling that the internationally
recognized Government is unconstitutional highlights
the significant challenges the country is facing. The
United Kingdom is examining that judgment and the
circumstances surrounding it. We are particularly
concerned about reports that a car bomb went off in
front of the security headquarters in the eastern city of
Shahat on Sunday.

It is imperative that all actors in Libya work
towards political solutions to the challenges the country
is facing. We call on all Libyans to set aside their
individual differences and support the United Nations-
led efforts to mediate between key Libyan leaders, agree
to a ceasefire and reach a lasting political settlement.
That is the only route to stability and prosperity.

However, it is not just for the Libyans themselves
to work towards a solution. A stable, democratic
and prosperous Libya that contributes to stability
and security in the region is in all our interests. The
international community must support the efforts
of the United Nations. Jonathan Powell, the United
Kingdom Special Envoy to Libya, is working to support
the efforts of United Nations Special Representative
Bernardino Leon, and we call on all States to give their
full support to his work. The United Kingdom supports
the call of the Prosecutor for all parties involved in the
ongoing fighting to refrain from targeting civilians or
civilian objects. We urge all parties to refrain from
Rome Statute crimes or human rights violations.

In order for there to be a sustainable peace in Libya,
individuals who have committed atrocities must be held
accountable for their actions. There must no impunity
for perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. It is also important that those who have
committed human rights abuses in the ongoing fighting
should face justice. It is vital that Libya's future is built
upon the firm foundation that protects and promotes
human rights for all. The United Kingdom recalls the
statement in July of the Prosecutor in which she stated
that her Office is monitoring the situation in Libya and
may exercise its jurisdiction over any crime against
humanity or war crime committed there since February
2011.

The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
dialogue between Government of Libya and the
Office of the Prosecutor and appreciates the spirit of
collaboration. We encourage the Government of Libya
to continue to work with the Prosecutor to confront
the challenges that Libya faces, including through
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing regarding the investigations and
prosecutions of former Al-Qadhafi officials.

The United Kingdom thanks the Prosecutor for the
update on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The United Kingdom
continues to urge Libya's full cooperation with the
Court. We recall Libya's obligation to cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
We also note the 21 May Appeals Chamber decision
confirming that the Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi case is
admissible before the International Criminal Court.
Libya remains under an obligation to surrender him to
the Court.

The United Kingdom will continue to support
efforts to bring about a sustainable peace in Libya.
An important part of those efforts must be holding
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
to account. There must be justice for the Libyan people
who have been the victims of atrocities.

