Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Ambassador Wang Guangya, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month and I
thank you for convening this necessary debate on the
grave crisis in Haiti. I also thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Jamaica, The Honourable Keith
Knight, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Bahamas, Mr. Frederick Mitchell, for the valuable
information they presented to the Council.
The Security Council cannot fail to take action to
prevent the violence, the chaos and the humanitarian
crisis from spreading in Haiti, a Member State that lies
only a few hours by plane from the Headquarters of our
Organization. Peru has no doubt that the Council will
shoulder its responsibility in dealing with this profound
political and humanitarian crisis, as requested in the
resolution adopted today by the Permanent Council of
the Organization of American States (OAS).

Peru vehemently rejects the use of violence to
resolve political crises in any part of the world. It
therefore reaffirms its profound conviction that the
most rational formula for resolving the crisis in Haiti is
to achieve political peace and stability while strictly
respecting of the country's constitution. Any solution
of the crisis now before the Council must be achieved
through a constitutional formula - in other words,
according to the rule of law and in respect of the
constitutional order of Haiti. The solution found must
also be guided by the Inter-American Democratic
Charter and find inspiration in the initiative of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which was
endorsed today by the Organization of American
States.

Peru affirms that no effort should be spared to
achieve peace and social stability in Haiti and, in
accordance with today's statement by the Rio Group,
vehemently condemns the acts of violence that have
occurred and expresses once again its support for a
peaceful solution to the crisis.

Haiti is among the Latin American countries with
the greatest social problems. What is occurring in Haiti
is undoubtedly the result of great social crisis and the
erosion of the country's social fabric. Its population has
been suffering countless shortages for years and is
frustrated. We must take the crisis in Haiti seriously.
We are deeply concerned at the humanitarian situation
in the country. It is a serious problem on which the
international community, and especially the United
Nations, must take urgent action. We therefore view
positively the present intention of the United Nations
to strengthen humanitarian activities. Peru welcomes
all initiatives for long-term assistance to Haiti, not just
short-term humanitarian assistance.

Peru believes that the Security Council must send
a clear signal that it is ready to take action and that it is
monitoring respect for human rights in Haiti. All
political and social forces in the country should be
fully aware that the international community will not
permit any violation of human rights to go unpunished.
Finally, I believe it is necessary that the
objectives of the United Nations in this crisis not be
limited to finding a momentary political solution.
Rather, once the crisis is resolved, it should initiate a
permanent strengthening of democracy and the
institutions in the country, stabilize it and help the
people of Haiti to improve their deplorable social and
economic situation. That is the best strategy for
preventing civil conflicts and achieving stability in the
world.

