Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia expresses its appreciation for the briefing given
by Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs. My delegation also
welcomes the initiative of Egypt in organizing today's
informative meeting, highlighting a very important
and sensitive issue that affects the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Our Organization is based on the values of
multilateralism, and it is precisely through those values
that the United Nations, as a multilateral system,
depends on the legitimacy and international legality that
allow it to address global problems and conflicts and,
at the same time, to respond to threats to international
peace and security through, inter alia, the imposition
of sanctions. Under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, sanctions must be considered only
when all other means of peacefully settling disputes set
forth in Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted
and only after their short-term and long-term effects
have been evaluated in detail. In that vein, sanctions
must not be an end in themselves. They must be used
as a measure of last resort in the event of a breach of
the provisional measures established under the Charter,
and must be imposed only when there is a clear threat
to international peace and security, the breach thereof
or an impending act of aggression.

Currently, we are witnessing a dangerous trend
towards the proliferation of the application and
imposition of unilateral sanctions. The Plurinational
State ofBolivia categorically rejects the implementation
of such measures because they represent a flagrant
violation of multilateralism and a serious threat to the
international order, and constitute illegal measures that
impose the jurisdiction and internal legislation of one
State over another, thereby violating the principles of
equality, sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the
States. Such actions are not only illegal - constituting,
as I said, an imposition of one State's domestic law on
another's and upon the international order - but also
constitute actions that usurp the functions of legal
bodies, such as the Security Council, which is the only
international legal body that can impose sanctions on
States and non-State actors within the framework of
the Charter. Accordingly, we reiterate that any measure
adopted unilaterally by one State to the detriment of
another through the use of force or any other coercive
measures is outside the framework of the Security
Council and therefore illegal and contrary to the
principles and purposes of the Charter.

We believe that, when the imposition of sanctions
is to be considered, the right to due process and
respect for international law must be taken into
account, which, through official and reliable sources of
information, helps to clearly establish the situation in
a given national context that might represent a threat
to international peace and security, while at all times
observing the principle of the non-use of force and
the peaceful settlement of disputes before resorting to
measures that warrant the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter. The design and development of sanctions
must be governed by fair and transparent procedures
that help to clearly identify the conditions demanded
of States or parties upon which sanctions have been
imposed, with a periodic review of those measures to
assess their effects and modify them as needed with
respect to developments.

We believe that the imposition of sanctions must
not affect the development of States subject to such
measures, and in all cases must be implemented with
a view to minimizing the impact on and possible
humanitarian cost for the civilian population affected
by the implementation of such measures.

Those issues were addressed at the World Summit
held during the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly, on 24 October 2005, at which it was
reiterated that sanctions must be selective and have
clear goals, thereby ensuring that their implementation
strikes a balance between their effectiveness in
achieving the desired outcomes and their potentially
negative consequences, including socioeconomic and
humanitarian consequences involving the population
and third States. That was in line with the final
document of the seventeenth Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement held in
Isla Margarita in 2016, which states:

(spoke in English)

"The objectives of sanctions are not to punish or
otherwise exact retribution on the populace. In this
regard, the objectives of sanctions regimes should
be clearly defined, and that its imposition should be
for a specified time frame and be based on tenable
legal grounds, and that it should be lifted as soon
as the objectives are achieved. The conditions
demanded of the State or party on which sanctions
are imposed should be clearly defined and subject
to periodic review. Sanctions should be imposed
only when there exists a threat to international
peace and security or an act of aggression, in
accordance with the Charter, and that it is not
applicable "preventively" in instances of mere
violation of international law, norms or standards.
Targeted sanctions may be a better alternative so
long as the population of targeted State concerned
is not victimised whether directly or indirectly".

(spoke in Spanish)

Lastly, we believe that it is necessary to
develop a process for evaluating the methodology,
implementation, impact and modification of sanctions
imposed by the Security Council, which must carry
out that task so as to improve the desired results
with the ultimate goal being, at all times, to ensure
that international peace and security prevail. Bolivia
supports the preparation by the Secretary-General of
a report on the impact of sanctions, which should also
cover the impact of unilateral sanctions on international
law and international peace and security. We recall that
the sanctions that the Security Council imposes are
under no circumstances the foundation on which more
sanctions can be added. Rather they constitute the
ceiling or limit that is legally and legitimately agreed
within the framework of the Charter.

