Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I, too, would like to
thank Mr. Kouchner for his briefing and to make the
following points regarding the main subject of today's
meeting and the central event of the past few weeks in
Kosovo, the holding of municipal elections.

First, we share the view of the Secretary-General
expressed on 30 October that the municipal elections of
28 October in the province constitute a landmark in
Kosovo's democratic development. Despite certain
doubts and questions raised at the stage of the
preparation of the elections, their conduct and outcome
proved that it was a significant event. We were
satisfied to learn that the elections were carried out in a
calm and peaceful atmosphere, with an insignificant
number of incidents, intimidation and with few
procedural violations.

In our view, the people of Kosovo, who
demonstrated a very high turnout, should be
congratulated for their political maturity and
consciousness in discharging their civic duty.

We acknowledge the key role of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), and particularly its Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) pillar, in
carrying out these municipal elections, and we pay
tribute to the efforts of its personnel. Holding the
elections indeed marked the completion of one of the
most significant periods in UNMIK's activities.

Still, the most regrettable thing about the
municipal elections of 28 October was the boycott on
the part of most Serbs and Turks. This fact really cast a
shadow over the general success. We are fully aware of
UNMIK's intention to co-opt Serb and other
communities' representatives through appointment by
the Special Representative to those municipalities
where they constitute the vast majority of the
population, such as in the areas of Leposavic, Zubin
Potok and Zvecan. This intention is welcome.
However, we have a question for Mr. Kouchner in this
regard. What is the attitude of the Serbs and the
Albanians themselves towards this idea of co-opting
Serbs through such appointments and will this idea he
carried out ifthere is no consent on their part?

It is our understanding that the appointment of
Serb representatives to the local bodies in those three
municipalities should be considered as an interim
measure. In this regard, in our view, the idea of holding
by-elections in the near future in these municipalities
deserves consideration and implementation. Moreover,
as Mr. Kouchner said, there are signs that the Serb
community may be willing to register. We think that
one of the conditions of such by-elections should be
the registration of Serbs inside and outside of Kosovo.
Therefore, we strongly encourage UNMIK to take
practical steps in this direction.

The holding of municipal elections almost three
weeks ago obviously did not bring solutions to all
existing problems in Kosovo. My country is concerned
about a new upsurge of inter-ethnic, political and
criminal violence in recent days. This growing negative
tendency shows that UNMIK and KFOR should not
weaken their efforts in pursuit of their mandates to
establish a secure environment for the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons and to ensure
public safety. In view of the current increase in
violence following the elections, great caution should
also be used in the matter of expediting the gradual
transfer of administrative responsibilities from UNMIK
to the newly elected municipal leaders.

While noting the general success of the elections,
my country is deeply concerned, however, with the
reports that leaders of all Albanian political parties
openly admit that they consider municipal elections to
be a first major step towards the declaration of
Kosovo's independence and that they therefore
categorically reject any possibility of discussing with
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
the issue of provincial autonomy within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. In this respect, we deem it
timely for the Council strongly to remind the Kosovo
Albanian leaders of the basic provisions of resolution
1244 (1999), in particular those reaffirming the
commitment of Member States to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and entrusting UNMIK to ensure a
substantial autonomy of the province within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is necessary to make
clear to the newly elected municipal leaders that the
partial transfer of power to them and the further
creation of local governing structures place additional
responsibility on them for the situation in Kosovo.

We are of the view that the role of UNMIK in the
new political environment that was created by the
democratic changes in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is to initiate the process of establishing a
meaningful dialogue between the new leadership in
Belgrade and the Kosovo Albanian side. In this
context, we are encouraged by the statements of the
new Yugoslav President, Mr. Kostunica, on his
readiness to start such a dialogue. In our view,
UNMIK's facilitation of such direct contacts might
result in opening a political process designed to
determine Kosovo's future status. Moreover, UNMIK's
task of facilitating the reopening of the political
process is clearly outlined in resolution 1244 (1999).

To this end, it is also obvious that a proper
dialogue and closer cooperation between the new
Yugoslav authorities and UNMIK itself are highly
required and should be established. The recent
admission of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the South-East Europe
Stability Pact, as well as many other dramatic, speedy
and welcome changes currently taking place, create
additional good opportunities.

In this context, I cannot but pay tribute to
UNMIK's effort to resolve issues concerning detainees
and missing persons. We welcome yesterday's
consultations, held in Pristina between UNMIK and the
Yugoslav delegation, on this sensitive issue. My
country welcomes the declaration by the Yugoslav
President to the Council of Europe last week that his
Government will initiate a process of resolving this
painful problem.

Lastly, given the new situation in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the entire region and the
beginning of the next post-conflict peace-building
phase in Kosovo, we feel that the Security Council
should consider a new strategy of actions with regard
to the future of the province, in particular the status
issue, and give its clear guidance to UNMIK in this
respect. In our view, the time has come for the Council
to consider all the ways to bring the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo leaders
to the negotiation table. We are of the view that it
would be wrong to rush in this, but that it would also
be dangerous to postpone it. As I said earlier, the
Council can pursue this goal through UNMIK's efforts,
or with the assistance of the Secretary-General's
special envoys to the Balkans, or undertake mediatory
efforts itself. In our view, today, now that the municipal
elections are over, this issue is becoming increasingly
topical.

In conclusion, let me sincerely wish Mr.
Kouchner and all his staff further success in all their
endeavours.

