The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultation among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern about reports of repeated incidents of
cross-border violence between the Sudan and
South Sudan, including troop movements, support
to proxy forces and aerial bombardments, and
views the situation as a serious threat to
international peace and security. The Council
urges the two countries to implement and respect
the letter and spirit of their 10 February
Memorandum of Understanding on
Non-Aggression and Cooperation, which was
agreed under the auspices of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP).

"The Security Council demands that all
parties cease military operations in the border
areas and put an end to the cycle of violence. It
further demands that the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan take no action that would
undermine the security and stability of the other,
including through any direct or indirect form of
support to armed groups in the other's territory.
The Security Council condemns actions by any
armed group aimed at the forced overthrow of the
Government of either the Sudan or South Sudan.
The Security Council affirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both the Sudan and South Sudan.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
core objectives of the international community
and all stakeholders in the Sudan and South
Sudan are the peaceful coexistence of two fully
viable States, embracing democratic governance,
rule of law, accountability, equality, respect for
human rights, justice and economic development,
in particular the establishment of the conditions
for conflict-affected communities to build strong
and sustainable livelihoods.

"The Security Council recalls the 28 June
2011 Framework Agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North) on
political and security arrangements for Blue Nile
and Southern Kordofan states, and urges them to
return to direct talks to resolve all political and
security issues on the basis of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and of the agreed principles of
the Framework Agreement. The Security Council
urges them to resolve the underlying issues that
have fuelled the current conflict in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, to end all violence and
to agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities.
The Security Council strongly supports the efforts
of the AUHIP and the United Nations to assist in
that regard.

"With regard to the humanitarian situation,
the Security Council emphasizes the grave
urgency of delivering humanitarian aid to avert a
worsening of the serious crisis in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, and demands that the
Government of the Sudan and the SPLM-North
cooperate fully with the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations, and
ensure, in accordance with international law,
including applicable international humanitarian
law and guiding principles of emergency
humanitarian assistance, the safe, unhindered and
immediate access of United Nations and other
humanitarian personnel, as well as the delivery of
supplies and equipment, in order to allow such
personnel to efficiently perform their task of
assisting conflict-affected civilian populations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The
Security Council welcomes the tripartite proposal
by the United Nations, the African Union and the
League of Arab States in that regard, welcomes
its acceptance by the SPLM-North and
encourages the Government of the Sudan to do
the same.

"The Security Council deeply deplores the
continued failure of the Sudanese and South
Sudanese security forces to redeploy from the
12-25259
Abyei Area in accordance with the 20 June 2011
Agreement on Temporary Arrangements for the
Administration and Security of the Abyei Area
(S/2011/384) and the 8 September 2011 decision
of the Abyei Area Joint Oversight Committee
(S/2011/593). The Security Council welcomes the
decision of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism to establish and move forward with
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, in accordance with the 29 June 2011
Agreement on Border Security and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. The Council
urges the parties to agree on a map that will
outline the area of operations for the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and the area of
operations for border monitors. The Council
demands that the two countries accelerate
implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement
and the immediate establishment of the Abyei
Area Administration, and work actively towards a
long-term political resolution of Abyei's final
status. The Council demands that the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan
facilitate the safe and dignified return of persons
displaced from Abyei to their homes, and grant
full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to
the Abyei Area. The Council emphasizes the need
for a safe and cooperative migration season.

"The Security Council regards the
settlement of oil and financial arrangements
between the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan as a critical element of the two countries'
security, stability and prosperity as viable States.
The Council affirms that any unilateral action
related to the oil sector is detrimental to the
security, stability and prosperity of both States.
The Security Council strongly urges both States
to work within the framework of the AUHIP's
January 2012 comprehensive proposal in order to
reach mutual agreements without delay on
transitional financial arrangements and
commercial oil arrangements.

"The Security Council urges the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
ensure that clear procedures for acquiring
nationality in the respective States are in place,
together with relevant documentation regarding
residency or right to employment. If such
arrangements are not in place before the end of
the 8 April transition period, the Council urges
both States to agree on an extension.

"The Security Council strongly urges the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
reach agreement on the status of disputed areas
along the Sudan/South Sudan border, and to agree
on and swiftly implement a process and timeline
for demarcation of the border under the
facilitation of the AUHIP.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to United Nations peacekeeping missions
in the Sudan and South Sudan. It calls on the
Sudan and South Sudan to cooperate fully with
the United Nations missions to ensure them free
access throughout their areas of operation and to
ensure unhindered and expeditious movement of
all personnel, including by swiftly granting visas
and travel permits, as well as of equipment,
provisions, supplies and other goods, including
vehicles, aircraft and spare parts, which are for
the exclusive and official use of United Nations
missions.

"The Council strongly urges the Sudan and
South Sudan to continue working within the
context of the AUHIP-facilitated negotiations
process to reach agreement on all outstanding
issues as soon as possible, and encourages the
continued partnership among the AUHIP, the
United Nations and other key international
stakeholders with a view to combining their
efforts in support of those negotiations.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to a peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of the Sudan and South Sudan. The
Council expresses its gratitude and full support
for the continuing work of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel for the Sudan
and its Chair, President Thabo Mbeki, as well as
of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haile Menkerios, and stresses the
collaborative partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union in this regard. The
Council calls on the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan to extend their full cooperation
to the AUHIP."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/5.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

