Mr. Yatsenyuk (Ukraine): It is a great honour for
me to address the primary body that is responsible
for peace, stability and security in the world. As far
as I know, this is the sixth extraordinary meeting of
the Security Council. The Council is well aware of what is
happening on the ground but let me additionally report on
the most recent developments in Ukraine. My country has
faced military aggression by a neighbouring country that is a
permanent members of the Security Council. There is no
reason for that aggression; there are no grounds for it.
It is absolutely and entirely unacceptable in the twenty-
first century to resolve any kind of conflict with tanks,
artillery and boots on the ground.

The Russian Federation has violated a number
of bilateral and multilateral treaties that were signed
between Ukraine and Russia. We strongly believe that
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
states that

"all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations"

is not questioned by anyone. We still believe that we
have a chance to resolve this conflict in a peaceful
manner, and we commend and praise the Ukrainian
military that have refrained from the use of any force.

We would like to be very clear and say that the
military presence has been clearly identified. This is a
Russian military presence, with Russian number plates
on its vehicles. We urge the Russian Federation to pull
back its military forces deployed in Crimea to their
barracks and to start real talks and negotiations in order
to tackle this conflict.

This is not an internal conflict. This conflict goes
beyond the borders of Ukraine. Let me recall that in
1994, Ukraine abandoned its nuclear weapons. We gave
up one of the largest arsenals of nuclear weapons - the
third largest in the world - and, under the Budapest
Memorandum, the signatories guaranteed the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of the Ukrainian
State. The way our Russian neighbours - and I believe
that if we talk real talks with Russia, they could be real
partners - acted undermines the entire global security
and nuclear non-proliferation programme, as after these
actions it would be very difficult to convince anyone in
the world not to have nuclear weapons.

I would like to reiterate again that the Ukrainian
Government is absolutely open. We want to have talks,
we do not want to have any kind of military aggression.

I shall now address the Russian Federation.
(spoke in Russian)

We are looking for an answer to the question of
whether Russians want war. As the Prime Minister
of Ukraine, which for decades had warm and friendly
relations with Russia, I am convinced that Russians do
not want war, and I hope that the Russian Government
and the Russian President will heed the wishes of their
people and return to the negotiating table to engage in
dialogue and solve this conflict.

