Mr. Deng Alor Kuol: I am very grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council following the
official announcement of the final results of the
referendum in Southern Sudan, and to put forward the
views of the Government of Southern Sudan on behalf
of all of our people.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
calling this meeting immediately following the
announcement of the final results. This is an indication
of the Council's continued support for the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and its determination to remain fully
engaged in the maintenance of peace and stability in
the Sudan.

I would like to thank the members of the Council
for their tireless and continued efforts in this regard. I
would also like to express my Government's gratitude
for the significant contributions made by the United
Nations, and by the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and the Secretary-General's Monitoring Panel in
particular, to the safe and peaceful holding of the
Southern Sudan referendum.
The fact that the referendum was held on time
and conducted peacefully is a major and historic
achievement, of which we can all be proud. It is a
testament both to the capability of the United Nations,
as well as that of the Government of Southern Sudan.
Most important, it is a manifestation of the maturity
and commitment of all of our citizens to exercise their
right to self-determination. The Government of
Southern Sudan is satisfied that the conduct of the
referendum was peaceful and that the referendum
outcome reflects the true democratic will of the people
of Southern Sudan. We can now say with confidence
that the people have spoken, and they have clearly
voted to establish an independent State in South Sudan.

With this in mind, the Government of Southern
Sudan calls on the Council and on the international
community to recognize the results of the referendum
in a timely fashion, to support the emergence of an
independent South Sudan on 9 July and to recognize
and accept the independent State immediately
thereafter. In this context, we welcome the formal
acceptance of the final results of the referendum by
President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir and the Government
of the Sudan, and the commitment to establish two
mutually supportive States, at peace with one another,
following the end of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement interim period. We also wish to
acknowledge the contribution of the people of
Northern Sudan to the successful conduct of the
referendum, as well as their support for the acceptance
of the results. We also note and welcome initial moves
being made by members of the international
community to provide debt relief for the Republic of
the Sudan.

Our challenge now is to finalize the full
implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, to which we remain
completely committed. Building a sustainable and
lasting peace for all of the people of the Sudan remains
our top priority. We are therefore ready to re-engage
vigorously with our partner the National Congress
Party (NCP) on critical post-referendum issues,
including oil revenue flows, citizenship, protection of
our populations and border security. Clarity on all
outstanding issues is essential to maintaining stability
and progress throughout the region, although in
accordance with the provisions of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the resolution of those issues is not a
precondition for the emergence of an independent State
in South Sudan, which will become a reality at the end
of the interim period.

While we will proceed along separate paths, both
parties have a joint responsibility to all the peoples of
the Sudan to guarantee a peaceful and prosperous
future. We believe that this will be achieved by
establishing mutual respect and cooperation between
Northern and Southern Sudan. We have no interest in
returning to the hostilities and divisions of the past. It
is our most sincere wish to achieve peaceful
coexistence between North and South, to enable all of
our peoples to live in security and prosperity. We
welcome the Security Council's continued support of
this process.

The Government of Southern Sudan, on behalf of
the people of Abyei, would like to express its deep
disappointment that the referendum required by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement on Abyei did not
take place. The terms of the Abyei Protocol, as well as
those of the award of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration, have very clearly set out the legal
obligations of both parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement with respect to Abyei. Although the recent
regrettable security incidents have been addressed, it is
clear that a final and lasting solution on Abyei must be
found, and found quickly.

During the last meeting of the presidency, North
and South Sudan committed to reaching an early
agreement on Abyei. We remain ready to start work
immediately with the National Congress Party to
resolve the impasse. We continue to see two possible
outcomes: either the holding of a referendum
consistent with the provisions of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement or a transfer of Abyei by presidential
decree to the South.

Separately, the South is fully committed to
respecting and protecting the grazing rights of
Misseriya nomads and other livestock-keepers in
Southern Sudan. Those rights will be protected
irrespective of the status of Abyei. Despite the
challenges we face on this issue, we are optimistic that
with the continued support of President Thabo Mbeki,
the United States Special Envoy General Scott Gration
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, the Abyei issue shall be resolved definitively.

The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the start of the popular consultation process in Blue
Nile and calls for such a process to be started in
Southern Kordofan as well. We are committed to
assisting our partners in the NCP to find a just and fair
political settlement for Darfur. We believe that all
parties should come to the negotiating table. We do not
support a military solution. It is not in the interest of
Southern Sudan to encourage war in any area of the
Sudan, since we are now enjoying the fruits of a peace
that we would like our brothers and sisters in Darfur
and all other parts of the country to enjoy as well.

Now that the formidable burdens associated with
preparing for the referendum have passed, the
Government of Southern Sudan is actively preparing
for the responsibilities of statehood by continuing our
work on good governance, institution-building and the
establishment of a multiparty democracy. The peaceful
conduct of the referendum serves as a demonstration of
our capabilities and of the maturity of our citizens.

We have already established a technical
committee to review the interim constitution of
Southern Sudan. This will be followed by the
establishment of a constitutional conference. Following
independence, the Government of Southern Sudan will
establish a broad-based Government of national unity
in the South, promulgate a new constitution, and
schedule national elections.

Also following independence, the Government of
Southern Sudan will apply for membership in the
relevant regional and international organizations and
international financial institutions. South Sudan shall
undertake a review of international treaties,
conventions and agreements with a view towards
acceding to such agreements upon achieving statehood.
We will pay particular attention to the international
human rights instruments and international
humanitarian law. Of course, regardless of the status of
its accession to treaties, the new State shall uphold the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the rights
and duties affirmed in all relevant international human
rights instruments.

The Government of South Sudan will vigorously
continue the fight against corruption and will institute
all necessary measures to stamp it out. We are also
committed to reflecting international human rights
norms in our national structures and Government
institutions. South Sudan will be not just the world's
newest State, but its newest democracy, and we are
committed to Government that reflects the will of the
people.
We very much welcome the support of the
international community in these efforts. The
Government of Southern Sudan particularly appreciates
the critical role that the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan has played in support of the referendum and in
the provision of security in the border areas. The
Government of Southern Sudan wishes to see a
continued United Nations presence in South Sudan
after July 2011. The Government of Southern Sudan
looks forward to participating in all relevant
discussions, both formal and informal, on the mandate
for the continued United Nations presence.

We believe that, after July, the United Nations
peacekeeping presence should have a strong focus on
maintaining peace and security in the border regions.
The United Nations presence should also provide
humanitarian assistance for Southerners returning from
the North. While we believe that South Sudan itself
should have the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians, we envisage that the United
Nations and the international community could play a
supporting role in this regard, particularly in relation to
the risk of insecurity in the border areas and the
protection of returnees.

The Government of Southern Sudan's primary
focus will be to achieve peace and security through the
economic development of South Sudan, and it will
work to build the necessary human and physical
infrastructure to achieve this. We welcome the
continued international support for the implementation
of South Sudan's national development strategy.

We support calls for the convening of a donors'
conference to promote a coherent and coordinated
effort among prospective donors. The Government of
Southern Sudan would welcome additional efforts on
the part of donors to coordinate such assistance as far
as possible. The Government of Southern Sudan is also
considering the possibility of our inclusion on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. We will
consider this in the context of a coordinated and
comprehensive approach to the issues of security,
peace and development in Southern Sudan. Separately,
the Government of Southern Sudan would also
welcome early international action on the issue of the
Sudan's international debt.

Of course there will be challenges ahead, and our
people will need to be reminded that raising the
Southern Sudanese flag on 9 July does not mean that
the hard work is over. But their future is in their hands,
their triumphs shall be theirs, and the success they have
achieved thus far will continue to move us forward. We
are confident that, with the continued support of the

international community, the new independent
Southern Sudanese State that will emerge on 9 July
will be one that grows in strength and capacity with
every passing year.

This is a decisive moment for Sudan. We are
conscious that the referendum is not the end point, but
rather provides for a new beginning, and that much
work remains to be done. It is my hope that, as
Northern and Southern Sudan embark on a new
journey, we will have the chance to convey important
lessons to the rest of our continent about establishing
genuine and lasting peace after a period of war, and
about building successful States that provide peace,
stability and prosperity for all.

