Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for Pakistan's leadership in hosting this debate. We
know that Pakistan is on the front line of terrorism.
The terrible attacks in Quetta, the Swat Valley and
elsewhere in Pakistan in the past week have been a
stark reminder of this. In the face of that violence, the
example of Malala Yousafzai and her fellow students is
inspirational. It must strengthen our determination to
oppose terrorism and it must be our beacon.

Terrorism is still one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security and therefore must
remain a decisive focus for the Council. The threat is
now more diffuse and decentralized, but the fact is that
in the past few years some 12,000 people have been
killed in terrorist attacks annually, and States and
regions are still destabilized. The nature of the threat
and the methods and strategies of terrorist groups are
constantly evolving and presenting new risks. We are
now engaged against terrorism's direct threat in Mali
and the Sahel.

Of course, States' understanding of the most
effective ways to tackle terrorism has also evolved.
Evidence and experience are accumulating, enabling us
to refine approaches and improve our effectiveness. We
know that good intelligence, strong law enforcement
and prosecutions are important, but we also know that
they are not enough. We must also tackle the drivers of
terrorism, the terrorist narrative and the processes of
radicalization.

The Security Council shares a strong commitment
against terrorism. That is very clear from all the
comments that have been made today, so I will limit
my comments to addressing two crucial elements of
a comprehensive approach: effective prevention, and
strengthened cooperation and coordination within and
between States.

States have had considerable success in prosecuting
terrorists and degrading major terrorist networks. That
is certainly the case in Australia's own region of South-
East Asia, where, for example, Indonesia has prosecuted
more than 600 terrorists since the Bali bombings in
2002. However, that shared law enforcement success
has also exposed a key challenge: prisons are, in many
cases, a weak link in our counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorists continue to recruit and plan attacks from
prison, and the reality is that many prisoners are now
beginning to be released.

Effectively managing and rehabilitating extremist
detainees is therefore increasingly important for
prevention. Sharing best practices and developing
common strategies for that is essential. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum's work in that area has been
highlighted today. Australia, Indonesia and other
South-East Asian countries are using that work to
develop regional approaches.

Terrorist organizations continue to recruit new
members and sympathizers. To defeat terrorism,
we must counter the forces that drive it. That means
strengthening our societies to reject violent extremism.
Approaches will vary depending upon circumstances,
but some common elements include the following.

The first is ensuring inclusive communities where
everyone has a voice and where everyone has access
to education, with strong curriculums, and access to
work. The world is experiencing a tremendous youth
bulge. As China's Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai
said this morning, the average age of terrorists is
decreasing. Youth unemployment remains one of the
greatest vulnerabilities in all regions and societies. We
need to make urgent progress in engaging youth in our
societies, most basically by generating jobs.

The second is promoting values that, when broadly
subscribed, can help communities resist the terrorists'
message. Those values include tolerance, understanding
and dialogue within and between religions and cultures,
as well as respect for diversity.

The third is strengthening the rule of law and
ensuring fairness and equality before the law, so as to
remove a potential grievance that is often exploited by
terrorists.

Clearly, States need to be innovative in using
modern communications to promote those values. The
Internet provides a perfect medium for terrorists to
recruit, propagate their ideology and secure financing.
Research is showing that young people - those most
susceptible to extremists' messaging - are more
familiar with the terrorist narrative than they are with
the positive counter-narrative. Governments need to
drive the debate on the Internet and through social
media to ensure that their positive messaging is heard
above the extremists' messaging.

We must also continue to communicate the values
of tolerance, understanding, equality and diversity at
the international level. The Alliance of Civilizations
and interfaith dialogue, such as the regional dialogue
we have had in South-East Asia for the past decade, are
still crucial.

An effective, comprehensive approach to terrorism
also demands strong collaboration and coordination
nationally, regionally and globally.
Effective coordination at the national level requires
systematic cooperation between law enforcement
agencies and with other agencies that are better equipped
to address the causes of terrorism, such as agencies
for youth, culture, religion, education and community
affairs. That means frequent communication about
threats, operations and long-term objectives.

States also need to strengthen collaboration with
regional networks. We have learned from experience
with the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation the real benefits of bringing together
regional law-enforcement professionals for training in
a dedicated facility. The Centre has trained more than
12,000 officers and, in the process, built understanding
ofthe common challenges and diverse needs ofthe Asia-
Pacific region, strengthened personal relationships
that deliver cooperation across borders, and developed
a sense of common purpose. We need more of those
regional facilities in other regions. Australia is
committed to working with others to achieve that.

At the global level, effective coordination among
United Nations entities is necessary to promote a
comprehensive approach. The appointment of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator would enhance
strategic and operational cohesion and should happen.
As others have mentioned, more cooperation is needed
globally to prevent the financing of terrorism. We also
need to further mainstream the analysis of terrorism,
its causes and measures to address it into the United
Nations peace and security agenda, including the
mandates of political missions and peacebuilding
efforts.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that, as a newly
elected member of the Security Council, Australia will
continue to strongly support the Council's ongoing
efforts to combat and prevent terrorism. As the threat
continues to evolve, our strategies to counter it also
need to improve. The Council's role will continue to be
central in that regard. No matter how hard the task, we
must be a step ahead.

