Mrs. Arce de Jeannet (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me first thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for his presentation of the
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). Let me also express my
Government's appreciation to Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma and his entire team for their work at the head
of UNMISET.

Mexico welcomes the progress made by
UNMISET in the implementation of the mandate
established by resolution 1410 (2002). The work
undertaken by the United Nations and the international
community in Timor-Leste constitutes a foundation on
which future missions can be developed, taking into
account the particularities of each individual case.

On 27 September 2002, we welcomed Timor-
Leste into the United Nations community as the 191St
Member State. In a brief time, the Timor-Leste
authorities have made considerable progress in
consolidating their State, which is founded on a broad-
based, participatory democracy. In this process, the
establishment and consolidation of relations of
friendship and good-neighbourliness have been of
prime importance.

It is encouraging to note that, thanks to
cooperation with the Indonesian authorities, many of
the problems along the border are being dealt with. In
particular, I wish to express my Government's
satisfaction at the agreements reached in the Joint
Ministerial Commission with Indonesia for the prompt
delimitation of the border. States have a right to live
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
We appeal to the States concerned to accelerate the
process of the delimitation of the land and maritime
borders.

As the Secretary-General rightly states in his
report, resolving the problem of refugees remains a
requirement for stability. The fact that this coming
December Timorese refugees might lose their refugee
status and be left in a state of vulnerability due to the
lack of protection under the Statute is a source of
concern to my Government. It is therefore urgent to
continue to promote the assistance programmes being
conducted by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) for the repatriation of
Timorese refugees, as well as the efforts to promote
and to protect human rights. In that regard, we
welcome the announcement made on 1 November that
the UNHCR and the International Organization for
Migration will join efforts to complete the return of
refugees by the end of the year.

Another welcome development is the progress
made in the area of internal security, in particular in the
training of, and gradual transfer of responsibility to, the
Timor-Leste Police Service. A stable security situation
will make it possible by the end of this month, as
scheduled, to complete the first phase of the four-stage
programme to reduce the presence of UNMISET.

I wish to express Mexico's support for the work
being accomplished by the Serious Crimes Unit, as
well as the work of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation. I also wish to express
Mexico's appreciation of and support for the Timor-
Leste Government's joint signing with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of a
communique establishing 11 goals in the area of human
rights. The strengthening of a culture of human rights
will contribute to the stability of the country.

We should therefore take into consideration the
Secretary-General's statement that future progress will
depend on maintaining stability in Timor-Leste and on
the successful development of a national defence force
and the Police Service, including the border service.
The support of the international community is essential
to those objectives. In this effort, it is crucial to support
adequately the strengthening of the judicial system.

It is a source of concern that the Timorese
Administration is encountering difficulties in dealing
with problems such as the reintegration of ex-
combatants, the training and recruiting of civil
servants, the indictment of those responsible for
serious crimes committed in 1999 and the training of
the Border Patrol Service. For that reason, we join the
appeal to the international community that it continue
to give its assistance in order to ensure the internal
stability of the country.

The National Development Plan places
appropriate emphasis on the link that exists between
the rehabilitation of infrastructure and national
development. Mexico supports initiatives that are being
undertaken to help the Government of Timor-Leste in
its efforts to achieve its objectives and to facilitate the
smooth transition of the United Nations role to
traditional development assistance. In particular, we
support those programmes aimed at poverty reduction,
the promotion of good governance, the administration
of expenditures, policy management and the
development of the private sector and of the energy
sector.

The support of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, has been fundamental to
the success of UNMISET. For that reason, we support
the appeal of the Secretary-General that this
commitment be maintained so that the goals set can be
met.

