Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. We are
honoured to see the friendly country of Kazakhstan
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today. I
would like to thank you for taking my country's situation
seriously and including it in your programme of work
for this month, thereby giving us an opportunity to
express our point ofview on the issues under discussion.
I would also like to take this opportunity to once again
thank the Council on behalf of the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the
untiring efforts of the United Nations to find solutions
to the conflict that has prevailed in the eastern part of
our country for several years.

We have thoroughly studied the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/16) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), which Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
has just briefed us on. While we are grateful for his
presentation, we believe that we can usefully improve
the Council's understanding with some explanations on
various points brought up in the report. In order to do
that, we will touch on the political situation, the steps
being taken to lessen political tensions, the security
situation and, very briefly, on the strategic dialogue.

With regard to the political situation, during the
last three months of 2017 the attention of every political
stakeholder in our country was once again focused on
the electoral process. As we mentioned in October (see S/PV.8067), the work of updating the electoral register,
which had entered its last phase with the enrolment of
voters in Kasai and Kasai Central provinces, as well as
in the Luilu and Kamiji territories of Lomami province,
will end this month. As of today, the registered voters
number 45,810,308, of whom 24,095,030 are men and
21,715,278 women. It is important to note that the work
of updating the electoral roll was entirely financed by
the Government at a cost of $400,821,569.

As the Council can see, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo authorities are determined to see that
elections are held. On 31 December, President Joseph
Kabila Kabange emphasized in an address to the
nation that

"today's adoption and promulgation of the Election
Act, the registration of the electoral rolls and the
subsequent distribution of seats and establishment
of polling stations, in accordance with the electoral
calendar published by the Independent National
Electoral Commission, will lead us ineluctably to
the holding of elections".

All of the active stakeholders in the country, especially
the candidates, must work together to respect the
established timetable. After the publication of the
calendar, which, as we all know, fixed 23 December 2018
as the date for the elections, that part of the opposition
that still resists compromise and everything that is
being done to complete the process in an atmosphere of
calm has continued to make waves.

The Council will undoubtedly agree with me
that while we await the elections scheduled for
23 December 2018, the attitude we need from the
political stakeholders and our citizens generally is a
willingness to do everything possible to ensure that we
are well prepared for these deadlines in an atmosphere
of calm. It is therefore not helpful to be dealing with the
agitation and protests that gave rise to the events of the
kind that we experienced on 31 December organized
by the Secular Coordination Committee, which is part
of the Catholic Church, and supported by a fringe
opposition that has rejected all compromise since the
process began. The truth is that while agitating for
elections, this fringe opposition does not actually seem
to want to see them held.

Since we have to discuss the events of31 December,
it is important to point out that we have a law in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo governing the
organization of public demonstrations that requires that
the relevant authorities be sent a request indicating the
time that the demonstration will start, the route it will
follow and the starting and ending points, in order to
enable the security forces to keep order and protect the
protesters if necessary. The information we have from
the relevant authorities shows that the demonstration
organizers did not comply with that legal procedure.
Indeed, the letter that the Secular Coordination
Committee sent to the Governor of Kinshasa on
27 December contained none of the information I
have just described. Nor did it give the Committee's
address so as to enable the city authorities to reach the
interested parties in order to get the necessary details.
In the circumstances, the Governor of the city could not
authorize the holding of the demonstrations.

In any case, the Committee is not part of the
official structures of the Catholic Church, which would
therefore not recognize it legally. This explains why
a large number of dioceses in the country and even
parishes in the capital did not support the demonstration
organizers. As for the results of these events, the
information we have from the relevant authorities is
that the Congolese National Police documented no
deaths in places of worship in the Catholic parishes
in two of the 49 dioceses in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - that is, 10 parishes of 152 in the
Kinshasa diocese, and one parish in Kamina diocese in
Haut-Lomami province. However, five violent deaths
were recorded on 31 December for the entire country,
with no causal link to the events in question. Two of
the deaths were of thieves - one a motorbike taxi
driver by profession, Jose Fataki, a resident of No. 2
Kwenge quarter in Matete commune, and another who
is still unidentified - both killed by the guards of a
cold-storage room in the Mototo quarter in Matete
commune, which they were robbing. Their bodies
were brought by their accomplices to Saint Alphonse
parish, near the commercial establishment they
robbed. Father Hugues Ndongisila, the parish priest,
confirmed this version, saying that the two who died
were neither Christians nor demonstrators, and were
not killed within the parish. The third was a Kamuina
Nsapu terrorist, first name Arnolde, who was already
wanted by law enforcement for other previous criminal
activities and who had been mortally wounded during
his participation on 31 December in an armed attack
on two police stations at the Liberte market in Masina
commune in Kinshasa that took place around two
o'clock in the afternoon, long after public order had
been restored. The fourth death was of a Congolese
National Police officer named Mfufumba Latanase,
from the mobile operations squad at the police station
in Nsele commune, killed by Kamuina Nsapu terrorists
in an attack on the Masina community centre. The last
was an unidentified terrorist from a cell of the terrorist
organization Kamuina Nsapu who had attempted to
attack the offices of the military auditor in Kananga in
Kasai Central province and was killed in clashes with
security forces.

With regard to the law-enforcement personnel who
attempted to enter the churches, the city's Governor, who
condemned the situation, indicated that an investigation
had been opened and that those found guilty would be
punished. Regarding MONUSCO's other allegations,
the Government is prepared to share information with
it so as to ensure a full investigation of the situation on
the ground, in order to take the necessary measures.

In any case, the Government deplores this avoidable
situation, as an electoral register has already been
updated and an electoral calendar published, so the path
has already been cleared for the holding of elections
in December.

To conclude on this point, my country's authorities
would like to thank the United Nations and all
international partners who continue to support the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to ensure
that the electoral process, which has been proceeding
smoothly to date, has a successful outcome for the
people of the country.

As far as the confidence-building measures set out
in the Comprehensive and Inclusive Political Agreement
of 31 December 2016, the report notes that 107 political
prisoners are still being detained. Information provided
by the Government indicates that all so-called political
prisoners have been released, except for two individuals
who were not detained for political reasons: Mr. Diomi
Ndongala and Mr. Claude Muyambo. As we have already
stated, these two individuals are being prosecuted for
violations of common law. The first was convicted of
the rape of two minor twin sisters and the second for
having illegally acquired privately owned buildings.
Mr. Moise Katumbi is being prosecuted for violations
that are similar to those committed by Mr. Muyambo.

I think that the Council will agree that the
Government, which is supposed to protect everyone
and ensure justice, cannot intervene in the affairs of
private citizens in such a way that the strongest would
be favoured over the weakest.

As noted in paragraph 13 of the report, the security
situation has improved in most conflict areas, in both
North and South Kivu and in Kasai. This is despite the
fact that, as underscored in the report, there has been
heightened activity by certain national and foreign
armed groups in North Kivu involving targeted attacks
against the civilian population, the Congolese security
forces and Blue Helmets.

There is no need to recall here that in spite of all of
the efforts that we have undertaken together to restore
peace and security in that part of the country, these
attacks have already taken the lives of thousands of
Congolese people, members of the security forces and
several peacekeepers. Here I would like, on behalf of
my Government, to strongly condemn these attacks and
to pay tribute to the memory of the brave Tanzanian
peacekeepers who lost their lives on 6 December 2017,
at a time when we still very much needed them. This
sad and unacceptable situation forces us to review
our methods of work by strengthening our strategic
measures so as to achieve better outcomes and avoid
having to deplore any further loss of life.

As far as the presence of various foreign armed
groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces, the
Lord's Resistance Army and the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), as we have always
underscored, our armed forces, which have made
tremendous sacrifices in combating these criminals,
will continue their efforts in cooperation with
MONUSCO to completely eradicate these groups, in
order to allow our people to live in lasting peace.

In connection with the operations being conducted
to eradicate these groups, my Government appreciates
the repatriation efforts undertaken by MONUSCO in
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
whose nationals are members of these groups. That is
the case, as mentioned in the report, of the repatriation
to Rwanda of members of the FDLR and the resettlement
in Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and the United States of
219 combatants of the Sudanese People's Liberation
Movement/Sudanese People's Liberation Army in
Opposition. My Government would like to see these
efforts continue until the repatriation or resettlement
in third countries of all combatants who are still in
transit camps.

In the same context, I would like to focus once again
on the case of the 340 FDLR combatants who have been
awaiting repatriation in transit camps in Kanybayonga,
North Kivu; Walungu, in South Kivu; and Kisangani,
in Tshopo. I would like to reiterate once again to the
international community my Government's call for
their repatriation to their countries of origin or, failing
that, to a third country outside the Great Lakes region.

I cannot conclude without mentioning the Kasai
provinces and Kasai Central, which were the targets
of terrorist attacks by the Kamuina Nsapu militia.
As the Council is aware, calm has been restored, and
investigations are under way to determine the exact
circumstances of the crimes committed and to prosecute
and punish those responsible.

Before concluding, it is important to note that my
Government would like to see the strategic dialogue
accelerated, in accordance with resolution 2348 (2017),
so that the next report of the Secretary-General on
MONUSCO, which will be a reference document in
the context of the upcoming renewal of the mandate
of MONUSCO, will provide a coordinated vision that
includes the views of both parties.

I would like also to express the deep appreciation of
my Government to Mr. Maman Samba Sidikou, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the work he did during his term as Head of MONUSCO
to ensure that peace was restored in my country. My
Government is very grateful to him.

In the same context, my Government welcomes
the appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we assure her
that we will cooperate fully with her, as we did with
her predecessor, in order to enable her to successfully
discharge her mandate.

Finally, my delegation would like, as we begin this
new year, to convey to all members of the Council its
best wishes for a successful 2018.

