Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I apologize for taking
the floor again but with regard to incitement, which we
believe comes from the other side, if members think
that it comes from our side, we accept the following
proposals, namely, first, to form a commission from
members of the Security Council to observe our
behaviour and that of the other side. Whatever the
Council decides in advance, I say that we will accept.
Observe our conduct. Do not trust what we say or
what they say. The Council is a third party. Let the
Security Council establish a commission and review
our educational books. Or if it does not want to, offer
us UNESCO to do the same thing so that we can get to
the bottom of the so-called provocation and incitement.
I do not claim that we are a group of angels. We are
not. We are human beings. But in order to resolve
this puzzle, let us have a credible third party to come
and evaluate our conduct and our curriculum and the
conduct and the curriculum of the other side. So that is
to deal with the first question that the representative of
Germany raised.

Secondly, with regard to the rockets, we welcome
a commission, to be established by the Council, since
the Security Council is responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Let it be stationed
on the Gaza side or on the Israeli side, in Al-Khalil or
in East Jerusalem, and observe our conduct and their
conduct. It should try to be an element for deterrence
so that no one conducts their behaviour in violation
of international law. It cannot be that the Council just
keeps talking to us. It can see the problem. It should
assume its responsibility and act. Who is going to stop
the Council from observing the situation? Members say
that they want to have a special commission or a special
body that the Council forms to see who is violating
international law, including all the kinds of behaviour
that members mentioned, such as rockets.

Those are ideas. I hope that my colleagues in the
Security Council will consider them seriously so that
we do not continue with the eternal cycle of the Council
asking us to do something and thinking that we are not
doing it and it asking the other side to do something
and it is not doing it. Step up to the plate. The Council
is an objective party. Whatever decision it takes should
be the most objective decision because the Council
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Security Council members are
also supposed to be defenders of international law. I
say here on behalf of the Palestinian people and their
leadership, we accept any such proposal. If the Council
is strong enough and powerful enough, it should see
if the other side would accept such proposals. By the
way, I accept having a discussion without statements,
but I do not want it to be behind closed doors. I want
the whole world to see the conduct of us all. It must be
televised in all corners of the globe. If the idea is not
to read statements, I accept it. If the idea is to have a
very frank discussion in the Security Council, I accept
it but let it be aired to all corners of the globe. Let the
whole world see who is trying to work with the Council
to open doors for peace and who is obstructionist and
trying to block doors for peace.

