Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Special Representative Zenenga and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings.

Secretary-General Guterres used a phrase at the
London Conference last week that we do not hear
enough when we talk about Somalia: "good news".
There is much work to be done and significant threats
still loom, but there are hopeful signs in Somalia that a
new foundation for the State is being laid.

Our charge today and in the coming months will be
to continue the momentum of State-building. Our goal
is to support an ambitious agenda of Somali-led reforms
towards a democratic, stable and prosperous country.
Ten years have passed since the Security Council first
authorized the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
salute those forces that have sacrificed so much to
bring stability and security to the country. In addition,
Somalia has a new leader in President Farmajo. Last
week in London, United States Defense Secretary
Mattis said that President Farmajo is someone who is

"willing to put personal comfort aside and carry
the responsibilities and danger of leadership".

We congratulate President Farmajo on the security
pact that was endorsed at the London Conference. That
agreement is very much in the spirit of our goal to help
Somalia create for itself a stable Government that can
provide security for its people.

The Federal Government of Somalia took the first
significant step towards that goal with the creation of
the new national security architecture. A vital part of
building a new, independent Somalia is the creation ofa
professional military and police force. This architecture
provides a starting point for a stronger, more cohesive
security force in a more united country. The London
agreement will now support this security architecture
with more coordinated international involvement.

Too often, the efforts of Somalia's international
partners have been disjointed and even at cross
purposes. In an environment where financial
resources are shrinking, cooperation and transparency
among donors are extremely important. The London
agreement not only encourages international partners
to stay committed; it urges them to work together and
more cooperatively.

The United States is fully committed to supporting
the implementation of the national security architecture
and the London communique. Our support comes
with certain expectations, however. We welcome the
new Somali Administration's commitment to tackling
corruption in the security sector. We will be looking
to see that the statements made promising these
reforms are matched with swift and decisive actions
to ensure transparency and accountability. We also
need to see stronger institutional capacity within the
Somali national army before we can consider lifting the
arms embargo.

We are willing to help Somalia build that capacity.
In the meantime, the Government of Somalia is able
to obtain the military equipment it needs by following
the existing exemption. Additionally, as we go through
the African Union-United Nations joint review of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we
encourage the review team to take a hard look at how the
international community can best support the next stage
of State-building in Somalia. Our goal now is to begin
the transition of Somali security forces by providing
training and resources to Somali troops. AMISOM's
comparative advantage is its ability to undertake
offensive operations and perform counter-terrorism
activities. Given the ongoing threats in Somalia from
Al-Shabaab and other armed groups, we do not believe
that it is appropriate at this time to consider a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, nor do we
support the use of United Nations assessed funding for
AMISOM. troop stipends.

Finally, as we focus on strengthening Somalia's
political and security institutions, we canot lose sight
of the immense challenges posed by the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Over 6.5 million people are in
need of food assistance in Somalia - more than half
the population. We applaud the Government's efforts
to address the drought conditions and we appreciate the
mobilization efforts of the humanitarian community
to provide water, food and medical care. While we are
heartened by the commitment of over $600 million from
the international community this year, we recognize
that we are not out of the woods yet, as our briefers
have reminded us today.

Somalia and the United Nations have just requested
nearly $900 million to provide assistance through
the end of this year. The United States has provided
$178 million since October to the humanitarian
response. We encourage other donors to offer their
support as well. In the longer term, it will be Somalia's
emergence as a stable, secure nation that will help it to
prevent future humanitarian crises. This is a moment of
great potential for that nation. The United States looks
forward to remaining a partner to Somalia as Somalia
makes its journey to security and Independence.

