Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing this afternoon. The Somalia sanctions regime represents a shared effort by Somalia and its international partners to tackle the greatest threats to Somalia's peace and security and to support long-term security sector reform. Its nature as a partial embargo means that the Federal Governmentof Somalia is able to access the equipment and training needed to tackle the scourge of Al-Shabaab. We greatly welcome the support provided by Council members in that regard. We strongly condemn the continued attacks by Al-Shabaab, which take lives in Somalia and beyond. At this point, I wish to pay tribute to the brave men and women of the Somali armed forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia. We welcome the Federal Government of Somalia's recent engagement with the Panel of Experts and the Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia, including constructive meetings with the new Coordinator of the Panel and a visit by the Committee in January 2020, on which we have just been briefed. We hope that that engagement can continue with the support of the international community to enable continued progress in building long-term stability and security in Somalia and we look forward to a visit to Somalia by the other members of the Panel in the near future. We are currently at a critical juncture in the long- term future of Somalia's security. Together, we can work to stop the flow of arms, improvised explosive device components and illicit finance to Al-Shabaab and other armed groups that threaten Somalia's stability. We also call for progress in agreeing individual designations under the Somalia sanctions regime, in particular those proposed in October 2019. Those listings represent an important element in ensuring that the sanctions regime has an impact. Somalia and its international supporters face a huge task in the coming years in delivering the full transition to Somali-led security. The United Kingdom will continue to stand firmly alongside Somalia, the United Nations and regional partners in those efforts.
