Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I am confident that
under your talented and able guidance, the Council will
be able successfully to fulfil its responsibilities during the
current month. I should like also to take this opportunity
to express my admiration for your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, for the excellent
manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council.

It is with a sense of utmost concern that the
Government of Pakistan views the recent decision by
Israel to build a new settlement consisting of 600 housing
units in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area of East Jerusalem.
Israel has also kept open the tunnel extending under the
Western Wall of the Al-Aqsa mosque, Al-Haram Al-
Sharif. We were equally disturbed to learn that Israel has
continued to isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the
West Bank by declaring it off-limits to Palestinians and
withdrawing residence permits for the city's original Arab
inhabitants. Pakistan strongly condemns all these actions,
which constitute a blatant violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly,.the Declaration of Principles and subsequent
agreements.

The special significance of the Holy City of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif for the international community in general and
the Islamic Ummah in particular requires no elaboration.
Israeli measures that are aimed at altering the legal status
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

and demographic composition of Jerusalem are illegal and
invalid.

Israeli acts of provocation have once again shattered
hopes that the peace process would lead to the early
exercise by the Palestinian people of their right to self-
determination through the establishment of an independent
homeland. This would require the complete Withdrawal by
the Israeli authorities from all the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds Al~
Sharif. Pakistan's support for the just struggle for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is well known.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to provide
a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.

It is imperative that the peace process, arrived at
through bold and courageous initiatives, not collapse. We
fully share the expectations of the international community
that there will be no attempt to derail the implementation of
the agreements and accords concluded so far. The
provisions of these agreements and accords must be
sincerely complied with in both letter and spirit. We hope
that the Israeli leadership will concede the realities on the
ground and resolve all pending issues -- including the
immediate reversal of their alarming actions - with the
Palestinian National Authority. We strongly urge the
demonstration of the requisite flexibility and
accommodation, as well as a sincere commitment to the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace that
will ensure security and stability for all in the Middle East.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are deeply
concerned at these latest actions by the Israeli authorities,
which are seriously undermining the peace process.
Pakistan urges the Security Council to uphold the just
position taken by the Palestinians on the issue of Jerusalem,
a position which is based on international law and justice.
We also call upon the Council not only to take urgent
measures to redress the current grave situation; which
imperils the peace of the Holy City of Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
but to prevent the further deterioration of the situation. We
firmly believe that the Council has the duty to call upon the
Israeli authorities immediately to end these unjust actions
and to desist from taking similar actions in the future.

We are confident that the Security Council is
conscious of the importance that is attached to Al-Quds A1-
Sharif by the entire Muslim world and to the dangers
inherent in allowing the prevailing resentment to foster.

