Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): Firstly, my
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Wisnumurti and
his delegation for the wise and effective way in which they
conducted the presidency of the Security Council in August,
and to pledge to you, Mr. President, our full cooperation in
helping you fulfil your responsibilities this month in the
Council, for which you have always demonstrated your
most pre-eminent concern.

My delegation strongly supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations, contained in his letter of 25
August 1995, and is pleased that this Council has adopted
unanimously the draft resolution before it to establish an
International Commission to investigate allegations of arms
flows to the former Government of Rwanda forces in the
region. There has been widespread concern at the
continuing allegations that arms and related materiel have
been reaching these forces and the militias in the camps.
The United Kingdom shares that concern, since we believe
that the activities of these elements represent a real threat
to the security and stability of Rwanda, of Burundi, and of
the whole Great Lakes region.

The voluntary and safe return of refugees to Rwanda
is essential for the long-term stability of that country. But
the intimidation of refugees by armed elements in the
camps has acted as a deterrent to their voluntary return.
Breaking the hold of those militias and accelerating efforts
to create conditions within Rwanda which will encourage
the refugees to return are therefore essential.

We therefore hope that the Commission will be able
to establish an accurate picture of whether arms and related
materiel are reaching these extremist elements. Its findings
will provide an objective basis for the consideration of
possible measures to improve the monitoring and
enforcement of the arms embargo established under
Security Council resolution 918 (1994) and the subsequent
resolutions. We urge all States to comply fully with the
requirements of those resolutions.

Countries in the region which have accepted large
numbers of refugees from Rwanda, and also Burundi, are
shouldering an enormous burden. We understand the many
problems this has created for them. But it is very much in
their interests, too, to cooperate with the Commission to
ensure that arms and related materiel, which could
destabilize their own countries as well as Rwanda, do not
reach the extremist elements in the camps in violation of
the Council's resolutions. We therefore call upon all
States in the region to cooperate fully with the
Commission.

We must also not lose sight of the wider picture. In
this context we very much welcome the Secretary-
General's letter of 29 August 1995 on the situation in the
Great Lakes region. This letter sets out clearly the key
problem areas. We share the Secretary-General's concern
and underline the need for a coordinated and effective
response from the international community. In that
context, we welcome and support the initiatives that the
Secretary-General is undertaking.

