Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I welcome the Vice-President of Iraq,
Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his briefing, and the
representative of the United States for his report on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

The circumstances in which we meet today are
ones of serious insecurity and instability in Iraq, as the
Secretary-General's report illustrates yet again,
unfortunately. Sectarian violence has intensified after
an initial decline following the implementation of the
Baghdad security plan. The specific consequences of
the security plan therefore remain to be seen in the
coming weeks. Moreover, reconciliation appears to be
remote, reconstruction is bogged down, and the impact
of conflict is reflected in tragic statistics, such as the
nearly 4 million individuals who have become refugees
and internally displaced persons, and the fact that only
50 per cent of school-age children are currently
attending schools. Those facts bode ill for the future of
the country.

It is necessary to continue to adapt strategies for
security, political dialogue, humanitarian assistance
and development to the circumstances of ongoing
sectarian conflict. We hope that the gravity of the
situation will generate among those Iraqis who aspire
to a future for their own country a gradual mobilization
towards re-opening dialogue in their country in order
to address the most basic issues affecting everyone's
existence. Clearly, significant changes must be made
with regard to strategic orientation and the provision of
the resources necessary to restoring Iraq's stability.

Iraq and its authorities, first and foremost, as well
as the neighbouring countries and regional and other
external actors involved in Iraq, must act cautiously in
the current circumstances in cooperating to achieve
stability. Peru supports all initiatives that would serve
to restore trust among all Iraqi sectors. My
Government hopes that such initiatives will be
reflected in a reduction in the level of violence in the
region, particularly in Iraq, and in the number of
refugees and displaced persons. Iraq needs more
inclusiveness and committed partnership if it is to meet
the immense challenges it faces.

Peru condemns sectarian violence and acts of
intolerance, and rejects all terrorist attacks committed
in Iraq. We encourage the Iraqi Government to strive
resolutely to implement security policies, provide
protection for all its citizens, and reinforce central
control of its public forces. We also reaffirm that there
is no place for impunity in the construction of
democratic institutions in Iraq.

The reconstruction of Iraq is a central issue for its
Government. Unfortunately, setbacks and delays have
been caused by the lack of security and governability.
We regret the deterioration in the provision of such
basic services as education and even food. The
International Compact with Iraq, a significant initiative
to promote international assistance, would enjoy
conditions more conducive to its launching if it were
accompanied by improved security and reconciliation.
Iraq's petroleum wealth should be managed
transparently and responsibly in order to ensure that all
Iraqi society benefits from its exploitation. If revenues
generated by the petroleum sector are distributed on a

negotiated basis, they will strengthen the climate of
understanding among Iraqis and their confidence that
their resources will serve to build a better future for
Iraq's citizens.

Finally, my delegation expresses its support for
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We are of the view that UNAMI should
continue to work, in accordance with its mandate and
opportunities in the field, to consolidate all tasks that
would serve to restore political and legal stability,
relaunch institutional and economic reconstruction,
promote humanitarian assistance, and protect human
rights in Iraq.

