Mr. Lowcock: On 23 October, I warned the
Security Council that a grave economic crisis and
escalating conflict had pushed Yemen closer to famine
than ever before (see S/PV.8379).

Shortly after that briefing, the Famine Early
Warning Systems Network released a new alert. The
Early Warning Systems Network, which is supported
by the United States, is one of the leading providers
of early warning and analysis on acute food insecurity.
According to the Network, "Yemen faces the largest
food security emergency in the world, and the worsening
humanitarian outlook requires urgent action to reduce
the likelihood of significant loss of life".

The Famine Early Warning Systems Network
characterizes the food security situation in Yemen as
facing "a catastrophic deterioration" and warns that
many of the millions of the severely food-insecure
people in the country "face food consumption gaps
large enough to lead to increases in human mortality".

So is it a famine? With respect, I fear that that is
the wrong question. A very painful lesson learned from
the two famines declared this century - in Somalia
in 2011 and in South Sudan in 2017 - is the fact that
most fatalities occur before famine is declared. So to
be clear, I am not saying that widespread famine has
already taken hold in Yemen, but that is what we are
trying to prevent. It is abundantly clear that Yemen is
already facing mass hunger and severe food insecurity.
We are fortunate to have David Beasley here today.
He will describe the food security situation in more
detail and tell us about his visit to the country earlier
this week. In my assessment, Yemen has so far avoided
famine for just two reasons.

First, the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
are implementing the largest aid operation in the world,
reaching nearly 8 million Yemenis across the country
every month. Secondly, Member States and other key
stakeholders have taken action when the risk of famine
has intensified in the past, for example by working
together to lift the temporary blockade this time last
year and by providing generous, flexible, large-scale
funding early this year. As I emphasized in my last
briefing, we urgently need the Council to take action
again now. That is why I sought the Council's support on
five key requests, which, if they are fully implemented,
would save the lives of millions of Yemenis, sparing
them from an entirely avoidable catastrophe. So today
I would like to update the Council on where we stand
with those five actions.

My first request was for a cessation of hostilities to
be implemented in and around the infrastructure and
facilities on which the aid operation and commercial
importers rely. Many Council members made similar
requests during the 23 October meeting and after that,
and the Secretary-General reinforced that position in
his statement of 2 November. What in fact happened was
that violence escalated on several fronts immediately
after my last briefing. Since 30 October, United Nations
sources have observed nearly 800 separate incidents of
shelling, armed clashes or air strikes across Yemen.
Some of the fiercest fighting has been in Al-Hudaydah,
which is where most of the crucial infrastructure
needing protection actually is. Those incidents too
often have devastating consequences for civilians. To
cite just one recent incident, a bus carrying civilians
fleeing conflict in Al-Hudaydah came under attack on
Tuesday, killing seven people.

Critical civilian infrastructure has not been spared
either. Last Sunday, patients - some of whom were
still connected to medical devices - reportedly fled
Al-Hudaydah's largest public hospital into the street
amidst large explosions. Several days later, the same
hospital was damaged by shrapnel, and then again by
shelling yesterday. A second hospital was damaged
after becoming caught up in the crossfire as front
lines shifted around the city. Fighters also took up
positions inside that hospital and on its roof, placing the
entire facility at grave risk. The impact of violence in
Al-Hudaydah has compounded the chaos and hardships
facing people who were already in desperate straits.
Needs are enormous; perhaps 30 per cent of people
still in the city are barely surviving, including about
a quarter of children who are malnourished. As the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Lise Grande,
recently noted, the most vulnerable people in the whole
country are sitting there in Al-Hudaydah. These are the
poorest of the poor.

The fighting has also had an impact on humanitarian
operations. Some programmes have been scaled back
in Al-Hudaydah and the staff overseeing them have
left - I hope only temporarily. Other important
emergency programmes remain in place, and agencies
are restocking supplies inside Al-Hudaydah in an
attempt to ensure that critical humanitarian operations
can continue if the situation gets worse.

So, for all the reasons Martin Griffiths has just
cited and those I have just given to the Council, it
remains urgent, as Martin has said, for the parties
to agree a cessation of hostilities. We both issued
statements reiterating that earlier this week. In the past
two days, we have seen a welcome de-escalation and
what appears to be at least a pause in the fighting in
Al-Hudaydah, but what we need to know is that this
lull is going to be sustained. Let me repeat again that,
as we have previously said and as Martin touched on,
the United Nations is ready to play an enhanced role
in ensuring the appropriate use of key facilities around
Al-Hudaydah, such as the port.

The second area for which I sought the support of
the Council is to facilitate and protect the supply of
food and other essential goods across the country. As
members know, Yemen imports nearly all of its food,
fuel and medicine. Commercial food imports in October
through the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef - where
most of the food enters the country - fell by more
than 50 per cent as compared to September. Only 17
ships discharged cargo in those ports in October - the
second-lowest monthly figure ever recorded. To avoid
famine, it is essential to keep all ports functioning
and to remove obstacles to imports or the domestic
distribution of essential goods. I therefore welcome
the Government of Yemen's decision this week to
suspend Cabinet Decree 75 for food imports. Experts
had warned that the immediate implementation of that
Decree could lead to worse food shortages and higher
prices. But although the Government has suspended
Decree 75 for food, it remains in place for fuel, which
is critical to pumping drinking water, maintaining
sanitation systems and running hospital generators.

Since the enforcement of Decree 75 for fuel
began last month, the coalition has, at the request
of the Government of Yemen, denied entry to four
commercial vessels carrying nearly 53,000 tons of
fuel. That is equivalent to more than 40 per cent of
average fuel imports in any given month since the
temporary blockade was lifted about a year ago. To
protect the food supply and avoid famine, parties to
the conflict must also avoid damaging or cutting off
access to supporting infrastructure. The main eastern
road from Al-Hudaydah to Sana'a remains closed due
to insecurity, forcing traders and humanitarian partners
to reroute shipments, which costs more money and
more time. Several humanitarian sites are in areas in
Al-Hudaydah that have recently changed hands. They
include the Red Sea Mills, which contain enough
grain to feed more than 3 million people for a month.
I understand that talks are proceeding on options to
ensure that those critical supplies can now reach the
people who need them.

My third request was for the provision of support
for the Yemeni economy by injecting foreign exchange
and paying salaries and pensions. Those measures will
protect against famine by boosting people's ability
to purchase food and other essential goods and by
supporting traders in keeping commercial imports
flowing. In October, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
deposited $200 million in the Central Bank of Yemen
to strengthen the Yemeni rial. That welcome move has
helped to bring the exchange rate down from a peak
of about 800 rial to the United States dollar in early
October, to about 670 rial to the dollar today. It has also
helped to finance imports of food and other essential
commodities. Some reports also indicate that that
deposit may be helping to lower food prices slightly.
Those are important improvements.

At the same time, we must recall that the exchange
rate before the conflict escalated four years ago was
215 rial to the dollar, so it still costs more than three
times as many rials to buy a dollar than it did before the
conflict escalated. In the past year alone, the rial has
lost nearly 50 per cent of its value. It is also important
to note that applications to access Central Bank credit
against the Saudi deposit have exceeded the available
funds - a sign that traders are eager to maintain
the flow of essential imports if they have access to
adequate capital. Those developments demonstrate that
foreign exchange injections are enormously effective
in this environment. We need a continuing, large-scale
flow of foreign exchange into the market to finance
adequate levels of imports and to support the currency
at a level that will make food and other commodity
prices affordable.

Regarding salary payments, I welcomed the news in
my last briefing that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates would provide $70 million to
cover allowances for 135,000 teachers. We see that as
a best practice, and discussions with potential donors
on replicating it for health and sanitation workers,
as well as for pensioners, are at an advanced stage.
Several weeks ago, the Houthi authorities in Sana'a also
released some of the backlog in civil servant salaries.
We hope that will be a first step towards the resumption
of regular salary payments across the country.

My fourth request was for an increase funding and
support to the aid operation. This year, we are extremely
grateful to all our donors for providing $2.3 billion so
far to the 2018 United Nations coordinated humanitarian
response plan. That is nearly 80 per cent of the
requirements we estimated at the beginning of the year.
Given developments over the past few months, we are
now discussing additional funding for this year with
donors. I hope decisions on that will be taken by the
relevant donors very soon. Given the increase in needs,
as a result of the intensified fighting and the further
recent collapse of the economy, I can say that next
year's response plan will be substantially larger. I will
announce the precise amount shortly. The Secretary-
General plans to convene a high-level conference on
Yemen with a focus on the 2019 humanitarian response
plan in February.

My fifth request called on all belligerents to work
with the Special Envoy to end the conflict, and I will
not repeat Martin's comprehensive account of where the
process stands. I echo his calls to move quickly towards
confidence-building measures and consultations,
and from there to resume full negotiations. Council
members have just heard Martin confirm his support
for my five requests. I want to emphasize that those five
requests need to be seen as a package. Substantial new
action is needed on all of them if massive loss oflife in
a terrible famine is to be avoided. I am therefore again
seeking Council members' individual and collective
support - both practical and political - on those
five areas.

