Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Australia for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate and the Foreign Minister
for personally presiding over it. We also would like to
express our gratitude for the concept note (S/2014/787, annex) that the Australian delegation has prepared,
which I am sure will guide today's debate. We thank
the Secretary-General for the information provided,
together with the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities.

The Government of Guatemala categorically
rejects all acts of terrorism and reiterates its
commitment to preventing and combating this scourge.
It is discouraging to see that terrorism, in its various
forms and spheres, continues to spread and even
intensify. The number of acts and victims is increasing,
leaving a tragic trail of dead and wounded. The means
used are becoming increasingly grotesque, and no
one - not even United Nations officials, journalists or
humanitarian workers - is immune to the risk of being
involved in a terrorist event.

The concept note raises for discussion various
ways to strengthen international cooperation to combat
terrorism and violent extremism. In that connection, we
would like to make the following remarks.

First, if there has ever been, in our interconnected
world, a challenge that a nation cannot face alone, it
is that of terrorists who cross borders and threaten to
unleash violent extremism. Therefore, it is vital that
we act on several fronts at the same time. The role of
international cooperation and multilateralism at all
levels is critical to neutralizing this threat. Conversely,
any purely national effort will be in vain. We should all
strengthen the mechanisms for border control, exchange
of information and good practices in the prevention
of terrorism. We also believe that international
legal assistance is key to avoiding impunity for the
perpetrators of terrorist acts.

Secondly, we must address as a priority the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. In the
long run, it is preventive measures that will effectively
contribute to eradicating terrorism. The emergence of
foreign terrorist fighters and violent extremism can
be attributed to situations such as extreme poverty,
marginalization, lack of opportunities and, especially,
youth unemployment. We must help all countries
develop their capacities to face this threat and overcome
it. We must build national resilience against terrorism.
States must foster societies in which individuals and
communities are able to resist the ideology of violent
extremism, challenge those who make it their own and
mitigate the impacts ofa terrorist attack so as to return
quickly to daily life.

Thirdly, in the course of the past decade, we have
come to count on a number of operating tools to address
this issue and cooperate efficiently, taking into account
the needs and characteristics of each region. However,
we must continue to strengthen our international
legal instruments. The current international situation
requires, as soon as possible, a comprehensive
convention against terrorism. Its conclusion would
be a message of firmness and unity on the part of the
entire international community. In addition, it would
provide us with a definition of terrorism that would
make possible a universal classification of this heinous
act, facilitate cooperation and legal assistance among
States, and fill the existing gaps in the work of the
Security Council, including the legal frameworks for
its sanctions regimes.

Fourthly, I would like to mention the United
Nations efforts in the fight against terrorism. We
recognize the role that the Council and its subsidiary
bodies have played in promoting this cause. But the
Security Council cannot and should not do it alone. The
Council considers measures primarily ex post facto,
while in this case the main focus should be preventive,
addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism.
In that respect, sanctions against terrorism have the
potential to serve as a preventive measure, although
much remains to be done to improve their effectiveness
and implementation. We note with interest the analysis
that counter-terrorism committees are doing in response
to the request contained in resolution 2178 (2014).

What we would like to see is additional measures
to strengthen coordination, coherence, efficiency and
transparency among the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat and the United Nations
system. We believe that a greater spirit of collaboration
would make it possible to better and more adequately
respond to the particularities of each situation under
consideration and maximize the use of existing
structures and resources. We see no cost benefit in
creating new structures for every threat and challenge
that arises. We suggest that existing capacities within
the Organization be reviewed before going ahead with
the proliferation of structures.

Finally, the international community faces a real
and growing threat is not new but is more diverse
and complex. In this lengthy process of combating
terrorism, we cannot forget the victims, who deserve
from us a tribute to their memory today. We express
our solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families.

