Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile voted in favour of resolution 2180 (2014) as an
expression of my country's ongoing commitment to the
democratic process, the rule of law and the promotion of
human rights and socioeconomic development in Haiti,
in which the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) has had and continues to have an
important role. We also did so in order to maintain a
constructive spirit in the work of the Security Council.
We regret that we were not in a position to be a sponsor
of the resolution this year, as we have been in the past.

The Council has just adopted the resolution
renewing the mandate of MINUSTAH on the basis
of recommendations to that led to apprehension on
our part, as they do for some in the Latin American
community that contribute troops and police to the
Mission.

In the course of the negotiations, Chile supported
a gradual reduction of forces, taking into consideration
the electoral timetable in order to ensure a process
that ensures transparency and eventual democratic
governance, so to avoid undermining the achievements
recent years. A drastic reduction in the number of
MINUSTAH's military contingents could diminish the
Mission's prevention capacity and, in a crisis, which
we hope will not occur, it would be obliged to react
under operational concepts that are still unclear, with
all the risks that that entails. My country cannot ensure
in advance if it will be able to continue participating,
as we have done in the past 10 years. Furthermore, our
understanding of paragraph 2 of the resolution is that
military contingents will remain at levels similar to
the current ones until the next report of the Secretary-
General, due in March 2015, so as to be able to support
any development in the electoral realm.

We reiterate that any decision with regard to
an increase or decrease in the number of troops
should be adopted in accordance with the situation
on the ground, not on the basis of considerations
that may vary. In that connection, Chile expects that
the provisions of paragraph 3 of the resolution will
be strictly implemented - that any adjustment in
the configuration of the forces must be based on the
situation on the ground - as well as those of paragraph
4, which reinforces the commitment of the Security
Council to review any situation that jeopardizes the
achievements made.

But it is equally important that Haiti's political
leaders take on their responsibilities with maturity and
now agree to pursue the pending elections and ensure
the realization of the 2015 presidential elections. That
process has abeen delayed more than is prudent, with
a peacekeeping Mission that has already been on the
ground for more than 10 years and must necessarily be
in the process of envisioning a horizon for an exit.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Chile considers it important that the views of troop-
contributing countries be adequately taken into account
in evaluating any reconfiguration of a peacekeeping
operation of the United Nations, especially when
reconfigurations of this magnitude are considered.

