Allow me to begin by welcoming the work of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), with support from the United Nations Kosovo team. I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing and note the significant role of the Secretary-General in creating an environment conducive to compromise, reconciliation and stability in Kosovo, as outlined in his latest report (S/2020/255) of 31 March 2020. We wish to reiterate that the presence of the United Nations in Kosovo is critical to reaching a peaceful and sustainable solution and in encouraging cooperation among all parties and stakeholders. We would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate UNMIK on becoming the first United Nations peacekeeping operation to receive an International Organization for Standardization quality management standard for end-to-end mission support field operations. That is a commendable achievement for the UNMIK team. South Africa continues to support the work of UNMIK and its constructive engagement with all stakeholders to create an environment conducive to compromise, reconciliation, unity and stability in Kosovo. In that regard, we support its continued cooperation with UN-Women and the empowerment of women and young people in peacebuilding and training. We also wish to reiterate our support for the continued engagement with the authorities and civil society, as well as bilateral and international partners, in building peace and inter-community trust in Kosovo. We note with concern the ongoing stalemate, which has brought the political dialogue to a halt, and call on both sides to recommit to the dialogue and to take the necessary steps to bring the process back on track. We call on the parties during this time to redouble their efforts towards reducing tension, as it undermines any future prospects for successful dialogue and reconciliation. The differences between the parties regarding conditions for the resumption of negotiations have negative implications for progress. It is only through dialogue that existing disagreements can be resolved and the foundations laid for an inclusive and fair political settlement acceptable to both sides. We believe that, through confidence and trust-building measures, a sustained dialogue between the sides will prevail. We laud the efforts by all sides to respond to the challenges posed by the onset of the coronavirus pandemic. We hope that the spirit of compromise will be the foundation for negotiations towards an inclusive, fair political settlement that is acceptable to both sides.
