Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his report on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), dated 8 August 1995,
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 997
(1995). We consider the report positive. It shows that
there have been improvements in the security situation;
that the Government of Rwanda continues to take
measures aimed at establishing the environment of
confidence needed for the voluntary return of refugees in
conditions of security and dignity; and that the
Government also continues striving to strengthen the
administration of justice, establish public order and
promote national reconciliation.

Indeed, national reconciliation is a task that the
Government of Rwanda must deal with as a priority. In
the context of that task, it is undeniably important to
strengthen the country's judicial system and
simultaneously to adopt measures intended to promote
human rights and to see that those rights are respected.
This means the establishment of conditions that can
produce the climate of confidence needed for the return
of the refugees.

It is also satisfying to know that the maintenance of
security in the country has improved and that the
Government is now cooperating more closely with
UNAMIR in the fulfilment of its mandate.

With regard to the task of national reconstruction, it
is encouraging to know that the donor community and
United Nations organs have met and have acknowledged
the need to speed up the distribution of funds already
committed for Rwanda. This would no doubt provide
great support for the reconstruction of the country's
infrastructure and for restoring and building up its
national production capability.

 

Unfortunately, all the efforts made by the Government
of Rwanda, with the assistance of the international
community, to recover from the effects of the tragic events
of 1994 could be thwarted by destabilization provoked from
outside Rwanda - with repercussions for neighbouring
countries - if there is no reduction in tensions and if lack
of security persists in the parts of Zaire bordering Rwanda.
These tensions exist because of reports of military training
and weapons transfers to members of the former
Government forces and militias that plan to attack the
established Government. Therefore, the international
community, which has been playing a leading role in the
reconstruction of Rwanda and in the promotion of
repatriation and reconciliation, must take measures such as
the Government of Zaire; suggested establishment of an
international commission to deal with reports of arms
supplies to the forces of the former Rwandan Government.

In general, my delegation is in agreement with the
Secretary-General's observations and conclusions in his
report. We support his initiatives to convene a regional
conference to study the interrelated problems of peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes subregion.

My delegation also believes that the draft resolution
makes it possible for the Rwandan Government to address
its internal-security problem, along with a number of related
problems. It also provides a clear-cut monitoring
mechanism for the restrictions imposed by paragraph 13 of
resolution 918 (1994).

In conclusion, I wish to say that my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution because it contains the
elements we believe essential for helping the people of
Rwanda achieve peace, stability, confidence, reconstruction
and the security the country needs.

