Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): We thank the Russian
Federation for organizing this open debate, as well as
Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien and Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for their briefings.

We are distressed by the ever-worsening spiral of
violence in Syria. Brazil welcomed the announcement
last month ofa renewed cessation of hostilities in Syria.
The apparent collapse of this promising initiative, only
a few days later, was a bitter setback. The destruction
of medical facilities in Aleppo, the bombing of Syrian
Government positions in Deir ez-Zor, the attack on a
humanitarian convoy in Oram Al-Kubra and the shelling
of the Russian Embassy compound in Damascus are
only the latest unacceptable episodes of a seemingly
endless sequence of serious violations of international
law perpetrated by all sides of the war.

We are particularly worried by the delay of the
Security Council to uphold its responsibilities, in view
of a persistent lack of unity among its members. That
was confirmed on 8 October, when this body rejected
two draft resolutions (see S/PV.7785). Such omission
underlines yet again the urgent need to reform the
Security Council and to adjust it to the geopolitical
realities of our multipolar world.

Tomorrow's informal meeting of the General
Assembly on Syria will, we hope, inspire the Council
to build consensus and identify new avenues to achieve
the long-overdue peace and stability in Syria. Brazil
stands firmly in favour of an inclusive and Syrian-led
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people, as established by Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015). We urge all parties to cooperate
constructively, without preconditions and in good faith,
with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and to resume
the intra-Syrian dialogue. We also stress the need to
separate so-called moderate opposition forces from
all terrorist groups active in Syria, particularly Jabhat
al-Nusra and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
as well as the importance of ceasing any support
whatsoever to those terrorist entities.

Countries with direct influence on the developments
on the ground should resume full dialogue and
cooperation in order to revive the cessation ofhostilities
and tackle terrorism in Syria. That would allow for
unimpeded humanitarian access for all Syrians in need
and pave the way for the resumption of the peace talks.
Brazil has long advocated accountability regarding
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity,
acts of terrorism and other serious violations in Syria.
We reiterate such calls today.

The eight-hour humanitarian pause announced
for tomorrow in Aleppo is a positive, though limited,
step. Other actions could be taken to minimize civilian
suffering. We should consider adopting multilateral
measures to curb the proliferation and supply of weapons
to Syria, including the imposition of an arms embargo,
as recommended by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria. However, existing
or new unilateral economic sanctions have a negative
impact on the welfare of civilians in Syria and create
further barriers to humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction activities. We stress that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the only body
with the legal authority to impose coercive economic
measures is the Security Council.

Brazil is concerned with recent developments
concerning the question of Palestine. Of particular
concern is the unrelenting expansion of and official
support for Israeli settlements in the West Bank and
in occupied East Jerusalem. As highlighted last week
by an informal meeting of the Security Council, Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories represent a
serious obstacle to the peace process. Brazil strongly
condemns all recent acts of violence and terrorism
in the region, including a shooting attack on Israeli
civilians in Jerusalem. Such actions are deplorable and
unjustifiable.

Brazil took note of the decision of the State of
Palestine to postpone local elections due to legal
difficulties and urges all Palestinian actors to overcome
their divisions and uphold democracy and national unity.

We welcome recent efforts by Russia, France and
Egypt, among others, to promote an atmosphere that
is conducive to the revitalization of Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. Nevertheless, no ad hoc initiative can be
a substitute for the responsibilities of this Council in
resolving the dispute.

We are heartened by reports that the Security
Council may soon draft a long-awaited resolution that
would define parameters for the peace process. Brazil
actively encourages the Council to lead the way towards
the creation of a fully independent, free, sovereign and
viable State for the Palestinian people within its 1967
borders and in peace with the State of Israel. Reaching
such a concrete outcome before 2017 would send a
positive signal. The Council has a vital role to play in
this regard.

The conflict in Yemen shows no sign of abating.
We regret the apparent deterioration of the political
process since the end of negotiations in Kuwait.
Brazil urges all parties to resume consultations with
Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed in order
to reach a comprehensive agreement. We join the
Secretary-General in condemning the airstrikes on
a funeral ceremony in Sana'a that reportedly caused
over 140 civilian deaths. All actors must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

On Lebanon, we are concerned that the positive
momentum generated by the successful local elections
could not be translated into a solution for the political
deadlock on the national level and the vacancy of the
presidency that has lasted two years. The situation
creates serious difficulties for the effective functioning
of the Lebanese Government, which is already faced
with challenging circumstances in its vicinity. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and its support to the Lebanese
Government and people.

Nearly one year since the Libyan Political
Agreement was signed, the consolidation of the
Government of National Accord remains a work in
progress. Libya continues to face the political, social,
security and humanitarian consequences of the absence
of effective State authority. We reiterate our support
for Special Representative Martin Kobler and the work
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
strongly condemn the recent attempted coup against
the Government of National Accord and urge all parties
to cooperate towards achieving national and local
reconciliation in the country and restoring the national
unity of Libya. Recent progress in the fight against
ISIL and other terrorists groups should be matched
with similar breakthroughs on the political side.

We took note of two important decisions adopted
by this Council on Libya. We welcome resolution 2298
(2016), which allows for the removal and destruction
of all chemical weapons precursors from Libya.
Concerning resolution 2312 (2016), which renewed the
authorization for naval operations to prevent migrant
smuggling and human trafficking on the high seas
off the coast of Libya, let me recall the imperative
of protecting the human rights of all refugees and
migrants who attempt to cross the Mediterranean,
especially the most vulnerable. Migration is not a
threat to international peace and security and should
not be criminalized.

