Mr. Tupouniua (Tonga): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the 12 members of
the group of Pacific small island developing States with
a presence at the United Nations, namely, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and my own
country, Tonga.

At the outset, allow me on behalf of our group
to thank you, Mr. President, and New Zealand, for
convening this very timely and important debate on
issues related to peace and security in the Pacific
SIDS and SIDS generally. We associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by Mr. Ali Naseer Mohamed,
Foreign Secretary of the Republic of Maldives and
Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States.

In this day and age, with all its complicated,
interrelated and enmeshed political, social,
environmental and economic realities, how can we
define international peace and security? Certainly
today's realities are far from those that the founders of
this body faced in 1945. Security issues were defined
traditionally in terms of the scourge of war between
States. The issue of what causes war was and still is the
major question that defines the purpose of the Security
Council.

Seventy years later, however, we must ask whether
the traditional definition of security, upon which the
Council was founded, is still appropriate for application
today? Should this traditional concept of security
alone continue to define the present day actions of the
Council? Many have argued that it should not, and that
is why other organs of the United Nations are looking
to renew themselves so as to ensure that the whole body
is fit for purpose for today's realities. In that regard,
we may ponder whether the Security Council today is
likewise fit for purpose, by way ofmaintaining its usage
of traditional security approaches to prevent, or dare
I say, cure the problems of global peace and security
today. Can the traditional definition of security still
suffice to answer the question of what causes war?

The root causes of the difficulties in maintaining
international peace and security are no longer drawn
from traditional definitions of security, as those root
causes have evolved over the years into what might be
considered non-traditional causes. The lines are blurred
between the traditional realpolitik ofthe past and today's
more complex notions of non-traditional definitions
of security, all of which contributes, in a multitude of
complicated ways, to making the Council's duty to the
world a more difficult one. Questions of sustainable
development or the lack thereof are root causes of the
failure to maintain peace and security. Furthermore, the
failure to maintain peace and security is a root cause for
the absence of sustainable development. The Council
must look at issues of international peace and security
through the lens of the present tense by redefining its
understanding of security to be in line with today's
realities, as non-traditional causes of the difficulties in
maintaining peace and security are plentiful.

That having been said, the Pacific SIDS have
observed that, over time, the Council has shown that
non-traditional security dimensions beyond traditional
military-type threats to peace and security do have a
place in the Council. Indeed, through resolution 1308
(2000) on HIV/AIDS, the Council for the first time
unanimously agreed to allow a non-traditional threat
to peace and security to be part and parcel of its work.
The coincidence of this unprecedented decision with
the fifty-fifth anniversary of the Council, as well
as with the advent of the new millennium, may have
facilitated the realization that the scourge of that
health issue at the time, which had been devastating
populations beyond national borders years before the
adoption of the historic resolution, was in fact a threat
to international peace and security even if it went
beyond the traditional definitions that the Council had
previously used. At that time, the spread of HIV/AIDS
was having a heavy impact on society and was leading
to an aggravated lack of security that could give way to
instability and emergency situations if left unchecked.
A very good precedent was set, and the Council
followed that precedent when, last year, the Ebola crisis
was addressed within these walls.
In 2007, these same walls heard another conversation
on a non-traditional threat to international peace and
security, namely, climate change. Unfortunately, the
Council found itself unwilling or unable to take on this
issue through a unanimously agreed approach. That
also occurred in 2013, despite the fact that Article 2
of the Charter of the United Nations established the
prime importance of respecting the territorial integrity
of States by setting forth the obligation of all States
to refrain from threatening another State's territorial
integrity. Human-induced climate change is doing
exactly that, however - undermining our territorial
integrity.

Pacific island leaders have been continually calling
for the political will and ambitious actions necessary
to address the adverse impacts of climate change. The
evidence is clear and present today in our region, and
it has very real implications for the rest of the world.
I would reiterate that the Pacific SIDS call for the
immediate appointment of a special representative on
climate and security with responsibility for analysing
projected security impacts of climate change so that
the Council and all Member States can prepare for the
unavoidable threats to their security that lie ahead.
Moreover, we are of the view that the Council should
request an assessment of the capacity of the United
Nations system to respond to those impacts, in order to
be able to assure us that it is up to the task.

Like the severity of the health crisis caused by HIV/
AIDS, especially in Africa, but with clear and direct
implications on a global scale, we are able to see direct
correlations between both of these non-traditional
threats to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Since both are threat multipliers, they
are equally important as root causes of threats to
international peace and security that should be on the
Council's agenda. Thankfully and rightly, the health
issue has been recognized. The Pacific SIDS submit
that the issue of climate change should be considered in
the same way. Both have global implications, both have
a heavy negative impact on society and both can lead to
instability and emergency situations if left unchecked.

Finally, last year the Secretary-General mentioned
that the Pacific SIDS are like a microcosm of the world
as a whole, in which we can see the vulnerabilities
and threats that we all face from the effects of climate

change. Climate change is cross-cutting, and therefore
all the major organs of the United Nations have a role
to play in dealing with it through their own mandates,
as they have done with regard to the non-traditional
security threat of HIV/AIDS in the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and in the Security
Council Chamber.

I would therefore like to conclude by saying that
we, the Pacific SIDS, submit our experiences and
realities to the Council in asking it to consider this
non-traditional security threat of climate change as one
that merits the Council's attention not just today, but in
an ongoing, dedicated space in our Organization that
can ensure that the threats posed by climate change to
our islands, our peoples and indeed our shared world
are adequately addressed so that the Council is able to
carry out the task of maintaining international peace
and security that we have entrusted to it.

