Mr. Ebrahim (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to express its appreciation to the Ugandan
presidency for organizing this important debate. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304).

This debate follows many robust consultations,
which sought to create a common plan and strategy to
effectively respond to challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005 as an intergovernmental body to
advise countries emerging from conflict was a direct
response by the international community to address
these challenges.

In that regard, South Africa welcomes the fact
that the report before the Council was compiled in
consultation with the Peacebuilding Commission.
While South Africa supports initiatives and
programmes that augment the work of the Commission,
it is important that the Commission continue to be
strengthened and that it remain the focal point of
peacebuilding activities, in line with its mandate. Thus,
the report of the Secretary-General should be seen as
an attempt to strengthen and enhance existing
mechanisms within the United Nations and to
streamline those outside the Organization in an effort
to better respond to the immediate aftermath of
conflict.

In his report, the Secretary-General acknowledges
that the immediate aftermath of conflict, while
challenging, also offers a window of opportunity for
the international community to provide basic security,
deliver peace dividends, shore up confidence in the
peace process and strengthen core national capacities.
The Secretary-General also proposes an agenda on how
the United Nations can be strengthened in order to
respond to the immediate aftermath of conflict and
identifies the following areas as priorities: basic safety
and security, basic welfare, economic reintegration and
support to political processes.

South Africa fully concurs with the Secretary-
General that national ownership of the peacebuilding
process is critical for confidence-building and
strengthening fragile Governments. Our experience in
African peace processes, such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Cote
d'Ivoire, has also shown us that a peace agreement
alone is not sufficient to bring stability in the country.
Effective communication and inclusive dialogue
between national actors and the civilian population are
critical in building confidence in the process, which
allows for realistic expectations by the population.

Accordingly, it is important that national actors
be capacitated in order to meet these expectations.
Again, South Africa's engagement in the African peace
processes has also shown that lack of due attention to
national capacity development has the potential to
constrain national actors from taking ownership of
their recovery process.

In that regard, South Africa would like to stress
the important role that women continue to play in
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict societies.

South Africa believes that regional and
subregional organizations have always been an
important element of the multilateral system. Many
with their own capacities are making a direct
contribution to peace and security in accordance with
Chapters VI and VIII of the United Nations Charter.
For instance, the African Union, with its Peace and
Security Architecture, continues to demonstrate the
commitment and desire to successfully contribute to
the achievement of stability, peace and political
solutions in the continent. These organizations also
possess a considerable amount of human capacity,
which need to be harnessed and utilized effectively in
order to augment the capabilities of the United Nations.
South Africa's own experience has shown that the use
of civilian expertise can be a valuable tool in the
immediate aftermath of conflict.

The Secretary-General identifies an agenda for
action by the international community on key priority
areas, among which is the role of the United Nations.
The United Nations possesses enormous comparative
advantages, which should be marshalled to provide
effective leadership, coordination and accountability,
particularly as relates to its country teams on the
ground.

South Africa has always supported the idea of
integrated peace missions in view of the
interdependence of United Nations efforts in countries
emerging from conflict. We believe that this integrated
approach will go a long way in maximizing the impact
of United Nations responses.

Related to this is the issue of the Post-Conflict
Needs Assessment. South Africa is of the View that the
Post-Conflict Needs Assessment should be synergized
with the Peace-Building Commission. The experience
of the past four years has shown that the advisory role
of the Commission has been instrumental in assisting
the countries on its agenda to develop their national
strategy frameworks. South Africa believes that the
Post-Conflict Needs Assessment process needs to
compliment the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Commission had demonstrated the ability to deliver
effectively on its mandate, notwithstanding the
challenges of the past four years. South Africa looks
forward to the forthcoming five-year review of the
Commission, to take place in 2010, which will be
critical in giving an assessment of the Commission's
work and of progress achieved so far.

South Africa is of the view that, in order for post-
conflict peacebuilding to succeed, it is imperative that
immediate, predictable and flexible financial resources
be made available. Therefore, forming solid
partnerships with institutions such as the World Bank
in a sustained manner is vital.

Lastly, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted by the Security
Council later today.

