Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Allow me, Sir, on behalf
of the delegation of Oman, to congratulate you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We assure you of our cooperation
at all times. We also appreciate the kind words addressed
to me and my delegation.

My delegation received with great joy the good news
from Paris on the official signing of the Peace Agreement

 

between the parties to the conflict in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has been nearly four years
since the war broke out in that part of the world, resulting
in the deaths of more than a quarter of a million people,
and almost half of that nation's population have become
either refugees or displaced persons. Words cannot
describe the events that occurred in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bosnia will surely remain in our
memory as a symbol of a nation's unwavering defiance
of tyranny, hatred and "ethnic cleansing". The Bosnian
nation wrote its independence with the blood of its
people, and, undoubtedly, that is something the
international community cannot and should not forget.

We cannot add much to what has been said and
what will be said, here, today, or in Paris, except to
remind the parties once again that they should live up to
their commitments, for the world cannot see this
Agreement violated or not adhered to in full. The price
that has been paid so far is greater than words can
describe.

"To save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war": With these words the Charter of the United Nations
begins, and with these words, we believe, a new era
should begin in war-ravaged Bosnia. We cannot fail to
remind the parties that the road to peace is not going to
be easy. It is, rather, going to be tough and challenging.
What has occurred in that part of the world over the last
few years is greater than that which can be changed in
days, months or even years. That chapter of history
cannot be changed, but let us all ensure that the future
will be made better and safer.

Many say that this Agreement is a new page in the
chapter of events in Bosnia. We, on our part, say that this
page does not mean changing to a new book. Thus, we
believe justice must be exercised and mistakes of the past
should therefore be corrected, and those involved,
wherever they are in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina or elsewhere in the area of the former
Yugoslavia, if they have committed crimes against
humanity or massive Violations of international
humanitarian law, should bear full responsibility for their
acts. War criminals should not in any way roam freely
before the eyes of the victims who have suffered under
them; otherwise, we will risk a return to chaos that might
lead to events similar to those we have witnessed in the
past. Through resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, the
international community established an International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to investigate these
violations and prosecute those responsible for crimes and

 

acts against humanity. We believe that much support should
be given to the work of the International Tribunal in order
to help it discharge its mandate effectively.

Oman welcomes the latest achievements, which have
been long- awaited, and in this regard we commend the
efforts of the Government of the United States in having
hosted the proximity talks that led to the initial signing of
the Peace Agreement at Dayton, Ohio. Our appreciation
also goes to all those countries and organizations that
participated at some stage in a collaborative effort to
establish peace in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly that of the Contact Group which has seriously
invested so much effort and time, the results of which we
can all witness now, at last. We call on the parties to fulfil
in good faith the commitments entered into in that
Agreement, stressing that compliance with it is of vital
importance in achieving a lasting peace and the creation of
conditions conducive to the reconstruction and development
of that country.

The days to come will test the intentions shown by the
parties at Paris with regard to their commitments to this
valuable peace. Oman will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us on the understanding that the Peace
Agreement will be respected at all times, by all the parties
concerned, in its entirety, and that they will refrain from
any acts that might undermine the Peace Agreement. The
new force that is going to be established will discharge its
duties to the best of its ability, in accordance with the
mandate given to it and with the Peace Agreement,
respecting fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and United
Nations efforts to help the people of Bosnia will continue.

