Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman and Alexander Hug, Deputy
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, for their exhaustive briefings this
morning.

The relative improvement of the security situation
in eastern Ukraine over the past two months has had a
positive effect between the parties at the political level,
despite the fact that the progress achieved has been
slow and limited. Nevertheless, it is our conviction that
halting stabilization efforts would be inappropriate. We
therefore will continue to promote stability throughout
Ukrainian territory through strengthening respect
for the ceasefire agreement, limiting the conflict and
preventing its spread to other regions. The Security
Council and the international community must
therefore provide every type of support to the parties
and help them overcome all obstacles and difficulties
in order to implement the peace agreements reached
between them.

Jordan expresses its concern over the continuing
violations of the ceasefire between the Ukrainian
Government and the separatists, as well as the increased
number of violations in recent days, together with the
increase in the degree of violence in some parts of
eastern Ukraine, particularly in the region of Donetsk
and neighbouring towns. The continuing military
confrontations and provocative acts and their expansion
will only further complicate the situation and nullify
the peace agreements reached between the parties.
That will have an impact on all of the outstanding
issues between the parties and worsen the economic,
social and humanitarian situation even further. Such a
situation will threaten the security and stability of the
entire region.

Jordan invites all parties to assume their
responsibilities and to emphasize constructive and
direct dialogue, as well as positive discussions among
them under the Normandy format, in order to reach a
peaceful settlement of the crisis. We reiterate the fact
that the only solution to the crisis depends on full
respect by all parties - particularly the separatists - of
the Minsk agreements on the ceasefire, as well as of
resolution 2202 (2015). Those agreements and all of
their provisions must be implemented globally without
exception, particularly with regard to halting the illicit
transfer of heavy weaponry and to its full withdrawal,
together with the withdrawal of foreign fighters from
eastern Ukraine.

Jordan welcomes the recent meeting held by the
Trilateral Contact Group working group. It is a positive
step forward, and it requires that all parties continue to
hold such meetings regularly, on the basis of the Minsk
agreements. Achieving a diplomatic solution and
promoting common language and points of agreement
among the parties on certain areas of some agreements
are essential and vital to reach a lasting peace that
meets the ambitions and requirements of the parties
and the stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.

Jordan appreciates all of the efforts carried out by
the OSCE in eastern Ukraine and reiterates that it has
a crucial role in monitoring borders and the ceasefire,
in addition to facilitating humanitarian access. We
call upon all parties to facilitate the work of that
organization and allow it to have access to all affected
regions in order to ensure the provision ofbasic services
to citizens. It is important that citizens, and refugees
in particular, avoid involvement in political diversions
or confrontations. They must be provided with the
social and humanitarian services necessary for daily
subsistence.

We pay tribute to the important role of the OSCE
in preparing local elections, and we hope that these
elections will soon be organized in eastern Ukraine,
pursuant to the Minsk agreements.

