Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2012/907) and Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and for the
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) does under his leadership.

The international Conferences held in Bonn last
year and in Kabul and Tokyo earlier this year, as
well as the Summit in Chicago, have reaffirmed the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community for Afghanistan's
long-term security, economic growth and development.
Those Conferences have set out the way forward for
Afghanistan to progressively assume responsibility
for all aspects of policy and to achieve its security,
development and governance goals.

In the EU statement in the Security Council
debate on Afghanistan in September (see S/PV.6840),
we briefly highlighted the important outcome of
the Tokyo Conference, in particular the principle
of mutual accountability encapsulated in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework, and addressed
the importance of regional cooperation. The
implementation of the Tokyo Framework remains
paramount to achieving a successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. Without consistent
delivery on commitments and the implementation of
reforms on good governance and transparency, the rule
of law and human rights, the international community
will find it increasingly difficult to defend a continued
commitment and allocation of financial resources
vis-a-vis domestic constituencies.

In this statement, we want to focus on two topics,
namely, progress on national reconciliation and
preparations for the upcoming election.

We welcome the visit of the Afghan High Peace
Council to Pakistan and the increased dialogue between
the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Progress
will be sustainable only if the peace and reconciliation
process is truly inclusive, not only engaging armed
groups, but fully involving civil society and including
a balanced representation of people from all regions
and sections of Afghan society, in particular Afghan
women. Both the process and its outcome must respect
the principles set out by the Afghan Government and
the international community at Bonn, including the
human rights provisions of the Afghan Constitution.

We also encourage particular attention to the
progressive implementation of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence against Women. The European
Union wishes to reiterate its firm commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security. We welcome the
commitment of the Afghan Government to its full
implementation through the establishment of the
inter-ministerial steering committee on resolution 1325
(2000).

We welcome the announcement of the date for the
presidential election. It will be critical for Afghanistan's
future that elections are inclusive and transparent, and
lead to an outcome that is widely accepted as legitimate.

We call on the Afghan authorities to engage all
political parties and civil society in agreeing to reform
the electoral process, based on lessons learned from
previous elections. In particular, it will be important
to put in place a legal framework consistent with the
Constitution, with credible measures to prevent fraud,
and overseen by independent bodies. Definitive and
clear decisions by the relevant Afghan authorities, in
consultation with parliament, political parties and civil
society, on the system and registration process to be used
for elections are needed, both to enable international
support to the processes, in particular by the United
Nations, and to allow for clear communication and
voter education.

Allow me to reiterate our full support for the
essential role of UNAMA during the transition and
beyond. The political role of UNAMA in advising
and assisting the Afghan Government is of central
importance, not the least in the perspective of the
elections in 2014 and 2015. UNAMA must be properly
mandated and adequately resourced to fulfil that role.
UNAMA also plays a key role in supporting increased
Afghan ownership and in coordinating international
development efforts in the coming years. The work of
UNAMA will be vital in enabling Afghanistan and the
international community to work effectively together to
fulfil the commitments made in Tokyo earlier this year
and in monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to progress
in Afghanistan. That will require sustained support
beyond 2014. The EU commitment to Afghanistan is
long-term. We look forward to the swift completion
of the negotiations on the cooperation agreement on
partnership and development between Afghanistan
and the European Union and its member States early
next year. The European Union is currently giving
more than €1 billion a year in development assistance
to Afghanistan, and we will continue to prioritize
and enhance support to Afghanistan in the decade of
transformation agreed at Bonn.

The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear - supporting a successful transition
process in Afghanistan and partnering Afghanistan
beyond transition to become a self-reliant, peaceful,
democratic and prosperous society for the benefit of all
Afghans.

