Mr. Stephen: I will refer briefly to a number of
topics that were referred to me by members of the
Council in the course ofthe debate.

The representative of Mauritius asked about the
flow of arms, and whether we had any estimate on
whether or not the flow of arms into the country had
increased. The mandate and resources of my Office,
which is located in Nairobi, not in Somalia, unfortunately
have not allowed us to monitor the flow of arms into and
out of the country. Allegations are made from time to time
about arms coming into the country. Our practice is to
urge those making those allegations to refer them to the
committee set up under resolution 733 (1992). That is, I
am afraid, all we can do as a political office with our
existing mandate and resources.

However, members of the Council will note that
in paragraph 54 of the report, where we note that
President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya ordered a ban on
trade between Somalia and Kenya on 28 July, one of
the reasons for this ban was, according to reports, the
President's concern about the flow of arms into Kenya
from Somalia. It is very clear that as conflict escalates,
arms become more valuable in the country. But then,
when there is little conflict it seems that arms flow out
of the country. This is one reason why the
neighbouring countries, as members will have noted,
are very concerned about the question of the flow of
arms from Somalia.

Both the representative of Mauritius and the
President, speaking in his national capacity, raised the
question of security. The representative of Mauritius
asked if I could give some estimate. As members know,
security is completely different from the political
activities of the Secretariat, and I would not presume to
offer a professional View. But, speaking of Mogadishu,
I visited the city in March one week before the taking
of the hostages, and my impression at the time was that
there was a good deal of tension in the city. I was then
unable, for security reasons, to visit Mogadishu for
nearly six months, but I returned for a brief Visit on 7
September, and my impression - for what it is worth -
is that the city was much less tense and that progress
had been made in terms of policing during those
months.

The meagre response of donors to the
Transitional National Government was raised by a
number of representatives and members of the Council,
and the representative of Bangladesh specifically asked
if I would comment on this. Obviously, this question
should be directed to donors; I cannot speak on behalf
of donors. But I think that there was, at the beginning
of this process, a rather low expectation on the part of
donors. The experience of donors in Somalia in the
past had not encouraged them to think that this was a
venture that would be likely to succeed. But I believe
that a number of donors are now engaging with the
Transitional National Government, and that some
assistance is in the pipeline.

Finally, the representative of Mali and the
representative of Bangladesh asked about the group of
friends. This, as the report makes clear, is a matter for
further consultation. There is no blueprint. No scheme is
being laid down, and I am sure that the Secretary-General
will take account of the comments and remarks that
have been made in the course of the debate, including
the fact that various members have offered to participate
in this activity, as he begins the consultations.

But it is designed for two basic purposes. One is
to assist in the development of a uniformity of
approach, which has been identified as one of the
problems in the Somalia context - in other words, so
that countries with an interest can see the arguments
and understand the viewpoints of other countries; and,
secondly, simply as a question of exchange of
information in other contexts. I am thinking of Angola,
which I think the Prime Minister of Somalia
mentioned, but also in Central America - El Salvador
and Guatemala - the exchange of information has
been a very valuable function of such groups of
friends, or friends of the Secretary-General, as they
have been termed.

I think that is all.

