Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating New
Zealand on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We wish you, Madam
President, and your delegation, every success in your
efforts. We also thank the New Zealand presidency for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation in
the Middle East. I also thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofNew Zealand for his presence in the Council
earlier today and for presiding over today's meeting.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.

One year after the launch of the Israeli aggression
campaign targeting Gaza, the Palestinian people and
the international community continue to aspire to
the hope that the Council will work towards ensuring
that justice is done and that the perpetrators of the
crimes carried out during the Israeli campaign are held
accountable for their actions. That campaign lasted
51 days, leaving 2,251 Palestinians dead, the majority
of whom were civilians, including 551 children. The
campaign also destroyed approximately 12,000 homes
and damaged over 4,000 others; it also damaged or
destroyed 540 schools and 73 clinics and hospitals.
The Palestinian people always suffer the repercussions
of such aggression. In fact 100,000 people are now
internally displaced in Gaza, owing to the aggression
and the ongoing blockade, which has hindered the
delivery of aid.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia holds Israel
responsible for the deteriorating situation in Gaza. The
suffering imposed by Israel will not end as long as the
international community and the Security Council have
not required Israel to end its aggression and its racist
and oppressive colonial policies against the Palestinian
people. We must not forget those victims. We must
not forget the tens of thousands of wounded and the
hundreds of children who became orphans last summer.
We must not forget that Gaza is continuing to suffer a
humanitarian crisis as a result of the aggression and
the blockade imposed by Israel, which clearly violates
international law.

Israel's policies will lead only to destruction and
to the end to any hope of achieving a just solution to
the Palestinian cause that will guarantee the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative and the relevant resolutions of international
legitimacy.

The report of the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
reiterates that Israel violated international law and
perpetrated crimes that could be considered war crimes
in carrying out its aggression against Gaza. Israel
has targeted residential areas and used wide-impact
explosive weapons to target residential areas, hospital,
schools and shelters. The report makes it clear that
Israel has systematically used destruction as a weapon
of war. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia underscores the
importance ofIsrael's being duly held to account for the
crimes it perpetrated during the attack on Gaza and for
the war crimes that it continues to perpetrate against
the Palestinian people.

My country finds it strange that Israel is not to be
found on the list contained in the annex to the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, known as the blacklist. My country believes
that this represents a double standard in the report of the
Secretary-General, which sets out the number of people
killed. Palestinian children represent the third-highest
number of children killed since 2014. The number of
schools destroyed in Palestine is the highest in all of
the conflict situations 2014. We therefore believe that
we need to objectively and impartially document what
has happened and ensure thatjustice is done and that no
double standards come into play.

Bringing about peace and security in the region and
achieving comprehensive peace requires thatjustice be
done and that Israel be held accountable for the crimes
it has been perpetrating since the beginning of the
occupation. The Palestinian people continue to suffer
under the yoke ofthe Israeli occupation. Israel continues
to act with complete impunity and to hamper the course
of justice, which has required the State of Palestine,
with the support of the international community, to
resort to the International Criminal Court in order to
obtain the justice that it has been denied for so many
decades now.

Palestine is a party to the Rome Statute, and we
commend this peaceful step. We also look forward to the
accession of the State of Palestine to the United Nations
as a fully sovereign State in the near future. The Israeli
acts of aggression against the people of Palestine are
one of the principal reasons for the continuation of the
conflict and the death of any hope to try to find a lasting
solution to the Palestinian situation. Israel continues to
impose arbitrary obstacles on Palestinians who wish
to go to the Al-Aqsa mosque to pray. We condemn the
fact that Israel is preventing Muslims from exercising
their legitimate right to pray at the Al-Aqsa mosque.
Israel bears full responsibility for the deterioration
in the situation in Jerusalem, and all of the negative
consequences of the racist Israeli policies in Jerusalem
are to be condemned.

We condemn also all attempts to try to change the
historic and religious identity and legal status of places
of worship, and we call on Israel to immediately halt
all actions leading to a demographic transformation of
the city of Jerusalem, including the settlement process,
the destruction of Palestinian homes, the deprivation
of the Palestinians of their right to a residence, and
their eviction from their homes in contravention of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

My country supports all international efforts to
adopt a resolution that seeks a final solution to the
Palestinian cause and bring to an end the occupation,
in line with the Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions
of international legality, so as to create a Palestinian
State in keeping with the borders of 4 June 1967, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

Four years after the beginning of the crisis in the
Syrian Arab Republic, Syria continues to be one of the
most serious humanitarian disasters of this century.
The Syrian authorities continue to intimidate, starve,
kill and destroy the Syrian people. That complete lack
of humanity and the proliferation of terrorism has led
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to condemn the presence
of armed foreign terrorist fighters in Syria, including
Hizbullah and other sectarian parties coming from
abroad. We must combat terrorism by finding solutions
to its root causes.

The Syrian authorities have engaged in genocide
and marginalization and have deprived the people
of their most basic humanitarian rights. We can see
what the Syrian authorities are doing with the full
support of Hizbullah in the town of Zabadani, where
the Syrian authorities have used more than 600 barrel
bombs in the past three weeks. We urge the Security
Council to condemn this aggression and to call on the
Syrian authorities to stop targeting civilians. We call
on the Council to condemn the crimes perpetrated in
Qalamoun by Hizbullah and other sectarian parties
coming from abroad. We call on the Council to put an
end to the bloodshed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The
Council can no longer fail to uphold its responsibility to
resolve the Syrian crisis if it is to retain its credibility.
The Council's silence regarding what is happening
in Syria helps the Syrian authorities in their actions,
which target civilians with violence and weapons.

We join the call to hold accountable all those who
have used weapons of mass destruction against the
Syrian people, including barrel bombs, missiles and
toxic gases. The perpetrators of such crimes, whatever
their political affiliation or motivation, must stand trial.
My country is committed to helping the Syrian people
to achieve their aspirations in a way that preserves the
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and the rights of
its children, whatever their faith or ethnicity.

We call on the Security Council to commit to the
implementation of its relevant resolutions and to put an
end to the suffering of the Syrian people, and to fully
implement the Geneva communique, which calls for the
creation of a transitional authority.

