Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing. I also thank the Ambassador of Afghanistan
for his first important statement to the Council.

France aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

For Afghanistan, 2015 was a year of progress and
many challenges. First, from a political perspective, the
transition started in September 2014 and the gradual
consolidation of the National Unity Government have
raised the expectations of the Afghan population,
neighbouring countries and the international
community. The Afghan Government has shown its
willingness to move forward in circumstances that are,
at times, difficult. I wish to underscore my country's
support for the Afghan Government and encourage
it to continue the efforts it has been making for more
than a year and a half now. France also welcomes the
announcement made at the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process Conference in Islamabad on 7 and 8 December
on the resumption of the peace and reconciliation
initiatives, a process critical to the country's national
reconciliation and lasting stabilization.

On the security front, the conflict has continued to
spread and the level of violence unfortunately remains
high, with numerous casualties, including growing
numbers of civilians. The Afghan security forces have
made notable progress and have kept control over
Afghanistan's main urban centres. However, the Afghan
Government and its international partners should not
relax their efforts to strengthen the security forces'
capacity, because the situation remains fragile in many
provinces. The Taliban's temporary occupation of the
city of Kunduz in October revealed the Afghan forces"
vulnerabilities as well as the new capacities that the
insurgency has acquired.

In the area of human rights, the situation of women
and children remains precarious, as was shown recently
by the recent tragic stoning of the young woman named
Rokhshana who had been accused of adultery. It is
essential that Afghan civil society and the authorities
continue to act to fully implement their national action
plan on women and peace and security adopted in
follow up to resolution 1325 (2000). The international
community should also continue to support the Afghan
authorities in implementing their commitments
regarding the protection of children in armed conflict.

The fight against narcotics and the illicit economy
is also among these challenges and of great concern
to France. The large-scale production and export of
narcotics in Afghanistan are extremely damaging to
the country's security, stability and development, since
they help to finance the insurgency, destabilize the
economy and weaken the Government. They create a
threat to public health that affects Afghanistan first
and foremost but that also extends well beyond it to
affect the region and many other countries worldwide.
We welcome Afghanistan's adoption on 15 October of
a national action plan against drugs for 2015 to 2019,
reflecting its determination to pursue a comprehensive
approach to fighting this scourge in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
France is committed to ensuring that the United Nations
plays a greater role in addressing this major challenge,
particularly in coordinating the United Nations agencies
and programmes involved in the drug war.

In this difficult context, the international community
should not cease its efforts to support Afghanistan in
achieving greater stability, prosperity and democracy.
As Afghanistan continues its political and security
transition, it is more important than ever that the
United Nations adapt the role it plays. Its support to the
Government remains crucial, particularly in enabling
the people to benefit from Government programmes and
international assistance. In that regard, we emphasize
the importance of the joint discussions on the changes
to be desired in the support that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations can give the country. We hope they will
be a useful guide in the renewal of UNAMA's mandate
in March.

In that context, France would like to emphasize
its support for the proposals made in the final report
of the Tripartite Review Commission regarding
the establishment of a narrow mandate that confers
on UNAMA strengthened powers in the areas of
good offices, protecting human rights, coordinating
humanitarian activities and combating the production
and trafficking of narcotics. France is ready to
contribute to that discussion and will continue to stand
shoulder to shoulder with Afghanistan, particularly
within the framework of our friendship and cooperation
treaty with Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of all the United Nations staff in Afghanistan, who,
as we know, are working in particularly difficult
conditions.

