Ms. Velho Rodrigues (Mozambique): It is a great
pleasure and honour for me and my delegation, Sir, to
congratulate you and your country - Mauritius, a
State member of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of the Southern African Development
Community - on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. On
behalf of the Government of Mozambique, I warmly
welcome your initiative to hold this public debate on
the situation in Africa, and I salute the outstanding
manner in which you have been steering the work of
the Council.

The situation in Africa presents us with a mixed
picture. While in some countries conflict and
instability still prevail, in others political, economic
and social reforms are taking place, aimed at enhancing
and strengthening peace, democracy and prosperity.

As a matter of principle, we believe that the best
approach to tackling conflicts is through prevention. In
that context, we are of the view that good governance
and democracy are crucial for the prevention of
conflicts. However, they are things that require
adequate resources and a reasonable level of human
development, conditions that are not present in most
African countries.

Prevention means addressing the root causes of
conflicts, which in Africa coincide with the pressing
needs and concerns of the people. We refer to poor
governance, poverty, endemic diseases, exclusion,
questions of State legitimacy, ethnic divisions and the
proliferation of arms. Those and other root causes
should not be dealt with individually. Peace,
democracy and development should be pursued in an
integrated and mutually reinforcing manner. Focusing
on one of those equally important areas will only create
imbalances that can ultimately be a potential source of
conflict.

We are aware that good governance and
democracy in Africa face tremendous challenges.
Among them is the use for political purposes of
tribalism, regionalism, racism, ignorance and poverty.
This is aggravated by the low level of human
development.

On the other hand, our continent continues to
witness conflicts related to the exercise of democracy
as candidates and their supporters often call into
question election results that are perceived to be unjust
and unfair. That situation is a clear demonstration of
the need for support for governance and democratic
institutions in African countries.

The failure of preventive measures brings us to

conflict resolution and management. For the success of
conflict resolution and management, we need to review
peacekeeping mandates and the conventional approach
to peacekeeping operations. That is so because the
nature of current conflicts differs substantially from
that of those envisaged in 1945, when the United
Nations was founded. Owing to their multidimensional
nature, current conflicts require a comprehensive
approach and the involvement of all stakeholders at the
national, regional and international levels.

We also believe that success in conflict resolution
is closely linked to the level of understanding of the
conflict itself. Those involved in the mediation of
conflicts should possess a profound knowledge of the
nature and dynamics of the conflict in question -
knowledge that could allow them to exercise their best
judgement, take effective action and provide critical
assurances to all parties to the conflict that they are
also parties to the solution.

We welcome the Brahimi report, a blueprint that
provides an excellent basis for a common strategy for
improving the effectiveness of peacekeeping. The
recommendations in the report provide a good framework
for action in which the strategic and operational aspects of
peacekeeping and peace-building are addressed. As we
encourage the early implementation of those
recommendations, we highlight the strong emphasis in the
report on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

The African continent attaches great importance
to the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts. We are strongly committed to solving
problems that affect our continent and to reversing the
appalling situation of conflict in Africa. It is within this
framework that individual countries and regional and
subregional organizations, such as the Organization of
African Unity, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) are becoming active
and important players in these endeavours. The
creation of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution bears
testimony to the continent's determination to settle
conflicts in Africa.

At the subregional level, the heads of State and
Government of the SADC countries signed, at their
ordinary Summit in Blantyre, in August 2001, a
Protocol for the operationalization of the SADC Organ
on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation. The
Organ operates at summit, ministerial and senior
official levels. Its main responsibility is the promotion
of peace and security in the region.

At the recent extraordinary Summit, held in
Blantyre on 14 January 2002, President Joaquim
Chissano, in his capacity as Chairperson of the SADC
Organ, reiterated his determination to spare no effort to
work with his colleagues for peace and security in
Southern Africa. This is in line with the mandate from
the SADC heads of State and Government to work
tirelessly for a peaceful resolution of the conflicts
prevailing in our subregion. The Summit tasked the
Organ with formulating a strategy for speeding up the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in close
cooperation with the Joint Monitoring Committee.
Furthermore, the Summit agreed on the need to work
out a strategic indicative plan for the Organ in order to
enable it to deal more effectively with issues of
politics, defence and security in the region.

We believe that the SADC Organ can play a
fundamental role in the promotion of regional peace
and security. We invite the United Nations to provide
support to and work closely with this institution for the
resolution of conflict in southern Africa.

Our analysis of conflicts in Africa must be
comprehensive, pragmatic and results-oriented. It should
encompass a clear understanding of their root causes, the
actors involved and the issues at stake. However, we need
to address, together with the dynamics of the current
conflicts in Africa, other equally important issues like
poverty, underdevelopment and endemic diseases such
as HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and cholera, which
claim millions of lives - even more than are claimed
by the prevailing conflicts.
The complexity of these issues requires
innovative approaches for the betterment of people's
lives in Africa. The establishment of the African Union
is a clear indication that only by joining our efforts we
can find effective solutions for problems affecting the
continent. The New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) is an initiative aimed at setting
the agenda for the renewal of the continent, based on
national and regional priorities and development plans,
through a participatory process and a new framework
of interaction with the rest of the world.

These efforts deserve the support of the
international community so that a solid Union and
strong integration can become reality in Africa. In this
context, we call upon the international community to
render the necessary support and assistance to NEPAD.

We therefore wish to acknowledge the positive
steps taken by the Group of Eight in adopting an
African Action Plan in support of NEPAD. We have
high expectations that this initiative will be translated
into concrete results at the forthcoming G-8 Summit in
Canada. Furthermore, we should like to welcome the
announcement made this morning by Her Excellency
Baroness Amos to the effect that the United Kingdom will
use its Council presidency in July to focus on African
issues. We applaud and encourage this willingness to
contribute to the solution of African problems.

The United Nations, particularly the Security
Council, has a critical role to play in efforts for the
prevention, resolution and management of conflict in
Africa. However, United Nations action in conflict
situations needs to be reviewed and should include the
following features.

First, the United Nations must have a strategic
global plan of action and a detailed programme to deal
with conflicts in Africa. Secondly, the United Nations
should master the necessary ability to generate, among
Member States, adequate resources for peace missions.
Thirdly, the Organization should negotiate and
implement political dispensations that are durable.
Fourthly, it must engage itself in peace processes with
a long-term perspective. Fifthly, the Security Council
must play a proactive role in the resolution of conflict;
it should fully implement each and every resolution it
adopts regarding peace processes. Sixthly, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General should continue to
visit, on a regular basis, the areas in conflict, maintain
a dialogue with the parties and other actors involved
and sustain pressure for the resolution of conflicts.

We are fully aware of the efforts that the United
Nations, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General have been undertaking to promote peace,
security and development in our continent. We
commend these efforts. We wish to express our
gratitude, and we stress once again our strong
determination to work together for the noble cause of
bringing about peace and development in Africa.

