Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I will give colleagues who are about to leave
the Chamber some of my valuable time. They are afraid
that I will beat them in the battle of arguments. They
become terrified when they hear any opposing views.

Those who just left the Chamber said in
their statements that today was a sad day for the
non-proliferation regime. I would like to refresh their
memories and say that violation of the non-proliferation
regime is the speciality ofthe following Western States.
The United States of America used nuclear weapons
in Japan. It used chemical and biological weapons in
Viet Nam and enriched uranium in Iraq. France used
Algerian human beings when it tested its first atomic
bomb in the Algerian desert in 1960. In fact, it placed
living Algerians in the desert tied to poles, and dropped
on them the first French atomic bomb. Britain, of
course, conducted all its nuclear tests in its colonies
on islands in the oceans. The British Ambassador then
says that day was a sad day for the people of Douma.

English is not my mother tongue, but I know that
there are no people of Douma. There are inhabitants in
Douma. There are Syrian people. There are no people
of Douma. However, beyond Marx, Engels and Lenin, I
would like to quote from Shakespeare as saying: "Lies
shame you. Speak the truth or remain silent".

My British colleague said that Russia does not have
the authority to go to Douma and establish whether
or not chemicals were used there, stating that it is not
within the jurisdiction of our Russian friends, who
are on the ground, to go to Douma and investigate the
scene. That is quite strange. Britain should have advised
itself in the same manner when it sent intelligence
officers to Khan Shaykhoun and conferred upon itself
the authority to collect samples with the French. They
took the samples to British and French laboratories,
as they claimed, without coordinating with the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) or the Fact-finding
Mission. That is quite the paradox: giving themselves
the very right that they deprive others.

Approximately two weeks ago, Britain signed an
agreement with the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia for
an arms deal worth $100 billion - much bigger than
the Al-Yamamah deal - to continue killing people
in Yemen, start new wars in the region with Iran and
Syria and entrench never-ending wars throughout the
entire region. That is what Britain is capable of doing.
Mahatma Gandhi knew the British well, and he was
right when he said, "If two fish broke out into a fight in
the sea, everyone knows it was Britain that started it".
The American colleague said that there is only
one monster facing the entire world in defiance today.
That monster has financed terrorists in Syria for seven
years and provided them with arms. I would say that the
monster is the United States, Britain and France. They
sponsored terrorism in my country for seven years,
and before that they did the same in Iraq, Afghanistan
and Libya. They sponsored terrorist organizations
starting with Taliban and Da'esh, down to the Al-Nusra
Front, Al-Qaida, Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman
and the White Helmets, which British intelligence
newly invented. The monster she spoke of unleashed
lies in order to destroy, occupy and send troops
thousands of miles throughout the world to destabilize
international peace and security. The monster is the
American who, thus far, refuses to destroy his chemical
arsenal, as we know, yet lectures others on destroying
chemical weapons.

My French colleague said that he was horrified by
the pictures he saw. But he was not horrified by the
pictures of the hundreds of civilians who were killed
in the 2016 French air strikes in Toukhar village in
the rural area of Manbij. Two hundred civilians were
killed, including entire families, by France's war
planes. The French Ambassador must not have seen
those pictures, and consequently they were not a source
of horror for him. The concept of double standards is an
understatement for those people.

In response to the web of lies spread by some
Western States against my country regarding the
alleged use of chemical weapons in Douma on 7 April,
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic sent today, 10 April, an official
invitation to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to dispatch a fact-finding
mission to Douma in order to investigate the allegations
of the use of chemical weapons there and to determine
the facts about those allegations. I informed members
of the Council of that invitation yesterday in this very
Chamber (see S/PV.8225). The Syrian Arab Republic
welcomes the visit of the fact-finding mission and
stands ready to fully cooperate, provide all forms of
assistance to the mission in the discharge of its duties
and guarantee the safety of its personnel. It will also
facilitate interviewing and sampling in accordance
with the terms of reference. Syria looks forward to the
fact-finding mission carrying out its work in a full,
transparent and professional manner and while relying
on credible and tangible evidence. If it does deploy, it
will find Douma liberated and it will be granted full
access to any location it wishes to visit.

The situation is quite clear. The co-sponsors of
the American draft resolution (S/2018/321) do not seek
the truth, because it will simply expose them and their
terrorist proxies on the ground. Instead of waiting for
the OPCW fact-finding mission to determine whether or
not toxic chemicals were used in Douma, they present
draft resolutions that do not enjoy consensus, nor do
they seek truth, but rather establish non-objective
mechanisms that pre-empt results in support of their
political accusations and agendas. They are aware
that a clone of the JIM. would not be accepted by the
States in the Council that are dedicated to the quest for
truth regarding who is using toxic chemicals against
Syrian civilians.

In that regard, I underscore that the United States,
Britain and France made the JIM. fail by thwarting
it through politicizing its work, putting pressure
on members of its leadership and blackmailing
them. Consequently, the JIM. lacked credibility and
professionalism, as it fabricated reports that accused
the Syrian Government based on the so-called open
sources, of course including the White Helmets, and
false testimonies and fabricated evidence emanating
mostly from terrorist groups, most important of which
is the terrorist Al-Nusra Front and the White Helmets,
which is the British misleading media arm of the
Al-Nusra Front.

The scenario that we witness today is exactly
similar to what we witnessed a year ago when the
United States ofAmerica launched a wanton aggression
on the Al-Shayrat air base, which was founded on
flimsy arguments and fabricated pretexts stating that
the Syrian Arab Army used chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhoun. Those allegations were proven false when
the United States and its allies prevented the experts of
the JIM. from visiting Khan Shaykhoun and collecting
samples from the Al-Shayrat air base.

Things are crystal clear. The aggression of the
United States and its accomplices, throughout history,
thrives on lies, deceit and hegemony, as well as on
the rule of the powerful. It is a brutal approach that
will never respect the rule of law and international
legitimacy. For seven years, my country, Syria, has been
a stark example of what the United States and Britain
did when they unleashed lies, misleading information
and fabricated stories in this very Chamber in order to
destroy and occupy Iraq. Their actions were grounded
on the pretext of a significant lie, that is, the existence
of the so-called weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
I am compelled each and every time to remind
the Council of the position of former Secretary of
State Colin Powell when, in this very Chamber (see S/PV.4701) - and I was sitting where the Deputy
Permanent Representative ofChina is seated today - he
presented tapes, documents, maps and pictures that
were later discovered to have been produced, faked and
fabricated by the American intelligence services for the
purpose of invading Iraq. The operation was prepared
in advance. The same scenario occurred with Libya.

The truth must be revealed. For centuries the world
has witnessed various instances of occupation and
hegemony, whose sole purpose was to loot the wealth of
nations, occupy land or impose a geopolitical agenda.
However, political immorality has reached a depth
today to the extent that Libya has been destroyed and
many of its people killed to cover up cases of bribery
and financial corruption involving the President of
a permanent member of the Council that talks about
democracy and freedom. It is so low today to the
extent that a permanent State regrettably forces Arab
oil-exporting countries to foot the bill for its ongoing
aggression and military intervention in my country,
Syria. It is a business deal forged between the corrupt
with the financial means and a mercenary who has
weapons and power. Some permanent members of the
Council commit acts of aggression against sovereign
countries simply to detract attention from domestic
crises and ongoing controversy surrounding their
political elite.

Following seven years of a dirty terrorist war that
was imposed upon us, we in Syria believe that clear
options exist - but they pose a major challenge to
the majority of Council members. The Council must
refute the lies and reverse the political deterioration
that the United States, Britain and France are trying
to push the Council towards engaging in. It is up to the
Council today, and in the future, to make its decision.
World public opinion and the people of the free world
will judge whether or not the Council has assumed
its responsibility to uphold international legitimacy,
maintain international peace and security and protect
the world against the horrible terrorism that is used and
exploited by those three permanent member countries
to undermine the stability and self-determination of
States. I call upon the members ofthe Council to uphold
a global, ethical and multilateral political system that
believes in international law and in the right of peoples
to self-determination, and rejects military, political and
economic hegemony.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its
condemnation in the strongest terms of any use of
chemical weapons by any party, anywhere and under
any circumstances. My country stands ready to
cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons to reveal the allegations and lies
being promoted by some Western parties so as to justify
their aggression and serve their own political agenda.
Their fleets are now in the eastern Mediterranean,
waiting for the veto in order to start their aggression.
I would like to inform those Western parties - and
they must pay close attention to what I say - that their
threats of aggression, manoeuvres, lies and terrorism
will never prevent us - as one of the founding States
of the Organization - from exercising our duties and
rights under the Charter of the United Nations and our
national Constitution to protect our sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to fend off aggression from
any source. We will not allow anyone - big or small,
permanent member or non-permanent member - to
treat us the way Iraq and Libya were treated.

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.
