Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union and its States members.
The candidate countries Montenegro and Serbia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

On 28 January, the Council adopted resolution 2134
(2014), on the Central African Republic, reinforcing the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, including the
crucial aspect of supporting the strengthening of the
rule of law. The same resolution authorizes the European
Union (EU) to deploy a military operation in the Central
African Republic. The European Union is the largest
donor to the Central African Republic and has already
been involved in matters concerning the rule of law and
security sector reform. As soon as security conditions
allow, the EU stands ready to re-engage substantially
with the Central African Republic authorities in those
crucial areas. That will provide the basis for a viable
State in the future, in addition to the resumption of
all development projects that will contribute to the
reconstruction of the country.
That engagement reflects the role played by the
European Union and its States members in supporting
United Nations actions toward building sustainable
peace. We fully share the view expressed in the
concept note for today's debate (S/2014/75, annex) that
assisting the host countries' efforts to strengthen the
rule of law is an important element of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. We thank the
Lithuanian presidency for having brought this critical
issue to the attention of the Security Council and hope
that the Council will continue holding open debates on
the rule of law on a regular basis. The United Nations
has a unique role in supporting the rule of law and its
benefits for countries and peoples.

We also reaffirm our attachment to the Declaration
adopted by the General Assembly at its High-level
Meeting on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/ 1), which reaffirms that human rights, the
rule of law and democracy are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and that the rule of law is a key element of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.

Judicial institutions in particular have a critical role
in the establishment of peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations. In countries affected by
conflict, it is essential to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. The perpetrators of such crimes must
be held accountable for their actions. We support an
effective and efficient interplay between national
justice systems and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in the fight against impunity, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute.

We pledged in September 2012 to support peace
and security in conflict and post-conflict situations,
in particular through supporting United Nations
engagement in the rule-of-law area. Since then, the EU
has continued to implement its plan of action to enhance
EU support to United Nations peacekeeping. In the
rule-of-law area, we share with the United Nations best
practices and lessons learned in developing civilian
capacities, training, and mutual support in developing
doctrine and concepts in the area of crisis management,
and we coordinate during the planning and conduct of
EU civilian missions deployed in support of United
Nations operations.

We have recently stepped up our efforts to enhance
the coherence and effectiveness of EU external policy
and action in conflict or crisis situations by defining a
comprehensive approach to external conflict and crisis.
That approach aims at coordination and, where possible,
a combination of policies, tools and instruments at
the EU's disposal, including diplomatic tools, crisis-
management missions, trade instruments, development
cooperation and humanitarian aid. The comprehensive
approach also recognizes that the EU needs to engage
and work together with other international and regional
actors, including the United Nations.

We note the important role played in that respect by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) as the joint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-
conflict and other crisis situations. It is important that
the global focal point initiative also be implemented in
the field in order to ensure its impact at country level.

Somalia is another example where the EU is working
in close partnership with the United Nations in support
of the rule of law and security. Implemented by UNDP,
our support has, since 2007, taken a holistic approach.
We are working closely with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to bring forward an integrated
support of the United Nations Support Assistance
Mission in Somalia and UNDP in the rule-of-law area.
The European Union is the main financial donor to the
African Union Mission in Somalia and supports the
training of defence forces under its training mission.
The EU also builds rule-of-law capacities in coastal and
maritime areas through EUCAP Nestor, its maritime
security capacity-building mission.

The high-level Declaration adopted by the General
Assembly on 24 September 2012 on the rule of law
stresses the need to strengthen support to States, upon
their request, through enhanced technical assistance
and capacity-building. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report of 11 June 2013 (S/2013/341) on measuring
the effectiveness of the support provided by the United
Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, which states that

"Building national data collection, monitoring
and evaluation capacity should be integrated into
project and programme design so as to enhance
cooperation in measuring results." (S/2013/341, para. 68)

We have set up indicators for progress regarding the
protection and empowerment of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations as part of our comprehensive
approach for implementing resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), on women and peace and security. In
that matter, we encourage operational cooperation and
strategic partnerships, as well as information sharing,
training and cooperation on the ground.

As identified in the concept note for today's debate
(S/2014/75, annex), adequate human resources and
expertise are needed to support States in conflict and
post-conflict situations, and regional organizations can
help the United Nations in implementing the rule-of-
law aspects of its mandates. In that light, sharing
best practices and information between the EU and
the United Nations feeds into our respective civilian
capability-development processes, as both the United
Nations and the EU face similar challenges with regard
to civilian capabilities.

As a guiding principle, EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management is based on the
value added to both organizations and on producing
operational benefits building on complementary efforts
on the ground, within the overall aim of ensuring EU-
United Nations effectiveness and coherence on peace
and security.

We share the view stressed in the report of the
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015
Development Agenda that

"Freedom from conflict and violence is the
most fundamental human entitlement, and the
essential foundation for building peaceful and
prosperous societies." (see A/67/890)

