Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Senegalese presidency
for having chosen the topic of cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union for the November
programme of work, owing to the importance of the
issue in implementing in practice Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. This is one of the most
important partnerships between the United Nations
and international organizations. I also thank all of the
briefers, in particular Mr. Kaberuka, whose mandate
we support.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations has recently increased in
importance as there is a growing awareness that no
party can single-handedly confront the emerging
patterns of transboundary threats to international
peace and security - chief among them are terrorism
and organized crime. That has helped foster new
approaches towards forging partnerships at the
regional, continental and international levels aimed at
confronting such challenges. It has led to the conviction
that cooperation, coordination and joint work are an
indispensable option, facilitated through the division of
labour among the relevant parties and building on their
comparative advantages, towards achieving the desired
goals and outcomes.

In cooperation with regional economic communities
and with the support of its partners, in particular the
United Nations, over the years the African Union
has undertaken an active role in providing security
and stability in Africa. That was made possible by
putting in place and operationalizing its Peace and
Security Architecture and taking early initiatives to
intervene in a timely manner in crises in various areas
of the continent through missions that enjoy flexible,
enhanced and developed mandates tailored to dealing
with the reality on the ground. It also includes adopting
new concepts that go beyond the role of conventional
peacekeeping, combating terrorism, supporting the
establishment of State institutions and confronting
other unconventional challenges.

In that regard, I commend the sacrifices made
by the African Union missions in Somalia, Mali and
the Central African Republic, among other countries,
and pay tribute to their effective contributions to
confronting the peace and security challenges in
Africa and throughout the world. The establishment
of the Peace and Security Architecture in Africa was
linked to an increased awareness of the importance
of African ownership. African Union Summits have
adopted decisions on enhancing phased self-reliance
in the funding of those activities as well as the
operationalization of the Peace Fund as a main pillar of
the Architecture. Ongoing discussions continue within
the relevant bodies of the African Union to develop
practical and effective mechanisms to implement those
decisions so as to achieve the desired goals.

The significant developments within Africa and
the United Nations have coincided with the report
(see S/2008/813) of the high-level panel chaired by
former Prime Minister Prodi and the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, thereby encompassing developments
in conflicts and international crises. It is a matter of
providing an opportunity for an integrated vision in
supporting peace and security as well as launching
new partnerships aimed at finding innovative solutions
to crises and conflicts. The partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union is therefore of
particular importance. It enables the United Nations
to actively respond peace and security challenges on
the continent. Items pertaining to Africa account for
70 per cent of the agenda of Security Council, and, in
that regard, I stress the importance ofimplementing the
recommendations of the relevant reviews and reports.

It is also important to build upon the continuing
efforts to develop the African Peace and Security
Architecture so as to give impetus to and enhance the
institutional partnership between the United Nations and
African Union, thereby creating a strategic partnership
based on shared and jointly shouldered responsibilities,
including adopting workplans to ensure regular
funding of African Union peace operations. That would
allow for the development of African capacity in the
area of preventive diplomacy and mediation, as well
as peacebuilding and reconstruction in post-conflict
situations. It is also crucial to enhance the institutional
cooperation between the Secretariat of the United
Nations and the African Union Commission in order to
enhance the implementation of agreed programmes and
projects within the operations framework agreed by
the two organizations, as well as to support the United
Nations Office to the African Union. That would allow
the Office to carry out its functions as a focal point
between the two organizations.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that, as a member of both
the United Nations and of the African Union, Egypt
is determined to actively participate in enhancing the
partnership between the two organizations. It is our
conviction that that is the ideal path towards countering
today's problems facing Africa, and the world in
general. They are complex and multifaceted challenges.
Once again, I reiterate that Egypt will exert every effort
to support the work of Mr. Kaberuka.

