Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation thanks
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing on her twenty-
ninth report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
In taking the floor on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, 1 must say that we condemn the
horrific attacks in Khartoum on 3 June. We extend our
condolences to the families of the deceased and wish
the wounded a speedy recovery.

We also express our concern about the violent
incidents that have been taking place in the Sudan since
mid-December 2018 in various cities in the country,
which, according to the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, have led to the
deaths of approximately 70 people up to 9 April.

We note the figures mentioned in the report we
just heard, whereby the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur states that the situation
in the country is relatively calm, with fewer incidents
reported against civilians as compared to the previous
reporting period.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports the
position and efforts of the African Union in the Sudan
to resume dialogue and to restore peace and normality
throughout the country, particularly in the Jebel Marra
area, where there are sporadic clashes between the
security forces and the Sudan Liberation Army.

It is important that the dialogue initiated by the
Transitional Military Council and the Sudanese parties
involved on the parameters and political content of
the Sudanese transition continue. We therefore urge
the parties to take all political and security measures
necessary for a speedy resumption of negotiations in
order to reach a consensual agreement for the transition
to a civilian-led consensus Government with full
respect for the will and aspirations of the people of the
Sudan, the region and the continent in accordance with
the statement issued in that regard by the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the press statement of
3 June of the African members of the Council. We call
on all parties involved in the conflict to respect the
human rights of all people.

In conclusion, with regard to the requirements of
the International Criminal Court, the position of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is well known and has
not changed. My country is not a party to the Rome
Statute because we do not recognize its jurisdiction.

