Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): As this is Indonesia's
first opportunity to address the Council this month,
please allow me to congratulate the United States of
America and you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency, and we welcome the convening of this
open debate. Let me also take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement of the
Non-Aligned Movement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt, as well as the statement of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which will be
delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan.

Several previous speakers have alluded to the fact
that the current situation between the Palestinians and
Israelis is uncertain and difficult. Indonesia fully
concurs with that assessment, yet wishes to pose the
question as to what we have done to alleviate the
suffering of the people in the occupied Palestinian
territories.
Indonesia is deeply concerned that the
international efforts to meet and advance the issue have
failed so far to facilitate the resumption of direct talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, which would
shape a path to a negotiated agreement before the end
of the year. It is noteworthy that the need for both sides
to avoid provocations that would be detrimental to the
prospects of peace has been repeatedly expressed by
the majority of Member States. Despite that, not only
have settlement activities not subsided, they continue
before our very eyes to increase in volume and
intensity.

It has been widely reported recently that
Palestinian State-building efforts face an increased risk
of failing. The deterioration of the progress achieved so
far, coupled with the financial and political burden on
the Palestinian Authority, has truly hampered and
blocked any potential success.

Indonesia wishes to restate its strong
condemnation of all policies designed to whittle down
the authority of the Palestinian Authority or frustrate
the desires of Palestinians to build their capacity for
eventual statehood. We have repeatedly stated our
unwavering support of the efforts of Palestinians to
build such State structures, and we have in fact
committed ourselves to capacity-building efforts in that
regard.

In line with that, Indonesia yet again joins the
international community in declaring its untiring
support for and solidarity with the Palestinians in their
quest for the realization of their inalienable rights,
including their right to have an independent and
sovereign State. We reiterate our support for the vision
of two States living side by side in peace and look
forward to the eventual establishment of the State of
Palestine. As we focus on that objective, the international
community must move beyond rhetoric. We must
contribute in real terms to supporting the Palestinian
people in preparation for the day when they finally
exercise their right of sovereignty.

The resilience of the Palestinian people is worthy
of recognition. They have endured repression and
endless mayhem for decades. Despite that, they have
kept on moving towards achieving their dream of
independent statehood. The dream of our Palestinian
friends, brothers and sisters, is simply to have a State
they can call their own.
Unfortunately, the dream of the Palestinians and
their journey to an independent State have continued to
be beset by hurdles and setbacks. Israel, with infamous
ingenuity, continues to combine persistent hostility
towards the Palestinians with determined efforts to
frustrate the peace process.

Israel must recognize that we are living in an era
when human rights must be respected and protected
and that the will of the oppressed will prevail. No
country can have a clear conscience if it resorts to
brutal repression. No country can expect to wear the
mantle of dignity by ignoring universal democratic
values. It is, therefore, also the responsibility of the
international community to continue its efforts to
create conditions conducive to the early establishment
of an independent State of Palestine.

Finally, with regard to the situation in Lebanon
and in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my
delegation calls upon Israel to fully respect Lebanon's
sovereignty and stop violating resolution 1701 (2006).
We further urge Israel to immediately halt its actions
aimed at altering the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, and to
abide by resolution 497 (1981).

