Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I wish at the outset to
align my delegation with the statement delivered on
behalf of the EU and its member States.

In his most recent report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2013/689), the Secretary-
General concludes that the current state of the protection
of civilians leaves little room for optimism. His report
describes in stark terms the violence, insecurity
and human rights violations which are at present
characteristic of Afghanistan, the Central African
Republic, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Iraq, Mali, South Sudan and Syria.

Although those conflicts and insecure environments
have their own distinctive features, they have at least
one element in common: it is civilians who bear the
brunt of the suffering being inflicted and who account
for the vast majority of the casualties.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies, of course, with the parties to a given
conflict. There is, however, a crucial role to be played
by United Nations peacekeepers. The protection of
civilians caught up in war remains at the heart of what
the United Nations does and what it stands for. As the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and its member States put it, the protection of civilians
must be the benchmark against which we measure the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In his report, dated 22 November 2013, the
Secretary-General urges Member States to ensure
that their peacekeepers are given the pre-deployment
training they need for the protection of civilians
according to United Nations standards and that
important resources such as air mobility assets and
early warning are provided along with troops.

We have seen the difference made by 3,000 well-
equipped South African, Tanzanian and Malawian
troops in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo's Force
Intervention Brigade. To complement the deployments
made by traditional large troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat should make a concerted effort to
broaden the base of troop contributors. The Security
Council and the Secretariat should work to enhance
interaction with all troop contributors, in accordance
with presidential note 630 (S/2013/630) oflast October.

This year we are marking the twentieth anniversary

of the genocide in Rwanda. It is also 15 years since the
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999). During this period,
we have seen a number of positive developments relating
to the role of United Nations peacekeepers in protecting
civilians. These include the increased integration of
protection of civilians into the mandates for United
Nations peacekeeping missions; improvements in the
capacity of these missions, including the establishment
of women's protection advisers and of mobile human
rights teams; and the increased role played by regional
organizations in relation to preventing and limiting
violations of international humanitarian law.

But significant challenges remain. There has
been an alarming growth in the incidence and scale of
intra-State conflicts, which are responsible for rising
civilian casualties and where we are also seeing - as
in South Sudan at present - the increased targeting of
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel.

My delegation welcomes the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in Security Council resolutions.
We would like, furthermore, to see the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping missions strengthened
through standardized in-mission training, through
the development of protection-of-civilians mission
strategies, and through resources being made available
which would permit a greater focus on prevention and
early-warning analysis.

Small arms are the weapons of choice in many of
today's conflicts. As a strong supporter of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT), Ireland looks forward to the early
entry into force of ATT provisions, which will help to
stop destabilizing flows of arms into conflict regions.
We are also keenly aware of the excellent work being
undertaken by the United Nations Mine Action Service,
including the steps it is taking in Libya and elsewhere
to secure and demilitarize stockpiles of weapons and
ammunition. If such work had been possible in the
Central African Republic during the course of 2013,
significant amounts of weaponry might have been kept
out of the hands of militant groups, and civilian lives
would have been saved.

It is a truism that the most effective form of
protection is prevention. And yet it remains the case
that far too little emphasis is placed on peacebuilding
and prevention. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan is on the whole a good example of the impact
that a United Nations mission can have in mitigating
the risks to a local population. Yet there are also clear
lessons to be learned from recent events there. In South
Sudan and in other fragile or post-conflict societies, the
need to build sustained and resilient peace, including
through efforts towards reconciliation, has never been
more apparent.

Nowhere, finally, is the need for protection of
civilians more apparent than in Syria, where more
than 3 million people remain trapped in areas of
heavy fighting which are besieged by Government or
opposition forces. Under-Secretary-General Amos has
spoken frequently and eloquently of the humanitarian
plight of ordinary Syrian men, women and children.
While the regime bears primary responsibility for the
conflict, both the authorities and armed opposition
groups must take immediate action to uphold
international humanitarian law and to facilitate the safe
and unhindered delivery of assistance to those who so
urgently need it.

