Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me pleasure, as Chairman of the
Arab Group for this month, to extend to you, Mr.
President, our sincere appreciation for your tireless efforts
in following the developments of the continued and
escalating Israeli aggression against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of our sister country, Lebanon. That
aggression has so far resulted in the deaths of almost 200
people, in addition to hundreds of injuries and the
displacement of about half a million refugees.

In this context, I wish to reiterate our expression of
solidarity between all Arab countries and their support for
the Government and the people of Lebanon in their
painful crisis. The massacres have not yet ceased, and,
indeed, escalated this morning with the deliberate Israeli
bombardment of a known international area, the
headquarters of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. That act of aggression resulted in the deaths of
several soldiers in the force, in addition to the deaths of
women, the elderly and unarmed children. I wish to
express our deep condolences to the Government and the
people of Lebanon and to the families of the fallen
members of the United Nations Interim Force.

On behalf of the Arab Group, I would like to
reiterate our strong condemnation of this act and our call
for Israel to comply fully with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. The Security Council should
shoulder its responsibility and do its best to preserve
international peace and security. The Arab Group again
reiterates the need for Israeli aggression against Lebanese
territory to cease and the absolute necessity to respect
fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
We reiterate the need for the complete withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces to the internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 425 (1978).

 

I would also like to express our sincere
appreciation to all the members of the Council that
supported the draft resolution submitted by the Arab Group
- the Arab Republic of Egypt, China, Indonesia and
Guinea-Bissau. We also wish to express our deep regret
with regard to the position taken by the other members of
the Council, which abstained when voting on the draft
resolution, especially given the fact that the Arab Group's
draft resolution is in complete accordance with the basic
principles of the United Nations Charter and Security
Council resolutions on the Middle East, in particular
resolution 425 (1978).

The elements contained in the Arab Group's draft
resolution were prepared and submitted to the Council,
which should have adopted it in order to send a clear
message calling for the immediate cessation of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and calling upon Israel to
withdraw immediately to the internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978).

We appeal to the international community to provide
without delay emergency humanitarian assistance to the
people of Lebanon in order to alleviate their suffering and
meet their humanitarian needs.

Finally, on behalf of the Arab Group, I call upon this
Council to continue to shoulder its responsibility in
following the grave developments in Lebanon and to take
the necessary measures to put an end to the aggression and
massacres, and to undo their consequences, in accordance
with international legitimacy and the provisions of
international law.

