Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Before I deliver
my statement, I wish to state that the Philippines joins
other Member States in strongly condemning the
bombing of the United Nations office in Abuja, and
expresses its deep condolences over the United Nations
personnel and Nigerian citizens who perished, as well
as those who were seriously injured in that horrific
attack.

The Philippine delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
and important open debate on the present and future of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As a country
committed to committing troops and police to various
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the Philippines
highly values this opportunity to engage the Security
Council in meaningful discussion on the challenges we
face and ways to collectively resolve them.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. My delegation likewise expresses its
appreciation for the briefing by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, which set the tone of our debate today.

We also welcome the heightened interaction and
dialogue among other key stakeholders of the global
peacekeeping agenda, including the Secretariat, the
General Assembly and troop- and police-contributing
countries. One concrete example of such productive
interaction has been the recently held informal meeting
between the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the heads of military components.

As we listened intently to the Force Commanders
of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
derived relevant and useful insights, learned critical
lessons and figured out ways on how best to move
forward. We thank the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for having organized the meeting, and look
forward to further interactions with our men and
women in the field and to seeing the recommendations
generated during those interactions transformed into
concrete action.

Philippine participation in peacekeeping missions
dates back 48 years to the deployment of a 40-man Air
Force squadron to the Congo. Since then, the
Philippines has modestly contributed to various
peacekeeping missions in fulfilment of its international
commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. Despite its limited resources, the Philippines
strives to find ways and means to assist the United
Nations by contributing troops and police officers to
existing and emerging missions.

I am pleased to highlight that my country is
playing an active part in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, under the leadership
of our very own Major General Natalio Ecarma III, in
which a 344-strong Filipino contingent is deployed. At
present, the Philippines is strengthening its own
peacekeeping mechanisms and charting a new road
map to allow it to increase the number of its
peacekeepers and expand its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the near future.

Today, the Philippines has the modest number of
893 military and police personnel serving in seven
peacekeeping operations around the world. I wish to
highlight that 10 per cent of our peacekeepers are
women - a figure which will surely increase in the
years ahead. The Philippines is a strong partner of the
United Nations in the promotion of women's active
involvement and participation in peacekeeping. We
fully support the idea of integrating the gender
perspective in the deployment of peacekeeping
personnel, and continue to play our part in putting that
into practice.

The Philippines strongly advocates the
continuous training and development of peacekeepers
to strengthen the effectiveness and success of their
missions. To this end, the Philippines successfully
hosted the first training of trainers in the Asian region
in June in Manila. Participants from 13 countries were
trained to present the new United Nations police
standardized training curriculum on preventing and
investigating sexual and gender-based crimes to police
officers, in preparation for their deployment to a field
mission. The training-of-trainers course is specifically
designed for the post-conflict environment and ensures
that United Nations police officers will have the
required knowledge of procedure and the skills
necessary to assist their counterparts in the host State
in preventing and investigating sexual crimes and
gender-based violence throughout the investigation,
prosecution and trial processes.

The Philippines is satisfied with the achievements
made by the United Nations thus far, and would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the courageous
and dedicated men and women serving under the blue
and white flag of the United Nations. The Philippines
is especially mindful of the sacrifices made by our
peacekeepers, especially those who are deployed under
harsh and hostile conditions, and salutes all those who
have given their lives to the cause of peace.

At the same time, the Philippines acknowledges
and appreciates the continued efforts made by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support to keep us abreast of
developments in the field of peacekeeping and to fully
address the increasing demand for peacekeepers
worldwide, despite countless challenges and
difficulties.

Based on its experience as an active troop- and
police-contributing country, the Philippines notes that
the surge in and increased demand for peacekeepers are
not often matched by the capabilities and resources
necessary to meet our peacekeeping commitments.
This is not only a budgetary problem, but also involves
the careful and methodical planning and effective
execution of the mandates conferred by the Security
Council. It is imperative that we continue to find ways
and means to ensure the safety and protection of our
peacekeepers. Hence, we must ensure that they are
adequately armed and equipped to enhance their
capacity to protect themselves in high-risk areas.

The Philippines believes that the solution to the
challenges lies in our collective will and action. As we

implement the peacekeeping reform agenda, the
extensive experiences we have gained on the ground
could enrich discussions on vital areas such as policy
and capability development, global field support
strategies, and planning and oversight. There is no
silver bullet that will solve the complicated and risky
operation of peacekeeping, but through hard work,
perseverance and wise decisions we can always
improve the utilization of our scarce resources and
apply our collective experiences to ensuring the
successful deployment of peacekeepers and the
completion of their mission.

In closing, let me reiterate my country's full
cooperation with the Security Council, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support, and once again manifest our unwavering
commitment to helping maintain international peace
and security and to preventing the escalation of conflict
at various points across the globe.

