Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan) (spoke in French): I
would like to congratulate the President for the very
able way he has been leading the work of the Security
Council this month.

(spoke in English)

I express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his recent report (8/2016/532) on the situation in my
country. Iwould also like to thank my friend Mr. Nicholas
Haysom for his last briefing as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan. I pay tribute
to his contribution to the life of our country during
the crucial years of transition. I would also like to
welcome another good friend Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto as the incoming Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, with whom I have had the
pleasure of working in Kabul.

I also wish to convey my deepest condolences in
connection with the tragic atrocity that occurred in
Orlando last week and yesterday's attacks in Kabul and
Badakhshan. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
victims and their families. We welcome the statements
of condemnation that the Security Council issued
following each of those attacks.

I am pleased to report that the country has shown
greater resilience in countering the ongoing challenges
since the Council's deliberations on Afghanistan in
March (see S/PV.7645). As I speak here today, we have
just left behind us the spring season with high casualties
and setbacks for the Taliban and other terrorist
groups. Actors from Afghanistan's region, along with
international partners, are coming together to give a
more collective response to the violent extremism and
terrorism emanating from the region. A number of
multinational development projects have either been
launched or come to fruition, creating new hope for
peaceful coexistence, connectivity and prosperity in
the region.

Afghanistan and its regional and international
partners appear more determined than ever to prevent
the continuation of violence from taking development
hostage. The re-emergence of Afghanistan as a
symbol of international cooperation and partnership
is gaining momentum. Nevertheless, the increased
civilian casualties and internal displacement and the
ramifications of the cowardly behaviour of the Taliban
and their supporters to compensate for their losses have
been alarming.

Last winter, the Quadrilateral Coordination Group
(QCG) - made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China
and the United States - finalized a road map for the
peace process. New opportunities were presented to
those willing to engage in talks. The QCG members
agreed to take all the necessary measures against those
who refused to engage in a political resolution of the
conflict in Afghanistan.

The expectation was that the Taliban would
use that opportunity and join the process. Sadly, on
12 April, they responded with their so-called spring
offensive, launched simultaneously across 42 different
locations in our country and causing heavy civilian
suffering and proving once again that they cannot be
reconciled to peaceful political initiatives. Given the
brilliant performance of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the Taliban suffered heavy losses
during the first stage of the Taliban onslaught. To
avenge their losses, the Taliban plotted, and claimed
responsibility for, the deadly Kabul terrorist attack
on 19 April, killing and wounding 411 persons,
mostly civilians.
On 25 April, President Mohammad Ashraf Ghani
Ahmadzai addressed a joint meeting of the National
Assembly of Afghanistan. He called on Pakistan to
respect the QCG agreements and take action against
terrorists who, according to the credible intelligence
from our own agencies as well as from our international
partners and from publicly recorded confessions by
Pakistani authorities themselves, have their bases
and leaders in that neighbouring country. President
Ahmadzai said that if Pakistan refused to carry out
military operations on its soil against the terrorists,
then it should surrender them to our courts to face
justice. We believe that there is a need for political will
and honest police action, rather than nuclear deals or
F-16s, to fulfil that task. President Ahmadzai added
that, despite our desire and efforts to advance regional
cooperation, we would have no choice but to refer the
case to the Security Council and take serious diplomatic
measures, unless there was a change in the policy of
using terrorist proxies against Afghanistan.

In contrast to the unforthcoming attitude of a
certain neighbouring country, other QCG members
have remained committed to giving - or have even
already given - effect to their words. On 22 May,
Taliban leader Mullah Akhtar Mansour was tracked and
killed by a United States airstrike in the Balochistan
province of Pakistan. The incident also exposed his
Pakistani passport with a fake name, which he had used
to fly from Pakistani airports numerous times. Despite
that, the charade of plausible deniability, duplicity and
blaming Afghan weaknesses continue. That must come
to an end if we are to succeed in countering terrorism.

In the past 15 years, numerous leading terrorist
figures, including the Al-Qaida leader Osama bin
Laden and Taliban leaders Mullah Omar and Mullah
Akhtar Mansoor, have lived and died in Pakistan. The
fact that notorious terrorist leaders were found and
killed in their safe havens there is clear proof that the
country has violated the sovereignty of other nations.
That constitutes a flagrant violation of the resolutions
1373 (2001) and 2255 (2015), on the sanctions regime
against the Taliban. We believe that there is an urgent
need for proper implementation of the existing counter-
terrorism resolutions of the Security Council.

Following the failure of their so-called spring
offensive, the Taliban have resorted to stepping up
highway banditry and the killing or kidnapping
civilians. In late May, they kidnapped 130 civilian
bus passengers in Kunduz; the fate of some of them
is still unknown. Earlier today, the Taliban again
took multiple travellers hostage in the province of
Helmand. Meanwhile, our neighbour's provocative
actions along the de facto separation line, including
the illegal construction of military installations, abuse
of our nationals and restrictions on trade and transit,
have escalated. In the past three months, the violation
of our sovereignty and territorial integrity continued
with the firing of over 820 foreign artillery shells on
our eastern provinces of Nangarhar, Khost, Paktika,
Kunar and Nouristan, causing civilian casualties and
material losses.

Most recently - in contravention of bilaterally
agreed consultation mechanisms - our neighbour
attempted to build new infrastructure at the Torkham
Pass, thereby provoking an unnecessary military clash
that produced casualties on both sides. The situation,
which is a threat to international peace and security,
remains tense, with a devastating impact on trade and
transit. As a responsible Member of the United Nations,
and under Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Afghanistan has submitted 19 protest notes to
Pakistan and summoned that country's head of mission
in Kabul three times in the past three months.

Meanwhile, Afghanistan's Government and Parliament
have called for a diplomatic solution to the illegal
construction at Torkham Pass. An Afghan delegation
was sent to Islamabad to explore a diplomatic
breakthrough. We hope the voice of reason will prevail,
but our message is very clear: make no mistake - I
repeat, make no mistake - the proud Government and
the people of Afghanistan have not, do not and will not
surrender to intimidation, violence and aggression. Our
history is a testimony to that.

Apart from the Taliban, constantly morphing
global and regional terrorist groups seek to turn
Afghanistan into a launching pad against Central Asia,
South Asia, West Asia and the Far East. It is imperative
that we remain vigilant and proactive against them.
Despite the recent heavy blows inflicted by the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaieda, those
groups continue to position themselves to re-emerge in
Afghanistan. Al-Qaieda has gone dark and deep. Other
regional terrorist networks with links to Central Asian
republics, Chechnya and China are highly active in our
region.
Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, in coordination with
other terror groups, remains a long-term threat to the
security and stability of our region. More important,
most of those terrorist groups and networks enjoy the
facilitation and orchestration services of elements
within the Pakistani State structure who believe in
the use of violence to pursue political objectives. Any
country contemplating the use ofgood and bad terrorists
against each other and against others is playing with
fire and will catch fire itself. It is imperative that the
international community undertake an initiative to
establish objective criteria to identify and confront
State sponsorship of terrorism in our neighbourhood.

Despite the challenges, Afghanistan remains
committed to the peace process with reconcilable
Afghan elements, parallel to strengthening its defence
and security capabilities. However, it is important that
we remain vigilant against the instrumentalization
and misuse of the peace process by supporters of the
Taliban to buy time and refuel their war machine. One
can talk about peace only with those who value genuine
and results-oriented negotiations. But the world has
yet to see sincerity on the part of the Taliban and
their supporters.

I must pay particular tribute to the brave men and
women of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. I am pleased to report that the security forces,
despite suffering high casualty rates, continues to move
from strength to strength, proving an invaluable asset
and partner in the global struggle against terrorism.
We are grateful for the continuous partnership of the
international community. We welcome last week's
announcement by the United States on further ground
and air support to the security forces. We look forward
to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's Warsaw
Summit in two weeks' time, which will review
international support for the Afghan security forces
and reiterate the pledges of our international partners.

Afghanistan has moved to complete or achieve
progress on a number of major national and regional
projects on energy and trade. Recently, we signed
an agreement with a Turkish company to explore
expanding the Kajaki dam in Helmand. Afghanistan
and India inaugurated the Saima irrigation and power
dam in Herat. Another historic occasion was the signing
of a transit trade agreement among Afghanistan, India,
and Iran on the Chabahar Port. We already started to
export agricultural products through that new trade
route. The leaders of Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan
and Kyrgyzstan launched the construction of the
CASA 1000 project. Afghanistan is determined to
continue its outreach to all regional partners for mutual
growth and prosperity, but at the same time remains
steadfast in refusing to allow obstructive policies in the
neighbourhood to dictate its direction.

We are currently working on the development
strategy framework, in line with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to be presented at the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan in October. We look
forward to generous investments from the international
community in support of the implementation of that
strategy. We are committed to the full implementation
of the September 2014 agreement on the formation of
the National Unity Government. We are working with
all stakeholders to identify and remove obstacles and
expedite the electoral reform and convocation of the
Loya Jirga on amending the Constitution.

As we approach the Brussels conference, I am
pleased to report that over 90 per cent of Afghanistan's
2015-2016 commitments in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework are either
complete or nearing completion. Afghanistan has
established the High Council on Governance, Justice
and Anti-Corruption, which oversees the national
anti-corruption strategy, and has implemented
anti-corruption measures in the justice sector, which
are bound to improve governance. The Parliament
has given votes of confidence to the new Ministers of
Interior and Defence, the Attorney General and the
Head of the National Directorate of Security.

Despite rising civilian casualties due to attacks by
extremist factions, the determination of the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces to protect
civilian lives remains steadfast. The Government has
reiterated its commitment to promoting human rights,
continues to work on revising the penal code and
professionalizing the Afghan National Police, and has
submitted its first periodic report to the United Nations
Committee against Torture. Children's protection units
are operational in different regions of the country to
prevent the recruitment of children into the armed
forces. Multiple women's protection and family
guidance centres for survivors of domestic violence are
open and functional, which shows the Government's
continued support to rehabilitating victims of violence.

The humanitarian situation remains fragile,
with an increase in conflict-related displacements in
extreme weather conditions. Earlier this year, I was
very pleased to sign the Paris Climate Agreement on
behalf of my Government, which I believe puts us on
the right track to make progress towards environmental
and social integrity. Afghanistan is ranked among the
most vulnerable countries facing the adverse impact of
climate change, which affects our economic situation
as well.

The ongoing flight of Afghans and the significant
numbers of internally displaced remain a cause
for concern, especially against the backdrop of
the decrease in voluntary repatriations. Terrorist
attacks on various aid organizations have hampered
humanitarian assistance in several cases, and rendered
refugee resettlement programmes more precarious.
However, our Government is fully committed to
finding sustainable solutions for the repatriation of
Afghan refugees, with the support of the international
community. I welcome the deliberations at the World
Humanitarian Summit, and assure the Council that
Afghanistan will work with our international partners
to address this serious humanitarian situation.

According to United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime's socioeconomic analysis in its Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2015, the estimated gross value of
opiates in Afghanistan decreased from 13 per cent of
the country's gross domestic product in 2014 to 7 per
cent in 2015. This demonstrates our commitment to
curbing the menace of narcotics, and we will continue
to work with the international community to garner
support for the Afghan national drug action plan to
counter the threat of illicit drugs.

Let me conclude by saying that 2015, the first post-
transition year, was a year of survival for Afghanistan,
but 2016 has inaugurated the era of consolidation of
the gains that we have collectively made in the past
15 years. Together, we will pave the way for the long-
term sustainability of progress in our country. I thank
the entire Council and almost all other United Nations
Member States that have been part of our journey so
far, either through sweat and toil or in spirit.

