Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
would like to express its concerns following the events
of the crisis in Ukraine, especially in Crimea, given
the fact that efforts undertaken to achieve a peaceful
solution have unfortunately not yet been successful.
We would like to reiterate the need to protect the
sovereignty of Ukraine, its territorial integrity and its
political independence.

All territories and regions of Ukraine, including
Crimea, fall under Ukrainian sovereignty. That
fact is recognized by the international community
and established by international law and, of course,
the Charter of the United Nations, which is further
complemented by relevant international treaties, such
as the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.

We wish to reaffirm the fact that the instrument
that governs all regions and parts of Ukraine's territory
is the Constitution, which guarantees its territorial
integrity and unity throughout all regions and parts of
the country. That is why it is simply unacceptable to
split off a part of its territory and have another country
annex it. The international community should spare no
effort to tackle the crisis and to encourage the parties
to reach a solution that would protect their legitimate
interests and rights, which would result, of course, in a
return of Crimea to Ukrainian control.

There is also a need to establish the necessary
guarantees to protect the interests of the various sides.
If ever an agreement were to be concluded to put an end
to the crisis, it should include guarantees of minorities'
rights in Ukraine. We urge the United Nations to use
its good offices to reconcile the positions of the two
parties and to come up with a mechanism that would
enable us to initiate dialogue and make progress.

Clearly, the time has come to set up an international
contact group to achieve that objective, to work with all
parties on the ground and to cooperate with the various
monitoring and observation groups, which could be
deployed to verify the situation throughout all regions
in Ukraine, including Crimea. The various parties
to the crisis should refrain from actions that would
lead to escalation. They should give pride of place to
reconciliation, common sense and logic, and work with
international organizations within the framework of the
existing forums. Such an effort would spare the world
from the negative consequences of the crisis and its
impact on international peace and security.

