Mr. Djani (Indonesia): In accordance with the
recommendation yesterday for all members of the
Security Council to speak briefly (see S/PV.8486), I
shall speak briefly in my national capacity.

First, with regard to the process of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), almost
15 years since its adoption, there are still States that
have yet to submit their final report. We therefore
encourage non-reporting States to submit their
initial report. Indonesia submitted its first report in
October 2004 and updated it in November 2018. We
also note the importance of providing assistance to
some Member States in fully implementing resolution
1540 (2004). Indonesia will work with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts to identify areas in which we can
provide assistance.

Secondly, with regard to the Committee's 2019
programme of work, we are pleased that it was adopted
early last month, which demonstrated the support
of the members of the Committee and their renewed
vigour and energy. We thank them for that. We also
welcome the identified activities, including those on
the margins of the General Assembly, to achieve wider
engagement on the part of Member States. We hope that
those activities can be planned carefully and in a timely
manner in order to be executed effectively and achieve
their objectives.

Thirdly, concerning the upcoming comprehensive
review, it is due by April 2021. Although it will not
coincide with Indonesia's membership of the Council,
its preparation is required starting now. Indonesia
feels that the review is crucial to evaluating the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and serving
as the basis of discussion for the renewal ofthe mandate
of the 1540 Committee. We are ready to engage in the
preparations for the comprehensive review.

Let me conclude by recalling that it is always
imperative for us all to differentiate between the
existence of the 1540 regime and all existing treaties
related to the prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction. Both should work together in order to
address the current challenges. Lastly, I would be remiss
were I not to express Indonesia's anticipation of closer
collaboration and its appreciation to the wise Chairs of
the Committee and Working Groups and members of
the Committee, as well as the Group of Experts, for
their excellent work thus far. We are looking forward to
a productive year ahead.

