Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, for his briefing and for
his efforts to promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) since the
beginning of his chairmanship.

China has always attached great importance to
and actively participated in the work of the Committee
and hopes that, together with the other members of the
Committee, we shall continue our good work in a steady,
practical and balanced manner. China believes that
sanctions in and of themselves are not the purpose of
the relevant Council resolution, and that the tightening
of sanctions is not the appropriate criterion by which to
assess the Committee's work.

The Iranian nuclear talks currently fact a precious
historic opportunity. Although the negotiations face
many difficulties, the entire international community
hopes to see a comprehensive agreement reached by
the deadline. This would represent a positive trend
and serve the common and long-term interests of
all parties. The Committee and the Panel of Experts
should therefore discharge their duties in a steady
and orderly way, contribute to international efforts to
negotiate a solution to this issue, and refrain from any
move contrary to the spirit of the resolution that may
disrupt the negotiating process. China notes that the
Panel is drafting its final report for the current term.
We hope that the Panel will act in accordance with the
aforementioned principles and work objectively and
impartially to produce a good report.

Resolving the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations will safeguard the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime, contribute to peace
and tranquillity in the Middle East, and offer beneficial
experience in negotiating solutions to major hot-spot
issues. It is therefore of far-reaching significance. On
the other hand, the potential impact of the talks far
exceeds the talks themselves, and some twists, turns
and difficulties in the process are unavoidable.

The six parties and Iran recently held intensive
consultations and negotiations with a view to meeting
the final deadline for the negotiations. The process
is now in the final stage of the marathon, and China
believes that the negotiations are near the finish line.
We hope that the parties will seize this important
window of opportunity to strengthen their political
will, mobilize favourable factors, continue working
to meet each other half way, and make timely political
decisions so as to run the last and most difficult
kilometre side by side in order, as soon as possible,
to reach a comprehensive agreement that is equitable,
balanced and mutually beneficial. The parties should
persevere, see the process through to the very end, and
prevent last-minute failures.

China supports the ongoing positive role being
played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
in resolving this issue. We hope that the Agency will
strengthen its cooperation with Iran and gradually
resolve the relevant pending issues. China is a
responsible party to the talks, has consistently behaved
in an objective and impartial way, and has made positive
contributions to resolving the difficult key issues in
the negotiations. China will pursue its constructive
participation in the negotiations and, alongside the
other parties, finish the marathon talks on the Iranian
nuclear issue as soon as possible, so as to contribute
its wisdom and strength to achieving a comprehensive,
thorough and long-term solution to this issue.

