Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
believes it very important that the full Security
Council, led by Ambassador Ronaldo Mota
Sardenberg, has carried out a working visit to Haiti.
That has enabled the Council to get a first-hand view
of the situation in that country and of the work being
carried out by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) under the mandate of the
Security Council. It should also be recalled that the
decision to visit Haiti was adopted at the open meeting
very aptly organized on 12 January by the delegation
of Argentina during its presidency of the Security
Council (S/PV.5110).
We also believe that the simultaneous visit of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council was very appropriate, as was the fact
that some of its meetings in Haiti were carried out
jointly with the Security Council mission. That
modality has not often been employed, but it enriches
our understanding of the problems besetting countries
such as Haiti. In addition to the Security Council's task
of maintaining peace and security, that approach
enables the Economic and Social Council to promote
the development agenda that will make it possible to
rebuild such countries.

My delegation fully shares the Security Council
mission's assessment of the aspects it addressed during
its visit and endorses its recommendations. I shall
therefore confine my remarks to a few points.

As we can see from reading the report of the
Security Council mission to Haiti, there is not yet a
minimal social contract in Haiti to underpin the
existence and authority of the State. My delegation
believes that that finding justifies two courses of
action. First of all, the forthcoming renewal of
MINUSTAH's mandate should be for an initial period
of 12 months. MINUSTAH is today the guarantor of
minimum conditions of peace and security for the
Haitian population. It must therefore be given a
timeline that guarantees the continuity of its activities,
and must have the resources it needs to provide
security for the elections.

The second course of action pertains to the need
for all of Haiti's political and social forces to be
incorporated into the political process of dialogue and
reconciliation currently under way. Absent agreement
on the part of Haitians themselves to establish a
genuine social contract among themselves, it is
difficult to imagine that the current critical situation
can be overcome.

It is time for the efforts of the international
community and all friends of Haiti, both in this
hemisphere and elsewhere, to converge resolutely on
the goal of achieving a social pact in Haiti. It is not, of
course, the responsibility of the international
community - and even less so in the current
circumstances - to take a stand in support or rejection
of any particular political actor or grouping in Haiti or
to express value judgements of the historical and social
process that has mired the Haitian population in the
worst living conditions in our hemisphere. The
international community must be unconditionally
committed to securing a social agreement leading to
political viability in Haiti. Such a social agreement is
undoubtedly the main guarantee of a successful
outcome of the electoral process to be launched in
Haiti in October and of the elections being carried out
in an atmosphere in which democracy and respect for
the voice of the voters transcend the violence and
legitimate the mandate of the elected authorities.

As the Latin American heads of State reiterated at
the Rio summit last November, the reconstruction and
development of Haiti are a regional priority for our
countries. We are therefore gratified by the region's
response in support of Haiti. In Peru's case, that
response includes supplying troops to MINUSTAH. In
recent months, the Peruvian contingent deployed in
J acmel has been used for various operations in Port-au-
Prince, Cite Soleil and other areas of Haiti where
violence and gang activity are widespread. We
therefore appreciate the recognition offered by the
Force Commander of the conduct of our contingent,
and deplore the losses incurred by MINUSTAH's
military personnel, which highlight the critical and
sensitive situation prevailing in Haiti. Peru has been
and will remain committed to Haiti and, in response to
the request of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, will send an additional contingent to
double the number of troops it presently has in
MINUSTAH.

The Peruvian delegation feels that the restoration
of the Transitional Government's control over civil
order throughout the country is critical to Haiti's
stability. There can be no substitute for that important
task, and we must therefore provide the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme with the
necessary momentum and, above all, resources. In the
case of Haiti, however, insecurity arising from the
existence of illegal armed groups requires a special
political effort towards inclusion. That is why
consolidating a sustainable level of security requires
the restoration of the social contract and simultaneous
action on various fronts, especially with respect to the
country's political, institutional and economic
development.

The political and institutional development of
Haiti cannot be dissociated from economic and social
development. That is why a comprehensive, long-term
strategy is required to address the challenges facing the
country. It is undeniably the fundamental responsibility
of the Haitian Government and society to make the
internal efforts necessary to laying those foundations,
but it is also a fact that Haiti does not have the
resources to deal with those challenges on its own.
Today more than ever, Haiti needs international
cooperation in terms of financial and technical support.
In its own efforts, Haiti needs the resolute support of
the United Nations, the donor community and the
international financial institutions.

We trust that, in the coming weeks, the
international community and Haiti's friends in America
and on other continents will discharge their
responsibility for helping Haitian society to restore its
social contract. We cannot be divided on that issue.

