Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are most grateful to Mr. Annabi for his
briefing on the situation in the Yugoslav province of
Kosovo. We can see how much is being done, thanks to
the international presence, in the attempt to create a
more or less normal life for the people of Kosovo.
From that standpoint, it is perfectly clear that a certain
amount of progress has been made.

Unfortunately, only some of those actually in
Kosovo are aware of that progress: people who are now
able to live there calmly, without fearing for their lives.
Sadly, that does not apply to all those who live in
Kosovo, least of all to those in Kosovo who have not
yet been able to return to their own homes. Thus, if we
look at the tasks set by resolution 1244 (1999), which
aim at establishing a free, multi-ethnic, safe society for
all those who had previously lived in Kosovo, it is
clear that we are as far from achieving them as we were
a year ago.

We note that, as in the past, the main provisions
of resolution 1244 (1999) continue to be violated. The
tasks involved in ensuring the safety and security of the
people of Kosovo - all the people of Kosovo - are
not being tackled successfully. These include the
launching of a political process to determine the future
status of the region within the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Nor is respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia being ensured.
Looking at the overall security situation, we note
with alarm that terrorist activities continue against non-
Albanian ethnic groups. Only a few days ago, on 17
August, a bomb exploded in an Orthodox church at
Velika Reka in the Vucitrn area, and hand grenades
exploded on a basketball court in Obilic, in the Pristina
region, as mentioned today by Mr. Annabi. Then, on 18
August grenades were launched at a Pristina building
housing the Political Parties Services Centre of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) as well as the Yugoslav committee for
cooperation with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). As
usual, those responsible could not be identified. I recall
no one ever being punished for a crime of this kind in
Kosovo. Nor has the international presence been able
to put an end to armed provocation organized by
Albanian extremists in the Presevo valley, something to
which Mr. Annabi also referred this morning.

In that light, we consider that the policy of
heedlessly forging ahead with respect to municipal
elections could entail further potential problems in an
already difficult situation in Kosovo. We have
repeatedly appealed to the leadership of the United
Nations and of UNMIK to affirm that this is not the
time for holding such elections. But despite this,
Mr. Kouchner has decided to hold municipal elections
on 28 October, even though many international experts,
including experts from the Council of Europe and from
the United Nations mission to assess preparations for
the Kosovo elections, have expressed grave doubts
about the wisdom of holding elections without the
participation of the majority of the Serb or Turkish
ethnic minorities in Kosovo. We are seriously
concerned that the notion of holding elections on 28
October at all costs could undermine all efforts to
establish a truly democratic multi-ethnic society in the
region. It could result only in legalizing the erstwhile
Kosovo Liberation Army units and structures that
continue to sow lawlessness under the smokescreen of
the so-called Kosovo Protection Corps.

We know that the conditions that would enable
the approximately 250,000 refugees and displaced
persons and the approximately 100,000 Serbs in the
region to participate in the elections are absent.
Mr. Annabi said that one reason why the Serbs, for
instance, are not registering to vote is that radical Serb
elements are intimidating the Serb population in
Kosovo. I am certain that this happens, and even
though Mr. Annabi did not give chapter and verse I
cannot disbelieve him. Yet I know too that if this is
indeed taking place, it is probably the least significant
reason why Serbs are not registering. The principal
reason why minorities do not wish to register is that
they continue to feel far from secure. They have a
constant feeling that their lives are threatened; they
have no freedom of movement; and they see extremist
Albanian elements carrying out activities against
minorities in Kosovo with impunity.

Would not members agree that, when we are
talking about the reasons why members of minorities
are not registering to vote, we should look at the entire
picture, not merely cast a critical eye on those referred
to by Mr. Annabi as "hard-line Serb elements". As
indicated by Mr. Annabi, we are also hearing of
increasing political Violence, not only against ethnic
minorities, but also against representatives of the
moderate, liberal Kosovo Albanian parties.

He gave us an example of scores being settled by
physical violence against the representative of the
Democratic League of Kosovo, Mr. Rugova's party.
Gorani leaders in the Dragas municipality were also
attacked. We know that the perpetrators of those
actions were members of the Kosovo Protection Corps
(KPC) who joined the Corps from the former Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA). In this very chamber a week
ago we distributed a document that proves that the
Kosovo Protection Corps is indeed recruiting not only
soldiers from the KLA, but also individuals whose
criminal pasts are well known to the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). We have had no reaction at all to that
document.

We consider that holding elections in Kosovo
may provoke a new crisis that would be a threat to
regional stability and security. We are convinced that
taking the decision to hold elections should have
happened only after holding consultations with the
Security Council. Mr. Kouchner has gone beyond his
authority in deciding on the date of elections on his
own. He has taken upon himself enormous
responsibility for the consequences of this action for
the future of the region as a whole. We have said many
times that in violating resolution 1244 (1999), Mr.
Kouchner has de facto arrogated to himself the
exclusive right to run Kosovo without consulting the
Security Council and without any cooperation with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

We noted that in Mr. Annabi's briefing there was
no mention at all of the idea of cooperation or contact
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. As a result of that
policy of UNMIK's leadership - whether it is
deliberate or not - they are in fact preparing the
ground for Kosovo to separate from Yugoslavia.
Speaking in New York in the last few days, Mr. Hashim
Thaci called the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia "a
neighbouring country". That was said in a public
announcement at a press conference. I did not hear the
leadership of UNMIK or that of the United Nations
responding or reacting in any way to such a statement
by a leader whom they consider to be the hope for a
democratic Kosovo in the context of implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

We have asked many questions about
Mr. Kouchner's activities and have not had a single
answer to any of those questions. In fact, we also asked
why the members of the Security Council have still not
received the report of the Finnish forensic pathologists
on the results of the tragedy at Racak last year. So I
would like to ask a second time, officially, that the
Secretariat take measures to ensure that the Security
Council can familiarize itself with the report of the
forensic pathologists on the tragedy that took place in
Racak.

Mr. Annabi also told us that the Zvecan plant had
been taken over by KFOR. The explanation given was
that there were environmental reasons why that was
necessary. We cannot accept that explanation. We view
the seizure of that plant as the de facto beginning of
plans to seize Serbian property in Kosovo. We know
that this plant, which was seized by force, is intended
by UNMIK to be handed over to the administrative
department for trade and industry, which is working
under the United Nations Interim Administration and
contains not a single Serb. So we can see very clearly
why the Kosovo Serbs are concerned that Mitrovica,
where the plant is located, will suffer the same fate as
other parts of Kosovo and become yet another district
that is ethnically cleansed and Albanian.

We therefore View that episode as the seizure and
alienation of Serb property. That plant was simply
taken from its Serbian owners. In this context, we
would like to draw attention to the fact that UNMIK is
not doing anything about the many economic facilities
in different parts of Kosovo that have also been
illegally seized by the former leaders of the Kosovo
Liberation Army and that are now businesses operating
within the criminal economy. For instance, there is a
whole network of gasoline stations that were seized
illegally and are now part of the criminal underground
economy.
In conclusion, I would like to mention another
step that Mr. Kouchner has undertaken on his own
initiative. I refer to orders he signed on the status of
UNMIK and KFOR within Kosovo. This was done on
the basis of a joint declaration by UNMIK and KFOR.
They had been talking about this for a long time, and
throughout that process we had warned that deciding
the status of the international presence in Kosovo could
be done only on the basis of existing United Nations
rules and the norms and standards of international law.
In other words, it was to be done through negotiations
with the host country and through the signing of an
agreement on the status of forces between the
international presence, on the one hand, and the
Yugoslav authorities, on the other. I would also like to
remind the Council that in the Kumanov agreement
KFOR committed itself to signing with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia a
document on its own status and its presence in Kosovo.
KFOR has therefore already violated its own
commitment, apart from any other violations. We
consider that the document on the status of UNMIK
and KFOR signed by Mr. Kouchner has no legal force.
UNMIK and KFOR must begin negotiations with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
sign an agreement with them regarding their own
status.

We have said many times that a settlement of the
situation in Kosovo will be possible only if we have
full and complete implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and it must be implemented not only by those
political and ethnic groups that are active in Kosovo
but also by the international presence and, naturally, by
the Security Council itself.

For the moment, unfortunately, neither the
international presence nor the Security Council is
fulfilling its part of the agreement that was enshrined in
the consensus resolution 1244 (1999).

