Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. I also wish to thank Ms. Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations; and
Ms. Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for their briefings. I further thank
Mr. Yves Daccord for his statement.

While the international community has endowed
itself with a solid normative framework to protect
civilians in armed conflict, actual compliance with the
existing standards remains far from satisfactory. How
do we translate this normative progress into concrete
improvement in the lives of the hundreds of thousands
of civilians who suffer extreme violence and hardship
during conflict?

If successful compliance with protection
standards requires an integrated and comprehensive
protection strategy in collaboration with the main
humanitarian actors, it remains that the primary
responsibility for civilian protection rests with the
concerned Government itself. Furthermore, occupying
Powers have the clear obligation under international
law to protect the population under foreign occupation.
We would like to stress in this regard the implications
of severe and sustained violations of international
humanitarian law in the Palestinian-occupied territories
and the appalling humanitarian situation confronting
the 1.5 million Palestinians confined to the Gaza Strip.

There is a prevailing awareness that United
Nations peacekeepers cannot protect everyone from
everything. However, protection is most successful
when it is part of a larger strategy. The development by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support of an operational concept
and a framework to guide the preparations of
protection of civilians strategies by missions is a good
step in the right direction. There is a need, furthermore,
to strengthen cohesion between mandates, resources
and expectations, and to enhance peacekeeping
capacity, especially in transport, communications and
intelligence.

A mission that protects civilians under imminent
threat but makes no progress in helping to address the
underlying causes of the conflict will not lead to
sustainable peace or to the durable and effective
protection of civilian populations. The United Nations
is invited to assist countries in advancing the peace
process and peaceful coexistence through inclusive
dialogue, reconciliation and reintegration. In the course
of establishing genuine and sustainable peace, the rule
of law and good governance should also be adequately
addressed. The Security Council should also consider a
more comprehensive and less selective approach to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Armed conflict is the source of devastating
calamities. This is why, all around the world, brave and
dedicated men and women strive to alleviate the
suffering of innocent victims. All parties to a conflict
should allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of impartial humanitarian relief to civilians in
need.

In his recent report (S/2010/579) on the subject of
our debate today, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
suggests that the Security Council has long recognized
that the maintenance of peace and security will not be
achieved or sustained without due attention being paid
to redressing grievances, ending impunity and
protecting the human rights of civilians. Based on that
principle, Lebanon reiterates its demand that Israel pay
due compensation for the tragic human, environmental
and material losses caused by the war it waged on
Lebanon in 2006.

During and subsequent to that war, Lebanon
suffered greatly from cluster munitions, which are
indiscriminate in nature and have a devastating effect
on civilians at the time they are used and long after the
fighting has come to an end. Today, I am honoured to
inform the Council that, earlier this month, my
Government submitted its ratification instruments on
the Convention on Cluster Munitions. Furthermore,
Lebanon has offered to host the second meeting of
States parties to the Convention in 2011. In that regard,
we urge States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Convention.

It is a moral imperative for us to prevent conflicts
and to place the people in need of protection at the
centre of our efforts and policymaking.

