Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to Spain for its initiative in convening this
open debate. As all are aware, during 2014 and 2015,
Argentina chaired the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Based
on that experience, we remain grateful to all members
ofthe Council and now wish every success to Angola as
it chairs the Working Group and that this will contribute
to transparency and accountability in the Council.

The President's concept note (S/2015/793, annex)
cites presidential note S/2013/515, which was the first
note adopted during the Argentine chairmanship of
the Working Group, and which reflected a joint effort
on the part of all Council members. The note refers to
the dialogue between the Council and Member States
and bodies, whether they be part of the United Nations
system or not. In our opinion, such dialogue is essential
in fulfilling the Council's functions. The organizations
mentioned in the presidential note include the
Peacebuilding Commission, the International Criminal
Court and humanitarian agencies.

The Security Council has a multiplicity of
responsibilities, and meeting them requires coordination
with other actors. However, Argentina is not in favour
of the Council, whose function is the maintenance
of international peace and security, absorbing the
functions of other bodies. There is a trend, which
in my opinion should be discouraged, to raise in the
Council issues that go beyond the level of necessary
coordination and encroach upon matters dealt with by
the General Assembly. That is a dangerous trend, given
that the securitization of the United Nations agenda
could lead to the Council assuming such matters to
the detriment of bodies with universal representation,
in particular the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. Although it is true that peace and
security are mutually interrelated, I want to stress the
term "mutually", because that relationship is not only
one-way. Just as peace is needed for development,
development also promotes peace. However, peace
is not the only factor influencing development. My
delegation wanted to to make those clarifications
because, as a developing country, we must remain
loyal to the multiplicity of factors involved and because
securitizing the development agenda could lead to over-
simplifying the recipes for development and give rise to
the temptation of attributing to the Council functions
that are of the General Assembly, to the detriment of
the Council's own functions.

I would also like to take this opportunity to share
some thoughts on the Council's working methods
generally.

My delegation attaches great importance 4 following
the holding of open debates - to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
taking into account the areas of agreement among the
broader membership as to how the Council works.
There are two aspects I would like to mention, as they
are issues that delegations repeatedly mention but on
which the Council has not made substantive progress.

One such issue is due process in the Council's
sanctions committees, in particular when it comes to
the listing and delisting of persons. Argentina favours
including Ombudspersons in all sanctions committees,
beginning perhaps as a first step with the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
The other issue pertains to the referrals made by the
Council to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council regularly receives from the Prosecutor
of the ICC the reports required by its own resolutions.
However, it takes no action in response, even when the
Court informs the Council that cooperation required
under the Council's resolutions has not been provided.
Both issues can affect the credibility of the Council if
they are not addressed promptly.

Finally, we cannot fail to mention that the year
2017 is of fundamental importance in that together we
must select the next Secretary-General. We call on all
delegations to work together to ensure that the process
is a genuine election. That is why we welcome General
Assembly resolution 69/321, adopted by consensus on
11 September. Although it is not perfect, the resolution
served to strengthen the transparency of the process and
is a step forward in the right direction. In that regard, we
again call on delegations and on the Council to present
more than one candidate for the post to the General
Assembly. It would also be desirable for at least one
candidate to be a woman. Finally, we welcome the very
important innovation that the selection and election
process begin with a joint letter from the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.

