Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for
his briefing. Let me also welcome His Excellency
Foreign Minister Drame for joining us at our meeting.

At the outset, I would like to make a few remarks on
the political process and the peace process. We welcome
the swift formation of the new Cabinet and we hope for
a very energetic approach to the most pressing issues.
It is important that the new Government maintain
the dynamic momentum in the peace process that
has developed over the past year. As it is the primary
responsibility of the Government of Mali to make
progress in key reforms, as agreed in the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, with tangible results
for the population, we very much count on progress in
that regard.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/454) presents a mixed picture. It acknowledges
some progress, and rightly so, but at the same time
it also makes clear that much more visible progress
is urgently needed on a wide range of issues:
decentralization, constitutional reform, security sector
reform and strengthening State capacity and presence
in all regions of Mali. It is a heavy agenda, but a leap
forward is needed to regain the trust of the population
in State institutions.

On the situation in central Mali, we very much
deplore * as many other colleagues have done - the
loss of lives and the ongoing violence, particularly
the latest massacre in the region of Mopti a few days
ago, which led to the death of a very high number of
civilians. We offer our condolences to the people and
Government of Mali. It shows and reminds us once
again that quick de-escalation is urgently needed.
Short-term measures, on the one hand, and the long-
term commitment of the Malian State to responding
to the grievances of the people in central Mali are
required. Moreover, the root causes of the conflict in
central Mali need to be addressed.

In our view, it is essential that any response not
exacerbate the ethnic dimensions of the crisis by
pitting one group's self-defence forces against others.
Accountability and investigations into human rights
violations are key to advancing the rule of law and, with
it, to preventing the further alienation of the population
from the State. Again, it is obvious that this is primarily
the Malian Government's responsibility.

On the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the way
forward, Germany has been a very significant troop
contributor to that United Nations operation for many
years. In our assessment, MINUSMA continues to be
the key security provider enabling the implementation
of humanitarian development and stabilization efforts.
It is clear to us that support for the implementation of
the peace agreement must remain the clear priority
when discussing the renewal of the mandate. The
Council should look at all the tools at its disposal not
only to measure and acknowledge progress, but also to
act decisively, including with targeted sanctions if there
is no or insufficient progress. As many others have said
before, the active participation of women in all stages
of the peace process remains a key pillar for success.

In our assessment, northern Mali should remain
the main focus. We need a realistic and achievable
streamlined mandate. That is essential to securing the
achievements in the north. But obviously, we also need
to look into what MINUSMA can do to support the
Government in responding to the deteriorating crisis
in central Mali, which has the potential to destabilize
the whole of Mali and beyond. As I stated before, it is
essential that the Government address the root causes
of the degrading security situation and investigate
human rights violations.

However, we should be careful not to set unrealistic
goals for the centre. In keeping with the Action for
Peacekeeping commitments, we should strive to set
achievable goals, which seems to be a key element for
us. In order to better identify such goals, we need to
continue our discussions with Special Representative
Annadif and his team to clarify some key questions.
For example, what are our expectations regarding
MINUSMA's role in central Mali? And what can it
actually achieve there with its limited resources? How
can it make a difference? What is the Council's view on
strengthening MINUSMA'S civilian pillar in the centre?

Since MINUSMA has a limited number of troops
and resources to operate in an increasingly complex
environment, we are clearly in favour of maintaining
the current troop ceiling and would not support any
reduction. The Mission needs to have the means to
allow it to fulfil its core tasks. We would also need
to consider the political signal we would send if we
were to reduce the number of troops. That is especially
important when we consider focusing more on the crisis
in central Mali.

Before I conclude, let me also stress that cooperation
with other security actors, such as the European Union
Military Training Mission in Mali, the European Union
capacity-building mission Sahel Mali and Operation
Barkhane, should be intensified. Closer cooperation
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) should also be looked into in a pragmatic
way and within the remit of the current authorizations
given by the Council. That could include, for instance,
the provision of logistical resources for G-5 Sahel Joint
Force troops by third-party transport.

