Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting and to thank your
friendly delegation for your presidency of the Council
during this month. I should like also to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this important debate.

The Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its firm stance
in support of the Palestinian question and of the efforts
made to achieve the aspirations of the Palestinian
people, so as to bring about a comprehensive and lasting
peace through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on the June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The question of Palestine has become more
complicated because of the intensification of the
settlement process, the siege and the repeated acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and their holy
sites. These illegal actions undermine the prospects
for peace and give rise to a climate conducive to the
escalation of extremism, hatred and violence, which
goes against the values of all religions and those of
peaceful societies that promote coexistence.

His Majesty the King of Bahrain, King Hamad
bin Isa Al Khalifa, in his address to the thirteenth
summit of the Islamic Conference, convened in Turkey,
noted that the peace process in the Middle East has
become much more complicated and has even reached a
standstill because of the persistence of Israeli practices
that oppose peace, the expansion of settlement activity,
the confiscation of land, the continued siege of the
Gaza Strip and the repeated acts of aggression carried
out against the Palestinian people and Islamic shrines,
especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

The King of Bahrain rejects and condemns such
Israeli practices and calls upon the international
community to put an end to them, as they have
undermined the peace process and promoted hatred
and terrorism in the region. His Majesty stressed the
importance of reviving the peace process on the basis
of international law and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The challenges are daunting, but our stance remains
firm, especially concerning the right of the Palestinian
people to build their independent State on their national
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Sincere
efforts to find a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution of the situation in the Middle East should be
based on ending the illegal Israeli occupation of Arab
territories by Israel, including the Syrian Golan, lifting
the illegal blockade against Gaza and the complete
withdrawal of Israel from the remaining Lebanese
territory, according to relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, resolutions of the Arab
Peace Initiative and decisions by the Quartet, as well
as on finding a solution that would ensure the return
of Palestinian refugees to their homeland, in line with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to take all the measures necessary to
provide international protection for the Palestinian
people and to end the Israeli occupation of all Arab
territories so as to achieve lasting and comprehensive
peace. We also stress the need to intensify efforts in
support of our Palestinian brothers and their aspirations
to achieve their inalienable rights.

