Mr. Ryan (Ireland): My delegation is very
pleased to have this opportunity to hear, in open format
in the Council, the views and concerns of so many
delegations on this issue of such importance to us all.
The Irish Government has consistently made clear its
grave concern at the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
When comprehensive economic sanctions were
imposed on Iraq by resolution 661 (1990), almost 11
years ago, it was not anticipated that they could
possibly last so long.

When they were reaffirmed by resolution 687
(1991), the conditions for their suspension were clearly
established. That they have still not been fulfilled 10
years on, even as modified by resolution 1284 (1999),
is a matter of utmost regret to the Irish Government. It
is regrettable because without their fulfilment, the
objective of restoring international peace and security
in the region cannot be considered to have been
achieved. It is regrettable also because of the effect that
the long-term comprehensive economic sanctions have
had on the people of Iraq, most of whom had nothing
whatever to do with the decisions taken by the Iraqi
authorities that led to the imposition of sanctions.

The international community and the Security
Council, acting on its behalf in the area of international
peace and security, have a responsibility to ensure that
the measures they adopt do not prevent the people of
the country under sanctions from obtaining the
necessities of life. That was acknowledged in
resolution 661 (1990) itself, which permitted the
supply of medicines, and of foodstuffs in humanitarian
circumstances. Because it was realized pragmatically
that the disarmament process would require some time,
the Council, in resolution 687 (1991), calibrated the
sanctions regime established by resolution 661 (1990),
lifting the prohibitions on foodstuffs, and establishing a
no-objection procedure for essential civilian needs.

That process was continued in resolution 986
(1995), with the establishment of the oil-for-food
programme. It was developed further in successive
resolutions, including in resolution 1284 (1999), which
lifted the cap on the amount of oil that Iraq can sell.

The arrangements envisaged in resolution 1352
(2001), therefore, do not represent anything radically
new. The Council has for a considerable time
recognized that the longer the sanctions continue, the
more the sanctions regime must be adjusted in the
interests of the people of Iraq and concentrated more
and more on their primary objective.

It is now time to take a further step, and to
acknowledge the need, after 11 years of sanctions, to
allow the people of Iraq to recover their national
economy and life, while maintaining the controls
necessary to ensure that the Government of Iraq does
not further develop weapons of mass destruction and
does not acquire the means of again threatening Iraq's
neighbours, pending the fulfilment of its disarmament
obligations in line with the Council's resolutions.

My delegation considers the approach now
envisaged on the basis of resolution 1352 (2001) to be
a promising one that would improve significantly the
flow of commodities and products to Iraq, while
maintaining the necessary controls.

However, the development and prosperity of a
people do not depend solely on the supply of
commodities. They also depend on modern
infrastructure - roads, railways, telecommunications,
medical facilities, water and sanitation systems. We
must ensure that nothing in the measures that we adopt,
or in the way we apply these measures, prevents the
development of Iraq's normal economic infrastructure.
In this context, it is important that the list of goods that
would be reserved for review by the Iraq sanctions
committee under the envisaged system is as short and
as precise as possible. Furthermore, any contract
containing an item on the list must be carefully
reviewed from the point of view of its overall
economic and infrastructural importance.

The new arrangements that the Council envisages
are intended, in the words of resolution 1352 (2001),
for the facilitation of civilian trade and economic
cooperation with Iraq in civilian sectors. Before the
Gulf War, Iraq had vigorous international economic
relationships, and international service contracts were
important in many sectors of Iraq's economic life. Such
contracts should again be permitted and appropriate
arrangements made for authenticating them and for
paying for them from the escrow account.

However, the people of Iraq will never achieve
the level of development and prosperity to which the
natural wealth of their country entitles them without
access to foreign investment. The longer they must do
without the resources and expertise that foreign
investment can make available, the longer development
in real terms will be put off.

None of this is to deny the responsibility of the
Iraqi authorities to take the steps clearly open to them
to secure their people's future. In particular, they must
devote the necessary priority to the education and
health sectors. The neglect of these sectors can not be
laid fully, or even mainly, at the door of the sanctions
regime. Every administration has the primary domestic
responsibility for these sectors, and citing the sanctions
regime as an excuse is not a posture that impresses the
international community.

My delegation has no interest whatever in the
perpetuation of sanctions. We are committed at any
time to act on the suspension and lifting of sanctions
on Iraq to the extent that the necessary conditions are
fulfilled. We can perhaps consider these conditions, but
the Iraqi authorities also have a big step to take in the
direction of the Security Council. When they are
prepared to take that step, we will be ready. In the
interim, however, we have a duty to the people of Iraq.
The strong sense of that duty underpins our approach to
the draft resolution under consideration and our
approach to the detailed work in the area of reserved
goods lists.

