Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, let me
join others in offering our condolences to our Russian
friends for their loss yesterday.

As the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation explained, the summit between the Turkish
and Russian Presidents in Sochi yesterday focused on
the situation in Idlib. I would also like to share our
views on the outcome of the summit.

First, I would like to recall President Erdogan's
article in The Wall Street Journal, to which I referred
here in the Chamber on 11 September (see S/PV.8347):

"Idlib is the last exit before the toll. If the
international community fails to take action now,
not only innocent civilians but the entire world
stands to pay the price."

With that awareness, President Erdogan and President
Putin met in Sochi yesterday. The summit was an
expression of their determination to find a peaceful
solution to address a major humanitarian disaster in
Idlib. The summit offered an opportunity to discuss
ways and means to implement the understanding
reached in Tehran last Friday, in line with the Astana
spirit of cooperation. The agreement reached in Sochi
builds on the Astana de-escalation arrangement and
aims to achieve the stabilization of the situation and
preserve the de-escalation zone in Idlib; the creation of
the necessary conditions to fight terrorism effectively,
in line with international humanitarian law; the
prevention of a humanitarian catastrophe; and paving
the way for the advancement of the political process.

The memorandum of understanding, which we
will circulate together with our Russian friends, was
signed by the Turkish and Russian Defence Ministers
yesterday and foresees the creation of a demilitarized
zone. The two sides agreed to continue working
on the details of that arrangement. In line with the
memorandum of understanding, all heavy weaponry
will be withdrawn from the zone by 10 October; all
terrorist groups will be removed by 15 October; the
existing Turkish observation posts will be fortified;
Russia will take all the necessary measures to prevent
military operations and attacks on Idlib; Turkey and
Russia will conduct coordinated patrols on both sides
of the demilitarized zone; the coordination centre for
the Astana guarantors will be reinforced in order to
strengthen the sustainability of the ceasefire regime;
and additional measures will be taken to ensure the
freedom of movement of people and goods.

In his briefing, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
once again depicted the dire humanitarian situation in
Idlib. The memorandum of understanding primarily
aims at averting the looming humanitarian tragedy
that the people in Idlib are facing. That arrangement
will not only prevent a military attack on Idlib, but also
serve the ultimate goal of accelerating both the political
process and the finding a negotiated solution in Syria.

As mentioned by Special Envoy De Mistura, efforts
to finalize the constitutional committee are under
way. Turkey hopes to see an acceleration of efforts
for the establishment of an inclusive and credible
committee, for the holding of free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision and for the Syrian
people's legitimate aspirations for a democratic future
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) to be addressed.
We reiterate our call to the Council and the overall
international community to support our endeavours and
expedite the political process. Our collective efforts to
fight terrorism will contribute to the creation of viable
conditions to that end.

In Sochi, the Turkish and Russian Presidents
reaffirmed their resolve to fight terrorism in Idlib and
beyond. We will continue to combat all terrorist groups,
including the Democratic Union Party and the Kurdish
People's Protection Units, which seek to undermine
the territorial integrity of Syria and represent a direct
threat to Turkey's national security. That should be a
common source of concern shared by all of us.

As Iunderlined before the Council on 11 September,
the international community must shoulder its
responsibility and throw its weight behind a political
solution. Millions of Syrians who have suffered
tremendously are putting their faith in us. They deserve
a better future. They deserve to shape the future of
their homeland. We should not, and cannot, fail them.

