Mr. Sejdiu (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the speaker): It is my
pleasure to appear before the Security Council to speak
of the situation in my country, the Republic of Kosovo.
Over the past four months the Security Council has
held regular and frequent meetings to discuss Kosovo
even as other regions demand the attention of the
international community. I recognize that this
programme reflects the great importance that the
Security Council attaches to peace and stability in
South-East Europe.
As members know, a great deal has happened in
my country since the beginning of this year. Kosovo's
independence, declared in conformity with the
recommendations of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, has been
recognized by 43 Members of the United Nations, and
more countries are recognizing it every month. As a
State desiring full integration into the Euro-Atlantic
community, Kosovo has been particularly grateful that
more than two thirds of the members of the European
Union and NATO promptly recognized our new status.

Kosovo has also achieved tangible progress on
the ground. As stated in our declaration of
independence, the Ahtisaari plan is the guiding
framework for our efforts. That document,
overwhelmingly endorsed by the Assembly of Kosovo,
continues to enjoy the broad support of our people. In
accordance with the obligations that Kosovo assumed
under the plan, the Assembly has adopted more than 40
pieces of legislation in crucial areas such as the
decentralization of local government, the protection of
ethnic minorities and the safeguarding of Kosovo's rich
cultural heritage. A new constitution came into force in
Kosovo on 15 June. It enshrines many of the provisions
of the Ahtisaari plan and reflects the highest standards
of human rights.

Although there have been violent challenges in
Kosovo, including attacks resulting in the tragic death
of a United Nations police officer, most of Kosovo has
remained calm and orderly.

In short, the transition to our new status has gone
well.

Today, however, the Council is meeting to discuss
the future of the United Nations presence in Kosovo.
As we recall, nine years ago this month, the Security
Council took the extraordinary step of severing
Belgrade's governance over Kosovo and placing
Kosovo under a transitional United Nations
administration. At that time, in that desperate year of
1999, hundreds of thousands of my fellow citizens
were displaced as a result of Belgrade's ethnic
cleansing. Milosevic's repression had left us without
any functioning institutions.
We were therefore grateful when the United
Nations came to Kosovo to help us rebuild our
shattered society. With United Nations support, we
developed our own democratic institutions of self-
government and selected leaders through multiple

rounds of free and fair elections. The United Nations
oversaw the establishment of an entire system of
governance: our municipalities, our ministries, our
Assembly, our judiciary and our police.

In recent years, the United Nations has
progressively handed governing responsibilities over to
Kosovo's new institutions. Since 1999, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has scaled down its physical presence and
personnel as the situation has improved in Kosovo.
Throughout this process, the United Nations has
continually taken account of circumstances in Kosovo
and has adapted its presence as Kosovo's capacity to
govern itself has developed.

As the Secretary-General noted in his recent
report (8/2008/354), Kosovo's independence and the
entry into force of our constitution have obviously
created a dramatically new situation to which the
United Nations must adapt once more. The people of
Kosovo, therefore, appreciate the Secretary-General's
initiative to reconfigure the United Nations presence in
our country. We note that the Secretary-General has
proposed a number of residual tasks for the United
Nations presence in Kosovo, and we further understand
that the United Nations will continue to perform rule of
law functions for a limited duration in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) as until such
time that the European Union is able to fully perform
its operational role.

I assure the Secretary-General that he will have
the ongoing support and cooperation of Kosovo as he
moves forward with this initiative. I have indicated this
support in a letter I sent to the Secretary-General
earlier this week.

The Secretary-General has also proposed
dialogue to discuss possible practical arrangements to
address threats to stability. We are open to this
proposal and take seriously the Secretary-General's
commitment to consult closely with us, as no
arrangements can be valid without the participation and
approval of the Government of Kosovo.

With respect to the threats to stability, we
recognize that addressing the situation of our minority
communities is the most essential element in
preserving peace. As President, I have continually
reached out to ethnic minorities, especially Kosovo
Serbs, to reassure them that they have a home in
Kosovo. Kosovo's current Government, which includes

representatives from minority ethnic groups is
constantly seeking new ways to build a more inclusive
and just State.

I am particularly concerned, however, that our
neighbour, Serbia, has promoted a policy that its
leaders call "functional separation of ethnic Serbs from
ethnic Albanians in Kosovo". As the Secretary-General
noted in his report, Serbia organized elections this
spring for illegal parallel municipal governments on our
territory. Serbia has also discouraged ethnic Serbs from
participating in Kosovo's Government or reporting
through our multi-ethnic police chain of command.

The people of Kosovo are understandably
concerned about the threat to our sovereignty. We are
equally concerned, however, about the message that
such policies send to Serbs in Kosovo. Policies of
division undermine the multi-ethnic governance that
the United Nations has promoted in Kosovo since
1999. These policies do not bring lasting peace or
stability, only resentment and misunderstanding. With
great sadness, I recall how such policies brought
trouble and tragedy to my region in the 19905.

The Republic of Kosovo is the seventh
independent State to emerge out of the non-consensual
collapse of the Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia. Most
of these countries gained their statehood under
circumstances that were contentious, controversial and
challenged. Although this history is a dark one, I
believe that all seven States of the former Yugoslavia,
including Serbia, have a bright and prosperous future.
The United Nations role in bringing about such a future
has been essential.

As the period of United Nations administration in
Kosovo comes now to a close, I wish to reiterate my
gratitude to the women and men of the United Nations
for their work helping my country recover from war.

The people of Kosovo believe that the best way
to honour this legacy is to build a peace-loving State
that aspires to the highest purposes and principles of
the United Nations.

