Mr. Henze (Germany): Like the other members of the
Security Council, Germany condemns the offensive by
Bosnian Serb forces against the United Nations safe area of
Srebrenica. This offensive constitutes a flagrant violation of
all relevant resolutions adopted by this Council. Together
with the other sponsors, we therefore put forward the
resolution just adopted by this Council. It demands an
immediate end to the offensive and the withdrawal of all
Bosnian Serb forces from the safe area.

We are particularly concerned about the impending
humanitarian disaster caused by the Bosnian Serb offensive.
After months of being cut off from humanitarian deliveries
because of the blockade of the safe area, large parts of the
population of Srebrenica now find themselves without
shelter, food and water. We welcome and support the
efforts of United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations to bring relief to the victims of the Bosnian
Serb offensive, and we demand free and unimpeded access
to the area. The cease-fire apparently now agreed around
Srebrenica should make this possible. However, we should
be under no illusions: what we are witnessing around
Srebrenica is one more case of "ethnic cleansing", which
we condemn in the strongest terms.

On behalf of my Government, I would like to pay a
special tribute to the Dutch contingent of UNPROFOR. The
Dutch soldiers have shown great courage in carrying out
their duty. They have acted in an exemplary manner to
alleviate the suffering of the civilian population. Dutch
soldiers have been taken hostage. We condemn this
contemptible act, which is so totally at odds with any
military ethic. We demand the immediate and unconditional
release of the hostages.

We are extremely concerned about reports that the
United Nations safe area of Zepa may be facing an
offensive by Bosnian Serb forces similar to that in
Srebrenica. We urgently demand that the Bosnian Serb side
desist from any further aggressive act against United
Nations safe areas.

The Bosnian Serbs and those who support them must
know that disregard of the will of the international
community comes at a cost. This behaviour puts them
outside the community of civilized nations. Political and
economic measures will, and have to, remain in place.

