Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing. I also thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union during this debate.

First, I would like to address the peace process
in the Middle East. Today, we have an opportunity
to develop a serious political initiative to achieve
a negotiated two-State solution based on the 1967
borders. Recent visits to the region by President Obama
and Secretary of State Kerry are important milestones
in the relaunching of the peace process. It is crucial
that, for the sake of Israelis and Palestinians alike, both
parties now make a genuine commitment to overcoming
the stalemate, resuming negotiations and developing an
action plan with a clear timetable. There is an urgent
need to move forward. In the current context, doing
nothing is tantamount to regressing.

Recent remarks by Israeli authorities reiterating
their commitment to the two-State solution are a first
step in the right direction. The new Israeli Government
must now translate those words into action and adopt
measures conducive to the resumption of talks by
stopping all settlement activity and respecting the
agreements reached with the Palestinians.

Luxembourg is indeed deeply concerned by the
settlement policy. We deplore the initial authorization,
granted at the beginning of April, for a new construction
project, the pursuit of existing settlement projects
and the demolition of Palestinian infrastructure. We
also deplore the statements made last week by some
members of the new Israeli Government in support of
efforts to strengthen the settlements, including in the
E-l sector.

No one in Palestine will believe that the peace
efforts can succeed if settlement activities continue,
if the blockade of Gaza continues, if the construction
of settler roads increases, if the wall of separation
continues to tear Palestinians from their lands, and if
administrative detentions continue. Such illegal actions
only exacerbate tensions and suffering and undermine
confidence in the future ofthe peace process. It must be
emphasized that such actions are contrary to the vision
of two States coexisting in peace and security.

Palestinians, too, must of course create conditions
conducive to the resumption of talks by meeting
their commitments, observing the Quartet principles
and continuing their efforts to combat terrorism. We
condemn, in this context, the rocket fire ofrecent weeks
that has targeted civilians in southern Israel. Nothing
justifies violence. Those attacks are unacceptable.

It is with regret that we learned of the resignation
of Mr. Salam Fayyad as Prime Minister of Palestine.
We take this opportunity to thank him for his service
to his people in that difficult position, particularly
with regard to the establishment and strengthening of
Palestinian State institutions. It is important that his
work be continued at this crucial time for the peace
process.

Indeed, 2013 will be a decisive year. It is no longer
time to listen, or even to talk. It is time for action, and, for
the umpteenth time, we must avoid giving rise to bitter
disappointment and the anger and violence that follow.
With its partners in the European Union, Luxembourg
is ready to actively contribute to the efforts to revive
the peace process, in close cooperation with key actors,
the Quartet and the countries of the region.

I now turn to Syria. While the situation is worsening
by the day, words can no longer describe the horrors
experienced by the Syrian people, including the use of
missiles and cluster munitions, torture, sexual violence
and the recruitment of children for military aims. It
would be difficult to provide an exhaustive list of all
the crimes committed on a daily basis. Like others, we
are gravely concerned by the possible use of chemical
weapons. It is urgent that the commission of inquiry
set up by the Secretary-General be able to visit Syria
and given full access in order to shed light on all the
credible allegations of the use of chemical weapons.

The list of crimes condemned by human conscience,
unfortunately, grows ever longer. Those crimes must not
go unpunished. We said it in January, and we repeat it
today forcefully - in the absence of a credible process
of accountability at the national level, a referral to the
International Criminal Court is essential.

The Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Valerie Amos, told the Council last week
(see S/PV.6949) that Syria is nearing the breaking
point - the point of no return. Syria is collapsing. It is
therefore urgent for the Security Council to act before
it is too late.

This past Thursday, the Council was able to take a
first step in agreeing on a message calling for the lifting
of restrictions on humanitarian access and to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid across borders. It
is absolutely unacceptable that the work of United
Nations agencies in Syria should be hindered and that
humanitarian convoys should be the target of attacks.
All parties to the conflict must respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including access
for humanitarian and medical personnel and the
protection of humanitarian workers.

At the same time, the Council called on all parties
to the conflict to cease armed violence and stressed
the need for a political process leading to a political
transition on the basis of the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex). That message was
a first step; we must now go further. If we want the
Council to fulfil its primary responsibility under the
Charter, we must overcome our divisions and work to
bring the parties back into dialogue as soon as possible
and to reach a political solution, considering the gravity
of the humanitarian situation.
The Syrian National Coalition is a legitimate
interlocutor on the opposition side. We must give
it our full support, encourage it to increase its
representativeness and inclusiveness, and focus its
efforts on a common vision of the political transition
so that it can ensure a political solution for the future
of Syria and build on the proposals for dialogue made
by Mr. Moaz al-Khateeb. President Al-Assad must
realize that he cannot prevail on the battlefield or cling
to power indefinitely. He cannot claim to represent the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

The conflict has overflowed Syria's borders. No
neighbouring country has been spared the security
and humanitarian impact of the war in Syria. It is no
exaggeration to say that Lebanon and Jordan face an
existential threat. We once again express our gratitude
to the neighbouring countries for the solidarity with
which they continue to host refugees fleeing Syria.
In this tragic situation, it is now more important than
ever to deliver on the pledges made at the Kuwait City
conference on 30 January.

For its part, Luxembourg has fulfilled its
commitments and transferred the funds promised to
United Nations agencies and programmes. Given the
growing needs, our Government decided last week to
make an additional contribution of humanitarian aid
amounting to €1 million.

I will conclude my remarks by urging the Syrian
authorities to stop the cross-border firing, and to fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon and other neighbouring countries. We welcome
the continued efforts of President Michel Sleiman to
preserve the unity and stability of Lebanon. We call on
all parties to respect the policy of dissociation adopted
by Lebanon. In general, everything must be done
to prevent the Syrian conflict from spreading to the
regional level.

