Mr. Apakan: I wish to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council regarding
the situation in Ukraine.

Violence in eastern Ukraine is once again reaching
a peak. The fighting around some hotspots varies in
intensity over time. Days of relative calm are followed
by periods of intense escalation. Just recently, from
11 to 17 April, the Mission has observed particularly
intense violence between Avdiivka and Yasnuvata, to
the north of Donetsk. This was the highest level of
violence observed since August 2015. Armed violence
also continues to take place around the cities onaitseve,
Horlivka, Svitlodarsk and Debeltseve. An upsruge in
ceasefire violations has also taken place in the south of
Donetsk region and in Luhansk region. Heavy weapons
are in frequent use.

The Special Monitoring Mission is also finding an
increasing number ofweapons missing from permanent
storage sites and from known weapon-holding areas.
Many of those facilities are completely abandoned. Our
observations suggest that many of those weapons are in
use at the contact line.

There are about 700 civilians living in and around
the contact line. They are suffering. In that context, I
should also underline the recent tragedy that took place
in Olenivka. That is the reason we need the cessation
of hostilities and a full and sustainable ceasefire, for
the settlement of the problem as well as to lessen the
suffering of the people.

Direct attacks against the Special Monitoring
Mission and its assets happen with impunity for the
perpetrators. Serious security incidents have taken place
recently. Therefore, we have temporarily imposed some
restrictions on our patrolling. Impunity for people who
threaten or violenty mistreat the Special Monitoring
Mission, or who violate its freedom of movement, must
end.

The inaction of those who have committed to
the ceasefire to withdraw weapons and to protect
the Special Monitoring Mission presents a direct
challenge to the letter and the spirit of the Minsk
agreements. It undermines efforts made towards
stabilization and normalization and endangers their
further implementation. The Joint Centre for Control
and Coordination (JCCC) could be instrumental in
addressing those challenges. However, the Mission's
monitoring shows that the JCCC still has not
significantly increased its effectiveness.

The Special Monitoring Mission has been adapting
its operations to the chaning situation and has further
expanded its presence on both sides of the contact
line. We have increased the number of locations from
where we conduct our monitoring, and have increased
our efforts to monitor the border areas not under the
control of the Government. The Special Monitoring
Mission is now operating out of 13 bases, on both sides
of the contact line. More bases are needed, including
in non-Government-controlled areas. The Special
Monitoring Mission is ready to engage, but needs
reassurances on safety and security from those in
effective contol in the respective locations. Currently,
the Mission has 700 monitors from 47 countries,
with the aim of further expansion. Such expansion in
number and geographical reach is accompanied by an
expansion in technical capabilities, including unarmed
aerial vehicles, satellite imagery and cameras in certain
sensitive areas.
Human suffering as a result of the conflict is
increasing. The number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as a result of the conflict remains one of the
main problems. The plight of IDPs serves to underline
the urgency for the sides to continue the peace process.
Focused work on gender issues has been a priority for
the Special Monitoring Mission. In the conflict area,
women, older persons and children are suffering.
Women throughout the country appear to be quick
in self-initiation and demonstrate a resilient attitude
towards the challenges in difficult humanitarian
situations.

All civilians in the conflict area face great
difficulties when attempting to cross the contact line.
That disproportionately affects - I repeat - older
persons, children and women. During recent months,
several of the few official crossing routes have been
closed for short or expanded periods. The closure of
checkpoints in Luhansk region considerably limits the
possibilities for people to reach their places of work,
use the services ofhospitals and reach family members.

Throughout the country, the Special Monitoring
Mission is continuing its cooperative relationship
in humanitarian matters with the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF to ensure the
effective coordination of efforts on the ground.

Armed formations along the contact line are
standing too close together, and have recently moved
even closer in some locations. That represents a violation
of the Minsk agreements and must not continue.
Disengagement is a necessity in the current situation.
Military formations need to move further apart to stop
the cycle of violence. Increased dialogue across the
contact line and confidence-building measures can
complement initiatives for disengagement.

Allow me to repeat: a sustainable ceasefire is of
central importance to the further implementation of the
Minsk agreements. In that context, I should say that
Ambassador Sajdik, in cooperation with the Special
Monitoring Mission, is working on a truce for the festive
season and the upcoming Orthodox Easter holiday. We
believe that will be an occasion for the sides to show
visible and decisive action for tranquillity and a full
ceasefire.

Attacks the Special Monitoring Mission must stop.
All signatories to the Minsk documents must live up
to their commitments to safeguard and ensure the
safety and security of the civilian Special Monitoring
Mission. And the JCCC needs to act in line with the
responsibilities assigned to it. Over the past week, I
addressed three letters to the signatories of the Minsk
package of measures in that regard. In close cooperation
with the Trilateral Contact Group, the Special
Monitoring Mission will continue to work towards the
stabilization and normalization of Ukraine, on the basis
of the principles and commitments of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

