Mr. Weisbrod-Weber: As requested, I would
like to update the Security Council on developments in
and around the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone.

Since we were last briefed, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) has observed
the large-scale movement of Russian troops and
military hardware from the Georgian side of the
ceasefire line to that controlled by Abkhazia. On
23 August, some 220 vehicles, including armoured
personnel carriers and trucks, as well as towed artillery
guns, were observed by UNOMIG moving north across
the ceasefire line. According to UNOMIG, only a small
number of Russian troops not under the command of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) remain
on the Georgian side of the ceasefire line.
08-49297

On 22 August, Russian military officials stated
that the total strength of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS-PKF) in the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone stood
at 2,142. They also announced plans to establish 18
additional checkpoints in the conflict zone and one in
the upper Kodori Valley. Since then, UNOMIG has
observed a forward-positioning of the checkpoints of
the CIS-peacekeeping force from the ceasefire line
towards the eastern perimeter of the restricted weapons
zone, which is the boundary of the zone of conflict
with Georgia proper.

Overall, the situation in and around the Georgian-
Abkhaz conflict zone has remained tense. Abkhaz
forces continue to exercise control over the
Ganmukhuri and Kourcha pockets north of the Inguri
River, on the Georgian side of the ceasefire line. The
Abkhaz side claims that Georgian armed elements are
active on their side of the ceasefire line. There are also
reports of mines having been laid in the Gali district.
At this point, UNOMIG cannot verify any of those
claims, largely due to the fact that UNOMIG has thus
far not been able to obtain the appropriate security
guarantees that would allow the resumption of normal
patrolling in the Gali Sector. Patrolling in that sector
thus continues to be restricted to the main road
crossing it, the M27. UNOMIG expects to be able to
resume normal patrolling in the next few days.

On the Georgian side, UNOMIG was informed
that the Russian forces had left the Senaki military
base and the Georgian police was conducting demining
of the area. UNOMIG has resumed normal patrolling
patterns in the Zugdidi sector.

During our last briefing, as concerns the Kodori
Valley, you were informed that UNOMIG planned to
conduct a patrol there. To date, the patrol has not taken
place owing to the absence of the necessary security
guarantees.

