Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his very illuminating briefing,
for his tireless commitment and for the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (S/2017/283).

For my part, I will discuss the security, political
and economic situation in Libya, which we consider to
be a cause for concern, and propose some possible lines
of action towards which I believe we are converging
collectively and which we must urgently implement.

From a security point of view, we are particularly
concerned about the developments taking place in
the south of the country, while major progress had
been made elsewhere. In Tripoli, the Government
of National Accord contributed to the adoption of a
globally respected ceasefire and is setting up security
institutions, including the Presidential Guard, which
France is helping to train. These efforts, in conjunction
with the United Nations and the European Union, are
essential to protecting the institutions and the people
of Libya. Libyan forces have also made significant
progress in the fight against terrorism, particularly in
Sirte and Benghazi.

On the other hand, for several weeks now,
skirmishes among Libyan armed groups, fighting each
other instead of uniting against terrorism, confirm the
dangerous temptation to take up the military solution.
Shows of strength lead only to political deadlock
and chaos in terms of security, creating fertile soil
for the resurgence of terrorism. Reckless armed
offensives, such as those which took place recently in
Sabha, in southern Libya, could only cause things to
boil over, thereby endangering the political process.
This escalation must cease immediately to allow for
dialogue and national reconciliation, and it is our urgent
responsibility to so inform the Libyan parties. In this
respect, the role of Libya's neighbouring countries is
invaluable in achieving a return to peace. We welcome
in particular the efforts of Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia.

At the political level, a consensus is emerging
around amending elements of the Libyan Political
Agreement in order to make the institutions more
effective and more representative, which is a step in the
right direction. However, several obstacles remain. The
Government of National Accord, which was the result
of the Skhirat Agreement, which we all recognize,
regularly finds itself in difficulty. The Parliament,

which today draws its legitimacy from this inter-Libyan
political agreement, seems to be constrained in its
efforts to promote dialogue. France denounces actions
aimed at undermining institutions that were established
based on the Skhirat Agreement, which reduce the
chances of getting out of the political impasse. In
this context, we fully support the work of the United
Nations to mediate between Libyans and to coordinate
all regional and international initiatives. We welcome
the integration of the European Union into the troika,
which has now become the quartet.

Finally, on the economic side, progress has
been made with the adoption of the 2017 budget by
the Government of National Accord, but certain
developments call for the utmost vigilance. The
National Oil Corporation, the only recognized actor
in the field, is threatened in its full exploitation of oil
under the supervision of the Government of National
Accord and is torn between the various factions of
power. Relations between the Central Bank and the
Government of National Accord remain tense, although
the so-called economic dialogue is working to smooth
things out. It is essential to preserve economic and
financial institutions and ensure that they operate under
the control of the Government. Oil money must be for
building the State, for the sake of the Libyan people and
its prosperity; it is not for financing a war economy or
trafficking of any kind.

Furthermore, I would like to echo the Secretary-
General's report in denouncing human trafficking
in Libya. We call on the Libyan authorities to do
their utmost to ensure that migrants are treated with
dignity on Libyan soil. This is a priority with respect
to the protection and promotion of human rights and
the fight against organized crime. In this context,
we have to ask, how do we get out of this crisis? A
reaffirmed commitment on the part of the international
community is essential, urgent and based on three
complementary concepts.

First, as we have repeatedly affirmed, the solution
to the Libyan conflict can only be a political one. Let
us remember that the logic of the Skhirat Agreement
is based on an agreement among Libyan political
forces, excluding terrorists, around a new model of the
distribution of power. It is therefore a choice in favour
of dialogue and the refusal to use weapons. In this
context, those who use weapons rather than dialogue
and who undermine any hope of stabilization and peace
must be identified.
We must therefore reaffirm our collective support,
under United Nations auspices, for the collaborative
review of the Libyan Political Agreement. Accordingly,
we encourage dialogue between the Presidential
Council, the Parliament of Tobruk and the High State
Council so that each body can find its place. We
come together around this table on this point and we
are increasingly doing so, I believe. Neighbouring
countries, particularly Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, are
stepping up their efforts to reach a political compromise
in support of United Nations mediation. Once again, we
commend those important efforts.

Secondly, it is incumbent on the Council to ensure the
maintenance, effective enforcement and strengthening
of the Council's mechanisms pertaining to the arms
embargo, which we have established, and to combating
the illegal exportation of oil pursuant to the resolutions,
which we have adopted. In that regard, I must thank the
Swedish chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Libya's oil resources must remain under the exclusive
control of the Government of National Accord and the
National Oil Corporation of Tripoli, for the benefit of all
Libyans. We must show collective resolve in ensuring
the prevention of all forms of the illegal export of oil.
We welcome the decision of the Presidency Council
to appoint the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Government of National Accord, Mr. Mohamed Siala,
as Libya's focal point for requesting exemptions from
the embargo for the benefit of that Government.

Thirdly and finally, the Security Council must
exercise all of its authority in the matter to encourage
the Libyans to get along. In that regard, I vigorously
commend the work of the Special Representative and
encourage the work of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General with regard to this issue, which
are essential to revitalizing the political process and
coordinating diplomatic efforts. Given the scale of
the current challenges, the unity of the international
community and the leading role of the United Nations,
accompanied by new proposals, are more necessary
than ever. The moment has come for renewed and
strengthened commitment, which has taken on urgency,
by the United Nations while we assume together
our responsibilities.

