Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to say to you, Madam Minister, how
pleased I am to see you presiding over the work of our
Council. I should like to thank you for having chosen
this subject, which is very topical and relevant, as its
consideration coincides with yesterday's publication of
the long-awaited report on relations between the
United Nations and civil society.

The report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations corroborates
the fact that civil society is now a pivotal actor at all
levels and that the United Nations, as an
intergovernmental agency, must, in the interests of
effectiveness and openness, establish renewed relations
with this very useful partner. That is true of all the
major agencies of the United Nations and, of course, of
the Security Council as it discharges its mandate for
peace.

Along those lines, I would note that the
commendable effort towards openness made by the
Council in the last decade vis-a-vis representatives of
civil society through the more frequent use of the Arria
formula remains, unfortunately, somewhat limited in
scope and has a tendency to increase and to entrench
the representational imbalance between the North and
the South.

From that standpoint, the establishment of a fund
aimed at strengthening the capacity of civil society in
countries of the South, advocated by my delegation for
some years now and now recommended by the Panel of
Eminent Persons, could contribute to correcting that
imbalance and could help us hear the voice, too long
ignored, of the NGOs of the South as well as the voices
of all peoples of the world.

Turning to today's topic, it is clear that NGOs,
which are actively involved in various critical tasks in
areas where the United Nations is sometimes absent,
make an invaluable contribution to global efforts to
stabilize those countries that are emerging from
conflict.

The evolution of the concept of peacekeeping on
the one hand, and, on the other, the fact that
peacekeeping operations have become more and more
complex, should, from our standpoint, prompt the
Council to embark upon a complete overhaul of its
approach to the question of peace-building, including
ways to broaden and strengthen the effective
contribution of civil society to that process, by drawing
inspiration from, inter alia, some of the
recommendations made by the Panel of Eminent
Persons.

In reality, a mutually beneficial partnership has
already developed between the Security Council and
civil society in conducting peace processes, based on a
division of labour. NGOs already assume the role of
peace adjuncts for the Security Council - a task they
perform with courage, despite the fact that their
representatives on the ground sometimes put their lives
at risk.

The experience and the expertise that NGOS have
developed from practical interaction can be extremely
useful to a Security Council that is confronted with
situations that are increasingly complex and where
expertise and direct knowledge may sometimes be
lacking. That experience and knowledge are too
important to be neglected or ignored; the Council must
make the best possible use of them. What is more, it
must rely more resolutely on national and international
civil society to succeed in establishing peace.

It is obvious that, by definition, the peace-
building phase represents the area where we must
rethink and redefine cooperation between
governmental and non-governmental organizations
through clear sharing of their roles and responsibilities.
Indeed, in this critical phase for the future of peace
processes, civil society can make an even more
valuable contribution to peace-building because it
often interacts directly with citizens and in many cases
knows how to win their trust.

From that perspective, we believe that the task of
reconciliation and national reconstruction cannot be
successfully accomplished unless it is carried out by a
dynamic and engaged civil society. Indeed, the fragility
of peace processes is often due to the weakness or
marginalization of civil society. Peace agreements
negotiated and concluded by armed factions whose
main concern remains taking or sharing power give
short shrift to the representatives of civil society. In
fact, such representatives are often targeted by
violence, because they are seen as competitors at worst
and as nuisances at best.

Unfortunately, Security Council action is too
often influenced by that vision, and therefore, its
resolutions are seen as dominated by the security
dimension dictated by a feeling of urgency. Resolutions
1528 (2004) and 1545 (2004) - concerning the United
Nations operations in Cote d'lvoire and in Burundi,
respectively - do not mention the role of civil society,
while resolution 1509 (2003), on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, refers to it only fleetingly.
However, those are multidimensional missions that
should have accorded to civil society its due place.

The assistance of the community of international
non-governmental organizations is valuable, but it
cannot substitute for the even more important role of
local associations. We believe that ownership by
national non-governmental organizations of
reconstruction tasks is vital. Therefore, rebuilding civil
society must be among the priority objectives -
together with restoring State authority and
strengthening State institutions - that we must set,
because in many cases the major challenge for
countries emerging from conflict is national
reconciliation, and civil society is well placed to
contribute to that process.

The desire to live together and the feeling of
belonging to a national collectivity that transcends
religious and ethnic ties are often undermined by
conflicts fed by mutual hatred and the will to destroy.
The contribution of all is therefore essential to meet
this challenge. Members of the clergy, intellectuals,
journalists and humanitarian and human rights
organizations, but also the business community, can
thus play a major role in spreading a culture of peace,
repairing the social fabric, restoring a national sense of
belonging and putting in place the conditions required
to establish a democratic society and to resume
economic activity.

The ownership process also depends on civil
society's involvement in the development of a crisis
exit strategy that coincides with the closure of the
peace operation and the establishment of a normalized
United Nations presence in the country. The sooner and
the more closely civil society is involved in managing
the transition period, the more effectively it will
contribute to the peace process and to the achievement
of lasting peace and stability.

