I would first like to thank the President of the Security Council and France for convening today's open debate. I also wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, Ms. Henrietta Fore and all the briefers for their informative presentations. Over the past 15 years, since the adoption of the landmark Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict, significant progress has been made in ending and preventing violations against children in conflict situations around the world. The monitoring and reporting on children and armed conflict by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005) and the signing of 32 action plans and other types of engagement with parties to conflict have played a critical role in further strengthening the protection of children affected by conflicts. Despite these efforts, however, grave violations of international humanitarian law committed against children in armed conflict persist. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) documents over 10,000 verified child casualties. It is totally unacceptable that children are still being subjected to gruesome killing and maiming, denial of humanitarian access, rape and other forms of sexual violence, and coercive recruitment and use. We are also seriously concerned that the abuse of refugee and migrant children, including through trafficking, torture, sexual violence and ill-treatment in detention, remains unresolved. As one of the largest refugee-hosting countries, Ethiopia firmly believes in the need to treat refugees with special care, bearing in mind their basic needs in terms of access to shelter, food, clean water, health care and education, as well as the provision of official documentation. We are committed to the continuous provision not only of international protection, but also education and health services, to refugee children, including unaccompanied minors who are forcibly displaced as a result of armed conflict. This is why Ethiopia last year adopted one of the most progressive refugee policies in Africa. We believe much more needs to be done to find durable solutions to the general living conditions and status of children affected by conflict and forced displacement. In this regard, strengthened support from development actors to countries emerging from conflict and to refugee-hosting countries remains vital. We believe the signing of action plans by parties to armed conflict is a step in the right direction. However, enhanced cooperation between the Council and regional and subregional organizations is critical to ensuring concrete implementation. In this regard, we would like to encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary- General to explore mechanisms for further strengthening the cooperation between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. Ethiopia acknowledges the role of the monitoring and reporting mechanism in tracking violations against children in armed conflict, including in the context of peace operations. We believe that any alleged grave violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law should be properly investigated. In line with the provisions of resolution 1612 (2005), close coordination with national Governments, troop-contributing countries and relevant United Nations and civil society actors will enable the mechanism to properly verify the objectivity, accuracy and reliability of any information. In that regard, we have noted the references in the report of the Secretary- General to the African Union Mission in Somalia and regional forces operating in Somalia, including the Ethiopian National Defence Forces, in relation to two alleged cases of violations. We reaffirm the need for a coordinated investigation with the troop-contributing countries and international forces concerned as well as relevant international and regional organizations. As a major troop-contributing country, Ethiopia has taken various measures to ensure the protection of civilians, including children, in areas where our troops are deployed. Our troops are guided by elaborate rules of engagement within the framework of our obligations under international humanitarian law. Our troops are given intensive predeployment training on the protection of civilians, with special attention on protecting the most vulnerable groups - particularly women and children. We have also put in place mechanisms for predeployment orientation and after-duty evaluation in order to ensure accountability for any violations committed by our troops deployed in a mission. Ethiopia has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, its amendment and two Optional Protocols. Undoubtedly, international commitments are vital to further strengthening the Convention and bringing about the necessary changes in attitudes to create conditions for the protection of children in armed conflict. In this regard, my country will work towards the full adoption of the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating Ethiopia's firm and continued commitment as a troop-contributing country to ensuring the protection of children in armed conflict. We will continue to work with all the relevant actors to that end.
