Mr. Baja (Philippines): Let me reiterate, Sir, in
this first open meeting of the Council for this month,
our congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month, as well as to the German
presidency for its excellent stewardship of the Council
last month.

My delegation is also grateful to Assistant
Secretary- General Danilo Turk for his comprehensive
and informative briefing on the developments in the
Bougainville peace process under the continued
political presence of the United Nations through the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville, and
for the letter from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of Papua
New Guinea. It shows us the fruits of the efforts
exerted by the parties in moving the peace process
forward to establish a stable and self-sustaining
autonomous Government in Bougainville.

We particularly welcome the encouraging results
described in the report, particularly the progress that
has been achieved in the implementation of the
agreement to destroy the collected weapons; the
simultaneous progress in the constitutional process that
is being achieved as Papua New Guinea and
Bougainville iron out remaining issues in finalizing the
draft of the Constitution; the increasing delegation of
powers and functions to the Bougainville Interim
Provincial Government, particularly of policing
functions; and the building of civil and political
structures, particularly in the law and justice sector, in
Bougainville.

The agreement reached by the Peace Process
Consultative Committee to destroy all contained
weapons as stage III of the weapons disposal plan
shortly after the last open debate on this issue, held in
this very Chamber, was indeed a very positive
development. It acted as the catalyst to increase the
momentum in the political and constitutional process.
My delegation looks forward to the positive prospect
of completion of all stages of the constitutional process
before the end of next month.

A stable environment and the finalization of the
constitutional process leading to the adoption of the
Constitution will provide the conditions necessary to
start preparations for the holding of the elections for an
autonomous Government. Recent developments bring
us ever closer to that goal.

In view of such developments, together with the
practical rehabilitation programmes in the economic
and social field being conducted by other United
Nations agencies, the peace process is expected to
further mature. These are additional building-blocks to
further consolidate the peace process.

It is also important to acknowledge the vital
contribution that the other countries in the region have
provided, and are continuing to provide, to advance the
peace process. This will be even more important in the
days ahead to sustain the momentum for Bougainville's
development towards a stable political future.

When the final chapter of the story of
Bougainville has been written, it will be a tale of how
dialogue and cooperation among all parties and
stakeholders and the United Nations led to the success
of the process there - a success which is now on the
horizon. My delegation will support the measures that
the United Nations will undertake to bring about the
final realization of that success.

