Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Sir, for convening this emergency meeting.

On Monday, 24 March 2003, the Foreign
Ministers of the League of Arab States adopted a
resolution condemning the Anglo-American military
action against Iraq, deeming it to be an act of
aggression, a violation of the United Nations Charter
and the principles of international law, a breach with
international legitimacy, a threat to international peace
and security and a defiance of the international
community and world public opinion.

The unilateral military action undertaken by the
United States and the United Kingdom lacks any moral
and legal foundation. This has been reflected in the
views of the majority of the members of the Security
Council, of popular international and regional
positions, and of Christian and Islamic organizations
around the world, all of which oppose this military
action and call for its end and for the immediate
withdrawal of the invading forces from the territory of
Iraq.

At the Security Council's meeting on 19 March,
the overwhelming majority of Council members
expressed the opinion, first, that, on the basis of
assertions made by representatives of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the means for the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq had not yet been
exhausted. Regrettably, those agencies were withdrawn
from Iraq without being given sufficient time to
discharge their mandates. Secondly, the Security
Council also considered that resolution 1441 (2002),
adopted unanimously, does not permit automatic resort
to force. Moreover, the pretext of political regime
change in Iraq to justify this military action is a
violation not only of that country's territorial integrity
and sovereignty, but also of the basic principles of the
United Nations Charter, especially Article 2, paragraph
4, which prohibits States from "the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State".

It is worth recalling here the denunciation -
made by the heads of Arab States in the 1 March
resolution adopted at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit -
of attempts to impose changes on the region or to
intervene in its internal affairs. The Arab heads of State
considered that the affairs of the Arab nation and the
development of its systems of governance shall be
decided by the people of the region in accordance with
their national and pan-Arab interests, free from any
foreign intervention.

The invocation of the right to self-defence is an
invalid argument, since Article 51 of the Charter
recognizes the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence only if an armed attack occurs against a
Member of the United Nations - a condition that is
not met in this case. We must recall Iraq's affirmation
at the Beirut summit last year of its commitment to
respect the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and security of Kuwait in order to guarantee
against any repetition of the events of 1990. We should
also note Iraq's effective cooperation with IAEA,
which declared it free of nuclear programmes and
weapons, and with UNMOVIC, which asserted that,
after four months of inspections, it had found no
weapon of mass destruction or prohibited programmes
in Iraq.
The unilateral military action undertaken by the
United States of America and the United Kingdom is
beginning to unleash environmental, economic and
humanitarian catastrophes in Iraq that threaten the
entire Middle East. Moreover, the instability resulting
from this military action has become a danger to the
system of international peace and security.

For all those reasons, the Security Council is
called upon today to do its utmost to control the current
crisis in Iraq and to ensure the return to a peaceful
approach to the verification of the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction on the basis of relevant
Council resolutions. The Council must also take the
necessary measures to put an end to the current
military action and to bring about the immediate,
unconditional withdrawal of American and British
forces from Iraqi territory so as to preserve the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and to
restore the Council's authority in decisions on
questions of international peace and security in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, to which the international
community is fully attached.

