Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The past month has been a very full one for
the Security Council. In particular, there have been
several meetings on regional and general issues.

I would now like to talk about the three important
thematic debates that took place on the situation in the
Eurasian region: on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA), on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886)
and the Austrian Chairperson-in-Office's briefing on
the priorities for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) (see S/PV.7887).

The outcome of the briefing by the head of
UNRCCA, Mr. Draganov, on 2 February, led the Russian
delegation to distribute a draft Security Council press
statement. Unfortunately, due to the stubborn refusal
of some delegations to recognize the close cooperation
of UNRCCA with regional organizations, including
the OSCE, the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
text was not agreed for the fourth time in a row. The
lack of reaction on the activities of UNRCCA not only
hurts the image of the Security Council but also has
a negative impact on cooperation between the Centre
and countries of the region. It also fails to convey the
right message to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations who has made preventive diplomacy the crux
of his activities.

We had hoped that during the 21 February
meeting (see S/PV.7886), the Security Council would
constructively discuss ways to react collectively to
European challenges. Indeed, refutation of the policy
of indivisible security has caused protracted conflicts
and triggered new ones in Europe. We also had hoped
that we would jointly convince Kyiv of the need to
implement the Minsk agreements. Many delegations
spoke of that at that time and today. However, we have
to note that these hopes were dashed.

We share the priorities set out by the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office - the Foreign Minister of
Austria, Mr. Kurz - on 22 February (see S/PV.7887).
We would like to see constructive cooperation in
such key areas as conflict resolution, combating
radicalization and extremism, and restoring trust among
States. We would like to see the further development
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE, including in the interest of this major European
organization implementing United Nations decisions.

With respect to the unabated threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Al-Qaida and their enablers, the Security Council
should focus on the pressing issue of counter-terrorism.
It is high time to establish a broad counter-terrorist
coalition and improve measures to combat the fuelling
and ideology of terrorism. The thematic meeting of the
Security Council on 13 February on the protection of
critical infrastructure from terrorists (see S/PV.7882)
and the content of resolution 2341 (2017) unfortunately
could hardly be considered evidence of priority being
given to counter-terrorism. The discussions brought
no new elements to the work of the Council or its
existing decisions.

The discussion of the issue of the Middle East
conflict on 16 February (see S/PV.7885) showed
that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues to be
marked by destabilizing factors, including repeated
acts of violence, tensions around Gaza and settlement
activities. We are convinced that there is a need today
more than ever to take practical measures to unblock
the peace process. Our proposal to conduct meetings
with Messrs. Netanyahu and Abbas in Moscow remains
on the table. We would like to see the Palestinian sides
implement the agreements achieved during the meeting
in Moscow from 15 to 17 January.

We nevertheless note a new positive
feature - consultations on 3 February, where the new
Secretary-General, upon his initiative, briefed the
Security Council on his participation at the African
Union (AU) summit. We note Mr. Guterres' intention
to scale up cooperation with the AU and other African
organizations with a view to settling conflicts on the
continent. We support his intention to seek African
solutions to African problems, with the whatever
assistance is needed from the United Nations.

In conclusion, we would like to wish every success
to the delegation of the United Kingdom, which will be
heading the Council in the month of March.

