Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States
and my own country, Uruguay.

I would like to commend you, Madam President,
for organizing this debate to discuss the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/6l7) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence among
us of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and wishes to
thank her for her comprehensive briefing and for the
hard work she is doing.

The strengthening of the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive to
democratic stability and improving the socioeconomic
conditions are key elements needed to achieve a greater
and sustainable stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that
regard, the Group of Friends encourages all political

actors in Haiti to deepen their dialogue and cooperation
with a view to consolidating their country's democracy.
The Group reiterates the importance of holding this
year free and fair legislative, municipal and local
elections as an essential and urgent step towards lasting
stability, recovery and development in Haiti. The Group
welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to facilitate a climate for dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen
Haitian democratic institutions.

The signing of the El Rancho Accord marked
an important milestone in a Haitian-led process and
represented the will of Haitian political stakeholders
to move forward with the planning of elections. When
the Security Council met to discuss Haiti in March (see S/PV.7147), the Group of Friends encouraged Haiti's
political leaders to maintain their spirit of cooperation
and to act promptly to fulfil the Accord's provisions
on amending the 2013 electoral law, establishing the
provisional Electoral Council and establishing an
electoral calendar. It is therefore with great concern that
the Group of Friends notes that, after so many months,
Haiti still does not have an amended electoral law and
that, as a result, the Electoral Council concludes that it
will not be possible to organize elections on 26 October.

The Group of Friends shares the Secretary-
General's view that the holding of inclusive elections in
2014 is essential for the continuity of the Parliament in
2015, for the consolidation of democracy and the rule of
law, and to promote socioeconomic development, which
is necessary to improve people's living conditions and
achieve lasting stability. The Group calls upon all
Haitian political actors to fulfil their obligations to the
Haitian people, through dialogue and action taken, to
ensure that elections take place within 2014.

The Group of Friends takes note of the Secretary-
General's report and is carefully considering it.
According to the report, the security environment in
Haiti remains relatively stable, although it has seen
increases in homicides and demonstrations triggered
by socioeconomic grievances, along with a steep drop
in kidnappings and other crimes. The Group of Friends
commends the improved response of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to demonstrations around the
country, while noting that the number of its requests
to MINUSTAH as a second line of response has also
increased.

The Group notes the progress that has been made
in executing MINUSTAH's 2013-2016 consolidation
plan, with the goal of enabling the Haitian authorities to
assume full responsibility for their country's security
as soon as conditions permit. We recommend a gradual
approach to transferring security responsibilities and
emphasize the importance of basing future action on
conditions on the ground. We should avoid decisions
that couldjeopardize the results achieved so far and take
into account the role that MINUSTAH should continue
to play in contributing to stability and security during
significant national events such as elections, including
the 2015 presidential elections.

The Group ofFriends stresses the importance ofthe
Government of Haiti's commitment to strengthening
the rule of law and making further progress in the
judicial and security sectors. In that regard, we would
like to emphasize the fundamental role of the Haitian
National Police in Haiti's security and stability and the
importance of completing its ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform so that it will be in a
condition to assume full responsibility for Haiti's
security. In that context, the Group of Friends stresses
the importance of building up the HNP's capacity
outside Port-au-Prince, and ensuring its adherence to
the highest standards of respect for human rights. At
the same time, the Group believes that strengthening
the police alone is not enough to solidify the rule of
law in Haiti. The judicial system needs improvement,
which also includes the urgent necessity of addressing
the serious issues of pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding and which will require the Government
to provide sufficient budgetary resources and qualified
personnel.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the zero tolerance policy of the United
Nations on sexual exploitation and abuse, and expects
all United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct in this area. We urge all actors
involved to shoulder their responsibilities for ensuring
that such cases are prevented, allegations investigated
and those responsible held accountable.

We welcome the significant progress made
during 2014 in resettling people displaced by the 2010
earthquake. However, we are also concerned about
the living conditions in the remaining camps, where
uneven access to water and functioning toilets, along
with malnutrition, particularly regarding the situation
of women and children, are examples of the persistent
humanitarian challenges that Haiti faces.

The Group of Friends notes the ongoing work by the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others to protect
vulnerable groups and urges that all stakeholders focus
intensively on preventing and reducing violent crime,
particularly against women and children, and including
rape and other crimes of sexual violence.

We welcome the great progress made in reducing the
incidence of cholera in Haiti since the initial outbreak.
The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic
are a reminder of the importance of maintaining
cooperation between the international community and
the Government of Haiti in order to meet the Haitian
people's needs. In that regard, the Group welcomes the
United Nations support for the 10-year National Plan for
the Elimination of Cholera and the work of the Senior
Coordinator for the Cholera Response in Haiti. We also
acknowledge the efforts of the donor community and
call on donors to make good on their pledges without
delay. We commend the Secretary-General's visit to
Haiti on 14 and 15 July, when, together with Prime
Minister Lamothe, he launched the total sanitation
campaign as a key initiative against cholera. And we
note with appreciation the creation of the High-level
Committee for the Elimination of Cholera, which has
already met twice.

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that
security, respect for human rights and the rule of law,
and development are interdependent and reinforce
stability. We therefore underscore the importance of
systematically addressing the issues of unemployment,
education and the delivery of basic social services, and
of ensuring the economic and political empowerment
of women. At the same time, we emphasize that there
can be no genuine stability or sustainable development
in Haiti without fair and open elections, strengthened
democratic institutions and a credible democratic
process.

Inthat context, the Group emphasizes the importance
of promoting the rule of law by strengthening Haitian
institutions and reaffirms MlNUSTAH's responsibility
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate. In that regard, the Group
emphasizes how much MINUSTAH's quick-impact
projects contribute by strengthening the rule of law
and good governance, mitigating cholera, improving
security in vulnerable neighbourhoods with better
lighting, public infrastructure, civic education, and
training civil society representatives.

Finally, the Group ofFriends reaffirms its solidarity
with and commitment to the people and Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery, social and economic development and
democratic consolidation. We recognize MINUSTAH's
important role in ensuring stability and security in Haiti,
and we support the women and men of MlNUSTAH
and acknowledge their dedication and tireless efforts in
support of recovery and stability in Haiti.

