King Abdullah: First, let me thank President Obama
for his leadership on this issue. Jordan can be counted
on to play its part. We need to shut down the sources
of extremist support and push back and defeat such
groups. That demands a coalition of the determined, one
that can combat the threat with consistency and resolve.
Allow me to salute the partnership that is gearing up.

Three principles are important as we proceed. The
first is global reach and commitment. The threat is
not only in Syria and Iraq, but also in Sinai, Nigeria,
Libya, Yemen, Mali, the Horn of Africa and more. It is
not an Arab or Muslim fight any more. It affects every
delegate here and beyond. It is the fight of our times.
Success requires a united struggle backed up by strong
resources. Success also requires a holistic approach.
Transnational terror grows on the back of crises,
grievances and sectarian conflict. Winning hearts and
minds requires a strong stand against marginalization,
poverty and exclusion. In parallel with security
measures there must be diplomacy, development, job
creation, education and more.

A second key principle is immediate action. The
new breed of extremism is recruiting world-wide
through social media and covert partnerships. The
more resource-rich territory they hold, the more self-
perpetuating they become. Time is of the essence. We
have started taking action, and the coalition must see
this through. The third requirement is transparency.
These groups rely on international transactions and
support for their survival.

There has to be a policy of zero tolerance towards
any country, organization or individual that facilitates,
supports or finances terror groups, provides weapons or
promotes propaganda, whether through media outlets
or by misusing religious clerics to incite and help
recruit fighters for such terrorist groups. Compliance
must also be absolute. Countries cannot comply in one
theatre while shifting their policy in another. Senior
figures in every religion and country must speak out
against intolerance and distortion. I and others have
made clear that the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria and
related ideologies are in no way related to Islam.

Nor should we permit any form of Islamophobia.
Jordan has taken the lead in inter-faith initiatives, and
we are working on introducing a Security Council
resolution that will address the systematic targeting of
religious communities. The world must also act as one
to help solve global injustices. We cannot underestimate
the recruitment power emanating from a sense of
exclusion from the enjoyment of basic human rights.
First and foremost, we must have ajust resolution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

A united global voice is equally vital in supporting
an inclusive political solution in Syria. In Iraq, we are
encouraged to see a solid start for an inclusive new
Government that will fight terrorist efforts to exploit
sectarianism. Finally, I hope there will be a global
call to action to support countries like my own at the
forefront of the fight. Jordan is a critical lynchpin of
stability. Our borders stand secure with terror threats on
two fronts. Just this week we foiled yet another terrorist
operation against our country, and of course we remain
a major shock absorber for massive refugee flights from
Syria. But we are bearing those critical responsibilities
under enormous economic pressures. Global support
will play a key role in keeping our country resilient
and moving forward. Jordan also seeks a renewed push
to get promised refugee assistance flowing for all host
countries and communities, as well as inside Syria
itself.

