Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): My delegation thanks
Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive briefing on the
situation in East Timor. We are pleased to note the
fruitful meeting between the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the East Timor Transitional Administration in
Denpasar last January, where many important issues
were discussed and agreement was reached on those
issues.

We believe that for any democratic process to
succeed, it must first of all adopt an inclusive approach
to accommodate the entire population of the country
without discrimination. We believe that the returnees
should be treated as an integral element of the broader
process of reconciliation in the independent East
Timor. We hope that in the short time-frame now
available to UNTAET this issue will be given the
consideration that it deserves. We appreciate the role of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the other organizations in
accelerating the return of refugees to their homeland.
We are happy to learn that the International
Organization for Migration is taking positive steps to
repatriate those refugees who are registered to return.
We look forward to a quick and voluntary return of
refugees from West Timor before June, the date set for
registration.

We deplore the tragic incident and rioting after
the death, on 12 March, of a teenager in Makadiki. We
believe that an effective process of community
reconciliation is the sine qua non for the successful
establishment of national protection.

My delegation appreciates the decision of the
House of Representatives to set up two ad hoc courts to
try gross human rights Violations. We hope that the
presidential decree that is needed for their actual
establishment will not be retarded. We strongly support
the application of the "relief to development
continuum", a framework strategy that addresses the
humanitarian needs and aims to achieve progressive
changes towards establishing a sustainable and
independent East Timor. We hope that international as
well as bilateral donors will generously contribute to
the implementation of the programme.

We hope that the formal request formulated by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the transfer to East Timor of Jacobus Bere - suspected
of killing New Zealand peacekeeper Leonard William
Manning on 24 July 2000 - made under the terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in
Legal, Judicial and Human Rights Related Matters
signed on 6 April 2000 between the Government of
Indonesia and UNTAET, will be acceded to.

Finally, my delegation would like to ask only two
questions of Mr. Annabi. The first is whether the
recruitment and training of East Timorese electoral
officers is being carried out so as to make the election
fair and transparent. Secondly, what are the facilities
put in place for refugees who are returning to East
Timor?

