Mr. Kurz: It is an honour to address the Security
Council today in my role as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).

Allow me to express my condolences on the passing
away of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the Russian
Federation.

With 57 participating States, the OSCE is the largest
regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. For decades, the OSCE has been
an important partner of the United Nations. As members
can imagine, chairing the OSCE is not an easyjob. Like
at the United Nations, there are many different interests
and opinions that often make it hard to find consensus
and to achieve progress on the challenges that we face.
But even if it is sometimes hard, there is no alternative
to multilateral cooperation. It is the only way to achieve
peace, security and stability.

Austria has taken over the OSCE chairmanship at
a critical moment. Everywhere we look, there are grave
threats to peace and security: war and destruction
in places like Syria and eastern Ukraine; serious
violations of international law and signs of increasing
nationalism; and radicalization and terrorism within
our societies. The consequences are the rising anxiety
of the people and increasing mistrust among States.

Given these challenges, our chairmanship will focus
on the following priorities. First, we want to contribute
to defusing existing conflicts. Secondly, we will create

a platform to assist States in their efforts to combat
radicalization and violent extremism. Thirdly, we will
do what we can to help rebuild trust and confidence
among the participating States of the OSCE.

Armed conflicts have caused much suffering,
displacement and destruction in parts of the OSCE area.
There can be no military solutions to these conflicts.
We have to find ways to enable political solutions. One
of the central issues the OSCE deals with is the crisis
in and around Ukraine. This crisis - the annexation of
Crimea, the flow of arms into the Donbas, the role ofthe
Russian Federation, the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, and the repeated acts of violence - is
regularly discussed in the OSCE, just as it is in the
United Nations.

During my first visit to eastern Ukraine in January,
I saw the unacceptable situation of civilians there.
We must improve the living conditions of the local
population, especially along the contact line. To that
end, access for humanitarian organizations is crucial.
The level of violence that we saw a few weeks ago
is unacceptable. It remains vital that all sides fully
implement the Minsk agreements and strictly respect
the ceasefire to which they have repeatedly committed
themselves. The OSCE, with its Trilateral Contact
Group, demonstrated its crucial role in brokering the
ceasefire.

The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has
prevented a worsening of the situation through its
monitoring and reporting and facilitated the repair of
critical infrastructure, such as electricity and water
supply. We now have to support the Special Monitoring
Mission in fully carrying out its mandate. We want to
increase the number of monitors on the ground, improve
the technical equipment for monitoring, and extend
the operating hours along the contact line. We will
continue working to make concrete steps towards full
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Forces
must disengage and heavy weapons must be withdrawn.
As Chairperson-in-Office, we will assist all efforts to
achieve progress on the other conflict situations in the
OSCE area, in particular regarding the Transnistrian
settlement process, the conflict in Georgia and the
conflict in Nagorno Karabakh.

Besides classic conflicts, one other major challenge
to security is radicalization and terrorism. Both
threaten the internal stability of States, the rule of law
and our basic freedoms, such as freedom of expression

and the freedom of religion or belief. More than 10,000
people from the OSCE area havejoined Da'esh in order
to rape and kill in its name in Syria, Iraq and Libya.
These fighters not only cause terrible suffering in those
countries, but they also pose a threat to the security
of the OSCE countries when they return. In the OSCE
region, there are different dynamics for radicalization,
but what we have in common is that the most vulnerable
group to be radicalized is young people.

To better understand these dynamics and identify
ways to effectively address the root causes and triggers
of radicalization, I have appointed Mr. Peter Neumann
as my Special Representative on Radicalization. He will
look for best practices, share them with participating
States and make concrete recommendations on how
to improve the fight against radicalization and violent
extremism. If terrorists cooperate globally, States must
do the same in order to fight terrorism more effectively.

No matter Whether we want to solve conflicts or
fight against terrorism, What is always needed as a basis
for international cooperation is trust. Rebuilding trust
among States in the OSCE area is probably the most
difficult task. As a neutral country, Austria has always
been a bridge-builder between the East and the West
and a good place for dialogue. As OSCE Chair, Austria
will strive to foster open and constructive dialogue as
a basis for finding common solutions to the challenges
facing the OSCE. In the OSCE, security concerns are
often at the core of mistrust. Therefore, the Austrian
chairmanship will also try to resume discussions on
conventional arms control in Europe. That is in the
interests of every single participating State.

In line with the mandate we received at the OSCE
Ministerial Council in Hamburg, Austria will seek
to launch a structured dialogue on current and future
challenges to security in the OSCE area. Cybersecurity
and social and economic cooperation - two issues that
we discussed in Vienna recently - are areas where
everybody stands to gain from more cooperation.
Success in these areas will lead to more trust. The same
is true for human rights, the rule of law and democracy.

Together, we can strengthen the cohesiveness and
resilience of our societies to better counter threats to
our security. I welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Liaison Office in Vienna. It will enable even
stronger cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations. We both will benefit from more information
exchange, operational coordination and technical
suppor,t especially in the field.

I hope that With these priorities, the OSCE
and Austria as its Chair can make a contribution
to strengthening a rules-based global order and to
advancing the goals, values and principles of the
United Nations.

