I thank the Estonian delegation for today's debate and welcome the participation of the President of Estonia. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/366) and express appreciation to the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and former President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf for their briefings. Civilians are the target of unacceptable violence. From Afghanistan to Libya, from South Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and from Yemen to Iraq, tens of thousands of civilians have been killed or injured and millions forcefully displaced. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has exacerbated the vulnerability of the most vulnerable in conflict zones, in particular refugees and displaced persons. Together with Tunisia, we will continue our efforts within the Security Council to support the Secretary-General's call for a cessation of hostilities to facilitate the fight against the pandemic. The Security Council has developed tools to address the protection of civilians in a more systematic and effective manner. First, the Security Council has repeatedly condemned violations committed by all parties. We regret that the Security Council has not been able to condemn violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law taking place in Myanmar and Syria. It is absolutely necessary that the Security Council renew the cross-border mechanism and that populations in need, including in the north-east of Syria, be able to receive aid through the most effective and direct routes. Secondly, the Security Council has mandated peacekeeping operations to protect civilians, which are carrying out their mandate in a more robust and innovative manner. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic has developed three surge teams composed of police and civilian personnel specialized in the protection of civilians. These teams can be deployed in hotspots. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has set up temporary bases close to civilian populations to strengthen social cohesion. The protection of civilians has become key when assessing the performance of United Nations missions. Unfortunately, women and girls continue to be subject to appalling sexual and gender-based violence, and children continue to be recruited by armed groups. It is paramount that United Nations missions be given sufficient capacity and human resources to respond to their specific needs. I will now turn to four challenges. First, the issue of attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel is particularly worrisome in the context of COVID-19. Parties to armed conflicts must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law to protect humanitarian and medical personnel and units and to ensure humanitarian access. The Humanitarian Call for Action, initiated by France and Germany last September, addresses this issue through different concrete commitments. France is planning to launch a national plan of action aimed at strengthening international humanitarian law training of State and non-State actors. We encourage all Member States to sign onto the Humanitarian Call and welcome the endorsements of the Call by Chile and the Maldives, bringing the number of signatories to 45. Secondly, there is the question of the use of weapons, which is addressed in the Secretary-General's report. Much of the harm and destruction in current conflicts appears to be the result of violations of international humanitarian law provisions including, but not limited to, the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of explosive weapons in populated areas. France is engaged in the ongoing negotiations towards the development of a political declaration to improve the protection of civilians. To that end, this political declaration must address the issue of the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons. But the declaration will not stigmatize explosive weapons alone. Indeed, the declaration must affirm that the core challenge is to improve the implementation of international humanitarian law principles by promoting appropriate policies and practices for the conduct of military operations in urban contexts and by encouraging States to exchange good practices. France is also engaged in efforts aimed at addressing the possible challenges associated with the development of lethal autonomous weapons systems. Substantial progress has been made through the work of the dedicated Group of Governmental Experts, which includes the adoption of 11 guiding principles reaffirming that international humanitarian law continues to fully apply to all weapons systems. Thirdly, it is crucial that the protection of journalists in armed conflict become effective. We commend the four Groups of Friends on the Safety of Journalists and their efforts to support the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions. Finally, we must redouble our efforts aimed at supporting justice for victims. The arrest in France two weeks ago of Felicien Kabuga, one of the highest-profile remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, is a reminder that those responsible for mass atrocities can be brought to justice. France will also continue to support the fight against impunity of perpetrators of atrocities committed in Syria, through national proceedings and support for the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
