Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

On the occasion of the commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), CARICOM. wishes to underscore its continued
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution and, in that regard, welcomes the adoption
of resolution 1977 (2011), which extends the mandate
of the 1540 Committee until the year 2021. CARICOM
strongly supports the mandate of the 1540 Committee
to strengthen its role in facilitating the provision of
assistance, enhancing cooperation with the relevant
international organizations and reinforcing its outreach
efforts.

Without question, the obligations pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) have served to precipitate
unprecedented action by States to develop
implementation approaches that are consonant with their
domestic realities and constraints and which allow for
the development of national engagement strategies that
can be implemented in close coordination with existing
security and economic priorities. It is that latitude that
enabled CARICOM, in June 2009, to develop a unitary
approach to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and that has led to the significant gains in the
implementation process.

The genesis ofthe CARICOM. resolution 1540 (2004)
implementation programme was largely precipitated by
the reality that CARICOM. members, both structurally
and resource-wise, faced significant challenges in
meeting the obligations emanating from the resolution,
particularly in relation to the enactment of strategic trade
legislation, including the implementation of domestic
export controls. Additionally, it was recognized
that national competences critical to increasing port
and border capacities to prevent the import, export,
re-export, transit, trans-shipment or brokering of
strategic goods were also limited, and would continue
to be so for the foreseeable future.

The CARICOM. experience demonstrates that
all States, regardless of economic, trade or strategic
standing, should assume a collective responsibility to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004),
regardless of the level of participation in the strategic
global supply chain. It also effectively underscores the
notion that, if availed with appropriate resources, even
small States such as those in CARICOM. can develop
mechanisms to effectively and measurably advance
non-proliferation.

Prior to the CARICOM. initiative, there had not been
a single instance where a group of States endeavoured
to implement a major Security Council mandate in a
unitary manner. The success of CARICOM's experience
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has
served to underscore the merits of innovative thinking
in dealing with the region's pressing international
security obligations. It is for this reason that other
regional organizations have adopted the CARICOM
approach and sought to leverage common structural and
administrative assets along the security and political
continuum to advance 1540 implementation.

These gains would not have been possible without
the political support ofimportant regional organs under
the aegis of CARICOM, including the CARICOM
Council of Ministers for National Security and Law
Enforcement and the Council of Ministers for Foreign
and Community Relations. In addition, national support
from Member States, including Trinidad and Tobago,
has been consequential in ensuring the viability and
indeed the success of the CARICOM. 1540 programme.

It would be remiss if CARICOM. did not take
this opportunity to recognize the work of the 1540
Committee and in particular its Chairman, Ambassador
Oh Joon, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea, and its Group of Experts, for their efforts to
actively support the work of CARICOM. CARICOM. is
grateful for this productive partnership, which, along
with the support of critical entities such as the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, has allowed
the region to realize meaningful and concrete progress
in relation to resolution 1540 (2004). This partnership
with the Community was clearly exemplified by the
visit of the 1540 Committee Chairman to the Republic
of Trinidad and Tobago a year ago, the first such visit of
any Chairman of the 1540 Committee to the Caribbean
since its inception in April, 2004.

Indeed, following the visit to Trinidad and Tobago,
the 1540 Committee also paid an official visit to
Grenada, which again constituted the first time since
the adoption of the resolution that the Committee
had engaged with two Member States in the same
geographic area within a relatively short period of
time. This is again indicative of the emphasis that the
Committee continues to place on supporting Member
States in fully implementing the resolution.

Without question, regional progress in preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is inextricably linked to the economic viability of
CARICOM. member States. We are all too cognizant of
the region's susceptibility to external shocks, including
those occasioned by acts of terrorism, as was the case
with the attacks on the United States in September,
2001. Notwithstanding the fact that those events took
place outside of the Caribbean, the economic impact
within the first year after the attacks reverberated
throughout our region's markets and resulted in the loss
of over $900 million in revenue and thousands ofjobs,
particularly in the tourism and hospitality sectors.

This is a major reason why terrorism and the
proliferation of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear materials continue to be of significant
importance to CARICOM. At the same time, regional
Governments have been grappling with the influx of
small arms and light weapons, as well as the deleterious
impact of the drugs trade and spiralling gun related
crime that has ensued from the confluence of these
events.

CARICOM's regional focus on the issues of
terrorism, furthering non-proliferation and building
capacity with respect to the prevention and mitigation of
a possible chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
attack is not new. Indeed, these issues constituted core
components of a regional report, which followed an
assessment of existing security threats facing the region
in early 2002. These recommendations ultimately led
to the establishment of the CARICOM. Ministerial
Subcommittee on Resource Mobilization for Crime and
Security by the Conference of Heads of Government
at its Twenty-Fourth Meeting in Jamaica in July, 2003.

In order to place non-proliferation firmly and
securely within the contemporary regional security
framework and to elevate it to actionable levels within
CARICOM. Member States, engagement on this issue
cannot be piecemeal or sporadic. It requires sustained
interaction with both policy and enforcement entities
in the region and the provision of equally sustained
material support going forward. CARICOM. therefore
views this open debate as a useful forum to further
the global discourse on non-proliferation and sees this
exercise as particularly valuable in advancing efforts
to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) within our
region and beyond.

