The President: The Security Council will now
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 13 of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice, to fill the remaining seat that will become
vacant on 5 February 2012.

Document S/2011/453 indicates, inter alia, the
national groups by which each of the two remaining
candidates was nominated.

On 10 November the Council conducted a total of
five ballots. Today the Council will conduct a sixth
ballot.

The Security Council has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2011/452, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election. I should
like to remind the Council that under Article 10,
paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice.

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is
eight votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the names of the two
remaining candidates. N0 withdrawal will be accepted
once the ballot papers have been distributed. However,
it will be possible to withdraw between ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Only the two
candidates whose names appear on the ballot are
eligible for election.
I should like to remind members of paragraph 10
of the Secretary-General's memorandum contained in
document 8/2011/452, which specifies that

"Each elector may vote for not more than five
candidates on the first ballot".

Given that the Council will now vote to elect the
one remaining member of the International Court of
Justice, any ballot papers containing votes for more
than one name will be considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers
in the Security Council will not be counted until it has
been verified that the ballot papers in the General
Assembly have also been collected. The Council will
remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.

When one candidate has obtained the required
majority of votes in the Security Council, I shall
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session, pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

As Council members will recall, at the 66515t
meeting of the Council, the delegations of Gabon and
Nigeria were selected to serve as tellers.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Onanga
(Gabon) and Mrs. Aguwa (Nigeria) acted as
tellers.

The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election of the one
remaining member of the International Court of
Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the conference officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

***


The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote.

>l<>l<=l<
11-60402


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the conference
officer to collect the ballot papers.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

**>l<


The President: I have now been informed that
the ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly. The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultations, there will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller. I should like to remind Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, I shall wait for
the General Assembly to complete its count before I
announce the results of the voting in the Security
Council. The Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: O
11-60402

Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 9
Ms. Julia Sebutinde 6

I should like to inform the members Council that
I have received from the President of the General
Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
64th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the
required absolute majority of votes in the Council and
in the General Assembly. As fewer than five candidates
have received the required absolute majority of votes
in both the Council and the General Assembly, the
Council shall proceed to a seventh ballot for the
remaining vacancy, in accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the Court. I shall therefore adjourn this
meeting of the Security Council and immediately call
to order the next meeting of the Council to elect one
candidate by a seventh ballot.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

