Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
this opportunity to brief the Security Council with my
reflections as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning Cote d'Ivoire and as Chair of the Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The first issue that I would like to point out is the
difference between those two subsidiary bodies. One
is a typical sanctions committee that acts pursuant
to Articles 40 and 41 of the Charter, while the other
can be viewed as a consultation and consensus-
building mechanism useful needed to further the
work of the Security Council, in particular in the area
of international criminal justice. For that reason, my
personal observations on such two different bodies
must be presented separately.

I will divide my presentation into two parts, each
in turn divided into a very brief review of the work
achieved during our two-year term, followed by my
assessments. The reason for brevity is clear: we have
reported on the work of the 1572 Sanctions Committee
concerning cote d'Ivoire to the Council when it
was considering the mid-term reports and mandate
renewals of the original resolution. We have also kept
the Council informed of the activities of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

I will therefore move on to the first part on the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1572 (2004). By the end of this month, the
Committee will have held a total of seven informal
consultations over the past two years, the majority
of which were devoted to exchanging views with
the Group of Experts on the Group's midterm and
final reports, and to taking decisions on the Group's
various recommendations in the form of draft letters,
notes verbales or press releases to be approved by
the Committee. In terms of other consultations, the
Committee also held an exchange of views with the
Special Representative of INTERPOL to the United
Nations, which led to an information-sharing agreement
between the Committee and its Group of Experts with
INTERPOL. The Committee also met with the Chairs of
the Kimberley Process on two occasions regarding the
implementation ofparagraph 6 ofresolution 2101 (2013)
on the situation in COte d'Ivoire. Beyond the informal
consultations, the Committee has also received three
monthly reports on the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, namely, on media monitoring, assessing
the embargo and human rights.

In short, I believe that the implementation of the
arms embargo, the diamond embargo, the assets freeze
and the travel ban have played the desired role in the
pursuit of a lasting political solution in Cote d'Ivoire,
but there remains a considerable way to go in order
to reach the full potential of those instruments. What
lessons can I and others transmit to the Council? I
would make the following brief points, some of which
are probably relevant to the other sanctions committees
as well.

First, the sanctions committees are certainly
flawed mechanisms, but, like the Security Council
itself, they fulfil an important role. Among the main
problems that we identified is the lack of compliance by
some stakeholders with the various kinds of sanctions
adopted by the Council. That is certainly true of
non-State actors but also applies to many State actors, in
particular in the area of the arms embargoes. It remains
necessary to continue improving transparency and the
provision of detailed information, with a particular
emphasis on ensuring that notifications and exemption
requests include the purpose, the end user, the technical
specifications and the quantity of the equipment to
be shipped and, when applicable, the supplier, the
proposed date of delivery, the mode of transportation
and the itinerary of shipments.

Secondly, although relations with the host
Government was generally good, there were at times
problems with the Mission in New York and in the
capital, in particular with the provision of timely
information and with receiving feedback regarding
the sanctions regime. The pace of dismantling the
sanctions was an ongoing source of underlying tension,
with the Government understandably pushing for its
rapid dismantling, while many Member States sought a
more conservative approach.

Thirdly, the interaction between the experts and
the members of the Committee was generally good, but
again, on occasion, there were some tensions, including
over the selection of experts and the differing views on
their performance. That area of interaction between the
Secretariat and Member States is particularly sensitive,

given the real consequences on the ground arising from
the implementation or lack of implementation of the
experts' recommendations.

Fourthly, the sanctions committees seem to function
as independent units, with relatively little interaction
and coordination among them. I wish, however, to
acknowledge the cooperation and information-sharing
between the Group of Experts on Cote d'Ivoire and the
Panel of Experts on Liberia established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003).

To sum up, we will, as I have said earlier,
nevertheless hand over to our successor a sanctions
committee that operates reasonably well in dealing
with a country that is moving in the right direction to
achieve peace, stability, democratic governance and
development.

Iwill now move on to the second part ofmy remarks to
deal with the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. That Working Group held several meetings,
drafted four resolutions, and the experts are now in the
process of negotiating a fifth resolution. In addition,
two press statements were issued concerning the
contribution of the international criminal tribunals in
the fight against impunity. In order to facilitate the
completion strategies of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the Working
Group considered various requests by the Presidents
of the Tribunals, including the extension of the judges'
terms of office. By maintaining a flexible programme
of work over the reporting period, the Working Group
successfully accommodated the views and concerns of
all delegations.

During our chairmanship, the Working Group
supported the setting up and commencement of
functioning of the Arusha and Hague branches of the
Residual Mechanism and a smooth transition from the
Tribunals to the Residual Mechanism.

Mechanisms dealing with residual functions
are a unique feature that is steadily increasing
in contemporary international tribunals. The
establishment of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals guarantees that the closure of
the Tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia does not
leave the door open to impunity for the remaining
fugitives and for the trials or appeals that have not yet
been completed. I consider the Residual Mechanism
exemplary for striking a balance between two sets of
potentially conflicting requirements: on the one hand,
the need to respect due process and justice, and on the
other, the demand for efficiency and cost-effectiveness.

In addition, the value added by the Working Group
derives from the fact that it constitutes a platform for
strengthening cooperation between the Tribunals and
the Security Council. I also believe that the discussions
in the Working Group have enriched the debates of the
Council during the crucial phases of the Tribunals' life
and that of the Mechanism.

To balance out this evaluation, allow me to
recognize the Tribunals' achievements, especially
in signaling that leaders who commit crimes will be
held to account regardless of their official position, in
bringing justice to victims and in strengthening the
rule of law by working in partnership with domestic
courts in the region. The Tribunals have inspired the
creation of other courts, including the International
Criminal Court.

As to my personal reflections - which are actually
my team's reflections as well - I would like first of
all to say how pleased we have been to preside over
the Working Group. We took a strategic decision even
before being elected to the Council that we would try
to carve out a niche for our tenure in the general area
of peace and justice, as a reflection of our own national
experience of transition from conflict to peace and
from authoritarian to democratic governance. I would
say that respect for the rule of law was our "brand"
during our tenure and certainly during our presidency
of the Security Council, and chairing the Working
Group served to the same effect.

A second personal reflection concerns the
satisfaction of managing what has become a genuinely
cross-cutting issue for the Security Council. Questions
of accountability, consolidating the rule of law and
judicial systems probably appear in the majority of our
resolutions.

A third personal reflection has to do with the cost-
benefit calculations of the Tribunals. When I had the
honour to preside over the Fifth Committee, I must
confess that I harboured doubts regarding the high
cost involved in bringing a relatively small number of
perpetrators to justice. But of course the teaching of
justice cannot be measured solely in monetary terms.
Indeed, the rule of law is priceless, and the impact of
the Tribunals cannot be measured via metrics such
as the number of people judged. It lies rather in their
dissuasive effect, through the knowledge that the entire
international community has mechanisms to ensure
thatjustice prevails, especially in symbolic terms.

Then there are relatively minor reflections. For
example, the Tribunals still face important challenges,
large and small. Staff retention is essential for the timely
completion of their work. I also regret that we could
not do more to address the urgent situation of persons
who have been acquitted or those who have served their
sentences who are living in safe houses in Arusha.

On another note, I would like to acknowledge the
invaluable role that State cooperation has played in
allowing the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates. It is
praiseworthy that, 20 years after the establishment of
the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, all persons
indicted by the Tribunal have appeared before it. With
regard to the Tribunal for Rwanda, it should be noted
that while it is true that the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions has facilitated the early conclusion of its
work, that will be achieved in reality only when all its
fugitives have been arrested and brought to justice,
whether through the Residual Mechanism or in national
courts.

My final reflection is that, in order to maintain the
momentum that has been generated, the Working Group
should continue to hold regular meetings and briefings,
to maintain a regular dialogue with the Tribunals and
close contacts with the affected countries and host
countries of the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism,
and to pursue close cooperation with the Office of
Legal Affairs. As the importance and relevance of
the Working Group continue to increase, delegations
should give serious consideration to finding a forum for
experts to discuss issues that concern the International
Criminal Court in order to institutionalize the Council's
cooperation with that Court.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the sustained
support of the members of the two Committees and of
the Secretariat, in particular David Biggs and Manuel
Bressan in the work of of the 1572 Committee and
Davey McNab in the work in the Working Group on
International Tribunals.

In closing, I strongly urge the Security Council to
continue to play its essential role in the fight against
impunity.

