Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
organizing this open debate and giving non-members
of the Council the opportunity to state their views on
today's important and timely topic. I am most grateful
too to Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing,
and in particular for the illustrative examples he
provided.

My statement will address three points: the
concept and significance of mediation; examples of our
cooperation with the United Nations; and some major
challenges.

The concept of mediation has changed
significantly over the past 20 years. From being seen as
an art mainly practiced by elder statesmen, mediation
is now increasingly viewed as a profession demanding
highly specialized personnel. In fact, mediation is a
complex undertaking involving numerous actors. It is
best conducted by integrated teams of mediation
experts of different levels and with diverse
backgrounds. Experience shows that mediation is an
effective instrument to resolve conflict. It increases the
probability of reaching an agreement and of long-term
reduction of tensions. Research suggests that since
2000, 17 conflicts were ended by the negotiation of a
peace agreement, whereas four ended by the military
success of one side.

To be sure, the effectiveness of mediation
depends on many different factors. Active Security
Council engagement can play an important role in
strengthening and supporting mediation activities. We
therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing mediation and its support activities
(S/2009/189), and we welcome today's debate. The
report is a timely, adequate and useful contribution to
further discussions in the Council. At the same time, it
is true as well that mediation efforts need support
beyond the Security Council. The Council bears an
important responsibility of striking the proper balance
between providing support and maintaining the
autonomy of negotiators. It must also pool its own
efforts with those of stakeholders outside the Council
who are able and willing to make contributions.
Finally, it must adapt outside contributions to the needs
of local and regional actors. Rightly, the report touches
upon some of these issues.

Switzerland commends the Secretary-General's
approach to mediation, as described in his report, and
supports United Nations activities based on this
concept in many ways. Let me mention two examples.
Swiss mediation specialists have been deployed to
United Nations mediation processes, as in the case of
the former head of the group of legal experts for the
Cyprus peace process. In other cases, these mediators
have worked closely with the United Nations. In Sudan
for instance, we are cooperating with the joint African
Union-United Nations mediation team for Darfur by
providing assistance and training for various parties to
the conflict. In Nepal, Swiss experts have been
working in close cooperation with the United Nations
in facilitating dialogue between the parties.

Switzerland has also supported the Mediation
Support Unit, financially and through training and
conceptual knowledge on best practices, including
guidance notes on federalism and mediation in peace
processes and on dealing with the past and mediation
in peace processes.

The Secretary-General's report addresses many
important issues that reflect in some ways our own
national experience. Let me give three examples.

First, to be successful, mediation has to address
the root causes of a conflict and requires a thorough
understanding of the local situation and its cultural,
political and ethnic dimensions. In this regard, close
cooperation with local mediators and civil society is
important. Such cooperation also strengthens local
ownership of the process.

Secondly, implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on women
and peace and security remains a major challenge. We
therefore strongly support the commitment of the
Secretary-General to increase the proportion of women
included in mediation teams and in particular to
strengthen the gender-related expertise of senior
mediators and their teams.

Thirdly, meaningful mediation has to involve all
parties involved. This can lead to the dilemma of how
to address both the imperatives of justice and those of
peace. The standards and guidelines that have been
formulated in this area are a good example of how
mediation has been professionalized. However, there
still is need for better cooperation among all actors
involved if we want to be able to implement these
standards.

In conclusion, let me stress how important it is
for the Council to develop a collective vision of its role
in international mediation efforts, taking into account
the synergies and linkages among mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is also very
important for the Council to continue the dialogue with
non-members on this topic. We consider the report of
the Secretary-General and today's meeting to be
important first steps.

With respect to the follow-up, it will be necessary
to formulate more specifically the ideas contained in
the report and further develop the general framework
that the Secretary-General has proposed today.

