Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like to start by thanking our South African
colleague for his briefings of last Thursday and today
on the mission to Timor-Leste. I commend him on the
professionalism he demonstrated in his leadership of
the visit.

I also wish to affirm that my delegation fully
supports the statement made by our Portuguese
colleague on behalf of the European Union. My
statement will focus on certain additional aspects.

One of the main conclusions drawn by the
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste is the fact
that, despite the important work done by the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the authorities of the country over the past
18 months, both the causes and the consequences of the
2006 crisis persist. It is precisely on the causes and
consequences of that crisis that I wish to dwell further.

The division within the leadership was one of the
major causes of the 2006 crisis. Now that legislative
and presidential elections are over, a new chapter is
opening for the country. The main opposition party,
FRETILIN, informed the Security Council mission of
its determination not to use violence and is
participating in parliamentary meetings. That positive
attitude should be welcomed, but national unity needs
to be bolstered. The country continues to face an
identity crisis. As the report before us quite correctly
points out, national consensus is required to resolve the
serious problems confronting the country.

The Council's mission also noted that another of
the causes of last year's crisis continues to prevail,
namely, the weakness of institutions, the security
forces in particular. Strengthening those forces is
precisely one of the major components of UNMIT's
mandate. The Council's mission also took note of the
tensions between UNMIT and the national police. The
national police should understand that it is in its
interest to be recognized by the population and that the
process under way, far from calling it into question, is
precisely designed to strengthen it and its democratic
legitimacy.
Allow me now to move from the causes to the
consequences of this crisis. Whether as regards Major
Reinado and his sympathizers, displaced persons or the
petitioners, it is crucial to prevent the aftermath of the
2006 crisis from leaving a permanent mark on
Timorese society. As the visit revealed, those three
issues are intrinsically linked and continue to be
unresolved 18 months following the crisis. Although it
was certainly difficult to resolve them during the
electoral campaigns, it is now up to the new team to
resolutely address those sensitive problems.

It is good to note that there is a move towards an
acceptable solution to the issue of petitioners by all
concerned. It is also commendable that the
Government is seeking a negotiated solution to the
matter of Major Reinado. However, as the report states,
the process of reconciliation cannot take place to the
detriment of the need for justice, as both go hand-in-
hand.

My delegation is especially concerned about the
issue of displaced persons, which, as we know, affects
about 10 per cent of the population. Everything should
therefore be done to enable their return. That of course
entails many material aspects, but it also depends upon
people feeling safe in their places of origin and upon
the feeling of justice being done vis-a-vis the 2006
crisis.

The challenges facing the new Government are
certainly numerous, but it has a major asset, namely,
the existence of significant natural resources. Gas and
oil income provide the Government of Timor-Leste the
keys for fruitful investment in the country's
development and the future of its people, including in
the socio-economic conditions of the country. My
delegation intends to look to the future resolutely. In
that connection, the mission's report contains some
proposals that have garnered our full attention. The
Council's support continues to be more necessary than
ever. It is in that spirit that my delegation will approach
the negotiations on the renewal of UNMIT's mandate
in February 2008.

