At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Sudan, on behalf of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, on reaching the historic peace agreement. We commend the commitment of the transitional authorities to prioritize peace, and urge the parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do so urgently. We hope that this peace deal will pave the way to sustainable peace for all people in the Sudan. In accordance with paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the Sudan Sanctions Committee, covering the period from 9 June to 14 September 2020. On 13 July 2020, the Committee held its first informal informal consultations remotely. The purpose of this informal meeting was to discuss the final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2020/36) with the regional Member States and to continue strengthening the dialogue between the Committee and the regional Member States, in accordance with the mandate of the Committee. I convened a meeting in accordance with paragraph 28 of resolution 2340 (2017), by which the Security Council "fe]mphasize[d] the importance of holding regular consultations with concerned Member States, as may be necessary, in order to ensure full implementation of the measures set forth in this resolution". After a brief presentation by the Panel's Coordinator, the representatives of the Sudan, Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia, Eritrea and Uganda made their statements. All representatives expressed their appreciation for the opportunity to share with the Committee and the Panel their views on the final report. We discussed with our interlocutors the issue of peace in the Sudan, borders, security and armed groups in the region. In accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 2508 (2020), the Panel submitted to the Committee its interim report, which the Committee discussed during the informal informal consultations held on 18 August. Due to the restrictions warranted by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Panel continued to collect and verify the information remotely. For the benefit of the Council, so that it can provide the best support to the Sudan regarding the most recent developments on the ground, I would like to highlight the following elements from the Panel's reporting. The Panel reported that the security environment in Darfur has been volatile and has deteriorated in several areas. Bolstered by new gold-mining revenues, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid has been able to increase its capability in Jebel Marra by recruiting new fighters and purchasing weapons, though the movement is divided by internal infighting. Intercommunal clashes and related attacks on civilians have increased since May, especially in West and South Darfur. Attacks on civilians have increased, in particular on internally displaced persons and farmers trying to return to their land. The Sanctions Committee recognizes the willingness of the Government of the Sudan to respond to the security incidents and the need for the necessary capacity- building to be provided in order to address this issue. The Panel also reported that most Darfuri rebel groups remain in Libya, where they have participated in large numbers in military clashes in 2020, including in Tripoli and Sirte. These rebel groups have grown significantly over the last six months, engaging in large-scale recruitment and obtaining new equipment. We would like to recognize the Government of the Sudan for increasingly acknowledging the issue of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations in Darfur, and would encourage them to address this issue. Regarding the implementation of sanctions, the Panel reported that parties in the Sudan have continued to transfer arms and other military material into Darfur, in violation of the arms embargo. Porous borders and the easy availability of small arms in Darfur and the region mean that illicit flows of weapons in and out of Darfur continue and pose a threat to security and stability both in Darfur and neighbouring countries. The Panel reported that the implementation of the travel ban and assets freeze also remains a challenge. In connection with the sanctions list, I would like to note that, as of 31 August 2020, the Committee has been considering a proposal, submitted by a Member State, for the delisting of four individuals. Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate that the sanctions regime was established for the sole purpose of helping to bring peace to Darfur. It is not to punish the Sudan, but to support to achieve sustainable peace. The 1591 Committee is committed to working together with the Sudan and all relevant stakeholders to make this a reality.
