The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, the Central African
Republic and Egypt, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. De Loecker
(Belgium), Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) and Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) took the
seats reservedfor them at the Side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to General Cisse, Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Bangui, the Central
African Republic.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Cisse' to take a seat at the Council
table.

Also in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Robert
Calderisi, Country Director of the World Bank.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Calderisi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic pursuant to the statement by
the President, document S/2001/886.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I invite Council members who wish to take
the floor to so indicate to the Secretariat as of now.

Following statements by the Council members, I
will give the floor to those Member States that have
inscribed themselves on the list of speakers to speak
under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

Before giving the floor to those that wish to
speak, I invite Council members to hear the briefings
by Mr. Cisse, the Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Bangui, the Central African
Republic, and by Mr. Calderisi, Country Director of the
World Bank.

I now give the floor to the Representative of the
Secretary-General.


