Mr. Amil (Pakistan): On behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for responding to the
calls for the holding of this emergency meeting of the
Security Council to consider the grave humanitarian
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular the Gaza Strip.

In the wake of the high hopes for peace rekindled
by the Annapolis Conference in November, the strong
support pledged for the future Palestinian State at the
international donors conference held in Paris in
December and the recent high-level diplomacy in the
region, the international community had nurtured
strong expectations for progress on the path of peace in
the region. It expected to receive some encouraging
feedback on the negotiation process launched in
Annapolis. On the ground, we expected to see respite
from the human rights violations and atrocities
committed by Israel in the occupied territories,
alleviation of the suffering of the Palestinian people
08-21448
and tangible improvement in their living conditions.
Regrettably, those hopes continue to elude us.

On the contrary, we are faced once again with
spiralling violence and further deterioration of an
already fragile humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly the Gaza Strip. The
recent intensified military campaign and indiscriminate
use of force by Israel in Gaza have terrorized the
civilian population there and have resulted in gross
human rights violations and the deaths of more than 40
Palestinians, including several children and women,
during the past few days, in addition to injuries to
scores of others and the widespread destruction of
infrastructure, civilian property, farmlands and orchards.
At the same time, Israel's continuing military incursions
and its campaign of arrests in the West Bank -
particularly the recent raids in Nablus - are also
undermining the security efforts of the Palestinian
Authority.

In addition, the gravity of the situation
necessitated the convening of an emergency session of
the Human Rights Council to call for urgent
international action to put an immediate end to these
grave violations by Israel and for protection of the
Palestinian civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in compliance with human rights law and
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention. We urge all concerned parties to
respect the rules of international humanitarian law and
to refrain from violence against the civilian population.

Israel's closure of the Gaza crossing points -
cutting off the delivery of humanitarian assistance, fuel
and electricity supplies and other essential medical and
relief items - is entirely unacceptable. We share the
international concern in that regard, and we call for an
immediate end to the brutal siege of the Gaza Strip by
Israel.

Nothing can justify this kind of behaviour and
unlawful action by Israel. This escalation by Israel -
coming on the heels of its decision to press ahead with
the construction of new settlements on Palestinian
lands, in defiance of its Road Map obligations and
international opinion - is a serious blow to
confidence-building and good faith, which are so
essential for an environment conducive to negotiations.
The construction of the illegal separation wall also
continues unabated. The impunity enjoyed by Israel is
a major factor in the incitement of the desperate
08-21448
reactions and the cycle of violence that have bedevilled
the peace efforts.

The international community must not allow
Israel to undermine the nascent peace process, in which
precious time, efforts and resources have been
invested. The United States, as the guarantor of the
Annapolis understanding, has a particular obligation in
this regard. Nevertheless, the primary responsibility
rests with the United Nations and the Security Council,
which must fulfil its Charter responsibilities. We call
on the Council to take immediate measures to address
the situation. We must make every effort to contain the
damage caused by the recent events and to help the
parties to get back firmly on the path of dialogue and
peaceful settlement.

The following steps are vital in order to
ameliorate the situation in the short term and to ensure
success in the long term.

There must be an immediate cessation of military
campaigns by Israel and an end to all violence by all
parties. A rapid and tangible improvement in the
situation on the ground in the occupied territories, is
needed, as is an end to collective punishment, a
prisoners release, a removal of all kinds of blockades
and restrictions and an immediate end to the siege of
Gaza. There must be an end to policies and actions by
Israel that seek to change the realities on the ground
that could prejudice a final settlement, including the
integrity and viability of the future Palestinian State.
This includes, inter alia, a halt to the construction of
the illegal separation wall, a freeze of all settlement
activity and the dismantling of unauthorized settler
outposts. There must be immediate and unfettered
provision of adequate humanitarian assistance and of
all essential goods and services in the occupied
territories, as well as enhanced economic and social
support from the international community. Support
must be provided to the Palestinian Authority for
building State institutions, including the security
apparatus. Finally, efforts must be made to revive intra-
Palestinian unity.

The root cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
Israeli occupation of the Arab territories. Human rights
violations and recurring humanitarian crises are the
direct consequences of the continuing occupation. An
end to the occupation of all Arab territories is therefore
a necessary prerequisite for peace. The OIC calls for
the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting
5
peace based on international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. These resolutions require
Israel's complete withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and all
other occupied Arab territories, including the Golan
and the Lebanese lands; the achievement of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to exercise
self-determination and sovereignty in their independent
and viable State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital;
and a just resolution to the plight of the Palestinian
refugees.

The participation of the Islamic countries in the
Annapolis Conference in response to the invitation
from the United States was solely to indicate their
commitment to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
between Israel and Palestine and in the Middle East.
We welcome the commitment to the establishment of
the Palestinian State and the agreement to start final
status negotiations to resolve all core issues, including
borders, refugees, settlements and Jerusalem.

To be fair, these issues must be resolved on the
basis of previous agreements, especially the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Madrid Peace
Conference terms of reference, the Quartet's Road
Map, and the Arab Peace Initiative. This approach will
entail Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We hope a peace
treaty will be finalized before the end of 2008 and then
be implemented quickly and earnestly.

A just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of
the question of Palestine is our collective objective and
strategic imperative. It would have a positive impact on
regional and international peace and security. Its early
realization would require the full support and
commitment of the entire international community. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference will play its
rightful role in this collective endeavour.

