Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
the kind words you addressed to me and my delegation.
I should like in turn to congratulate you and your
delegation on Burkina Faso's assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. This month is
always very difficult and busy, and we are therefore
very happy that it will be in your very experienced
hands. Of course, you will have our full support and
cooperation throughout the month.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings.

In my statement today, I will first address some
issues about the completion strategies of the Tribunals.
Secondly, as you have already said, Mr. President, in
my capacity as Chairman of the Security Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, I
would like to give an update on the Group's activities.

Austria reiterates its strong support for the
strengthening of international criminal justice,
including through the International Criminal Court
(ICC), ad hoc or mixed tribunals and truth
commissions. We highly commend the work of the
ICTY and ICTR, which carry out a crucial task in
fighting impunity and bringing to justice those
responsible for the most serious crimes. Austria fully
supports the efforts of the Tribunals to complete their
work at the earliest possible date. However, the most
recent reports of the Tribunals (see S/2009/587 and S/2009/589) indicate that their work is not likely to be
finished until 2013, or even 2014.

While the reported delays remain of concern -
and we urge the Tribunals to take all possible measures
to complete their work expeditiously - at the same
time we have to accept the reality that the dates set
forth in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) will
not be met. We believe that we have reached a point
where the Security Council will need to adapt to the
changed circumstances and extend the mandates of the
judges beyond 2010 in order to allow the Tribunals to
plan their trials and appeals for the coming years.

The arrest of the remaining 13 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladic, Goran Hadzic and Felicien
Kabuga, remains a top priority for the completion of
the Tribunals' work. We call on all States concerned to
fully cooperate with the Tribunals. With regard to the
ICTY, we welcome the most recent report by the
Prosecutor (see S/2009/589, annex II), in which he
states that he is satisfied with the current level of
efforts undertaken by the Serbian authorities in their
cooperation with the Tribunal. We also welcome the
continued efforts by the Croatian Government under
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, in particular the recent
establishment of the new task force. The task force
concept has already been crucial to the ultimately
successful efforts of Croatia and the international
community to arrest General Gotovina and transfer him
to The Hague. We welcome the most recent positive
developments that the Chief Prosecutor has been able
to report to us today. We are confident that the new
task force and the intensive interaction and dialogue
between the task force and the Office of the Prosecutor
will help to rapidly address all outstanding issues on
missing documents.

With regard to the ICTR, we welcome the
cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda that led to the arrest of two fugitives
during the reporting period.

As we already stressed this past June, the referral
of cases to competent national jurisdictions is an
essential part of the completion strategy. We therefore
continue to encourage Rwanda's efforts to improve its
judicial system and witness protection system and hope
that those efforts will enable the Prosecutor to reapply
for a referral of cases in early 2010.

I would now like to give a brief update on the
activities of the informal Working Group on
international tribunals since my most recent briefing in
June (see S/PV.6134). The Group, which to date has
held 21 meetings, has continued to meet on a regular
basis to take forward the discussions on the
establishment of the residual mechanism or
mechanisms. Another meeting of the Working Group
with the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals
will take place this afternoon. The members of the
Group has also met informally with the President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and with representatives
of the Netherlands, Rwanda and Serbia in order to
continue the dialogue with affected countries and host
countries of the Tribunals.

In mid-July, the Working Group started
discussing the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/258)
on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the
options for possible locations for the archives and the
seat of the residual mechanism or mechanisms for the
Tribunals. The report provides valuable information
about the eight potential residual functions identified
by the Tribunals, discusses the potential structure and
organization of the future residual mechanism or
mechanisms and provides tentative estimates for
staffing and costs. It further analyzes 14 potential
locations for the Tribunals' archives and the residual
mechanism or mechanisms, which include 13 United
Nations offices and the International Criminal Court.
The report concludes with 13 recommendations
addressed to the Security Council and the Tribunals.

On behalf of the members of the Working Group,
I would like to take this opportunity to highly
commend the Office of Legal Affairs for the
preparation of this report, which provides an excellent
basis for the Group's deliberations. In September, the
Working Group already reached agreement on
recommendations (1) and (m), which are addressed to
the Tribunals and are contained in paragraph 259 of the
report. By a letter dated 28 September 2009
(S/2009/496), the President of the Security Council
confirmed that Council members welcomed those
recommendations and requested that the Secretary-
General write to the Presidents of the Tribunals to ask
that they ensure that the listed tasks are carried out as
part of their completion strategies and that they report
to the Security Council on their progress in
implementing these tasks as part of their regular
reporting, which we have heard today.

In June and July, the Working Group also
considered various requests by the Presidents of the
Tribunals related to the completion strategies,
including the extension of the judges' mandates, the
appointment of additional ad litem judges and the
redeployment of judges to the Appeals Chamber. On 7
July, following negotiations and the agreement reached
in the Working Group, the Security Council adopted
resolutions 1877 (2009) and 1878 (2009). By letters
dated 29 September, 15 October and 6 November 2009,
respectively, the Tribunal Presidents made some new
requests for the extension of some of the judges'
mandates. In this regard, the Working Group is
currently discussing two technical draft resolutions,
which are expected to be adopted in mid-December.

On 8 October 2009, in order to increase
transparency, raise awareness and provide an
opportunity to hear the views of expert speakers and

the broader United Nations membership on the various
key issues related to the establishment of the residual
mechanism or mechanisms, the Permanent Mission of
Austria organized an Arria formula meeting on residual
issues of the ICTY and the ICTR open to all Member
States. Invited speakers included the Presidents of
ICTY and ICTR, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs, as well as representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
International Center for Transitional Justice. We are
grateful to the many Member States who participated
actively and for the interest they showed in the
meeting. The meeting provided the Working Group
with very useful input for its deliberations.

Next week, the Working Group will start its first
reading of the new draft resolution on the
establishment of an international residual mechanism
for criminal tribunals, prepared by the Chair with the
help of the Office of Legal Affairs and based on the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report.
The negotiations on the resolution are expected to
continue in the spring.

In conclusion, I would like to thank once again
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the ICTY and ICTR
for their briefings. I would also like to express our
gratitude to all the members of the Working Group for
their very active and constructive participation in our
discussions.

