Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). Let me first express the appreciation
of NAM. to you, Sir, and to the Japanese presidency of
the Council for having convened this debate on the
Council's working methods and for presenting the
concept note (S/2016/585, annex) on the issue.

In view of the time limit and the fact that the NAM
position on the subject at hand is reflected in the May
2014 final document of the seventeenth Ministerial
Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, I will
confine myself to the following nine specific measures
that NAM. calls for, with a view to improving the
working methods of the Council and enhancing its
efficiency in fulfilling its primary responsibility.
First, the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, which have remained provisional for
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve its
transparency and accountability.

Second, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the meetings
should provide real opportunities to take into account
the views and contributions of the wider membership
of the United Nations, particularly non-members of
the Council whose affairs are under discussion by
the Council.

Third, closed meetings and informal consultations
should be kept to a minimum and should be the
exception rather than the rule. Meetings should be
open, especially when they include briefings by the
Special Envoys or Representatives of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Secretariat.

Fourth, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Council should be in accordance with the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and
those organs should function in a manner that provides
adequate and timely information on their activities to
the broader United Nations membership.

Fifth, the annual reports of the Security Council
to the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical, and they should assess
the work of the Council, including cases in which the
Council has failed to act. They should also include the
views expressed by members during consideration of
agenda items. We also call on the Council to elaborate
on the circumstances under which it adopts the various
outcomes, be they resolutions, presidential statements,
press statements or other elements to the press.

Sixth, the Council should, pursuant to Article
15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the
Charter, submit special reports for consideration by the
General Assembly.

Seventh, the Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical and
that they are issued in a timely fashion. The General
Assembly may consider proposing parameters for the
elaboration of such assessments.

Eighth, the Council should fully take into account
the recommendations of the General Assembly on
matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter.

Ninth, the Council should cease its ongoing
attempts to shift issues on the agenda of the General
Assembly or the Economic and Social Council over to
the Security Council and the encroachment by the latter
on the functions and powers of the Assembly.

The Non-Aligned Movement rejects the use of the
Security Council as a tool to pursue national political
interests and agendas, since that practice aggravates
rather than alleviates situations and runs counter to its
mission as enshrined in the Charter.

We reiterate the need for non-selectivity, impartiality
and accountability in the work of the Council. A
decision by the Security Council to initiate formal or
informal discussions on the situation in any Member
State or on any issue that does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security is contrary to
Article 24 of the Charter. In such cases, there is a need
for the Council to remain strictly within the powers
and functions accorded to it by Member States under
the Charter.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action
in some cases, while remaining silent and inactive in
others. Furthermore, the Council has increasingly
resorted to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not necessarily pose an
immediate threat to international peace and security.
Instead of making excessive and quick resort to
Chapter VII, efforts should be made to fully utilize
the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII for the pacific
settlement of disputes.

As we approach the process of appointing a
new Secretary-General of the Organization, NAM
underlines its position as elaborated in the Algiers
ministerial declaration of May 2014, along with the
central role of the General Assembly in the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, and
expresses its support for efforts aimed at reinforcing and
strengthening the role of the Assembly in that regard.

Finally, for NAM, transparency, openness and
consistency are key elements that the Security Council
should observe in all its activities, approaches and
procedures. We regret that the Council has neglected
those important elements in numerous instances.
Examples of those failures can be seen in the Council's
reluctance to convene open debates on certain issues
of great significance, its holding of unscheduled
open debates with selective notifications, its practice
of repeatedly restricting participation in certain
debates and of discriminating between members and
non-members of the Council, particularly with regard
to the sequence in and time limits for statements during
the open debates.

