Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We
appreciate the opportunity provided by this meeting for
the Council to reaffirm its steadfast commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
briefing and continued hard work in this area.

Although today's presentation makes clear that
there have been some positive developments since we
last discussed this issue, much remains to be done if
the international community is to achieve an adequate
level of protection for civilians in armed conflict. As
my delegation has stated before, the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with the
parties to the armed conflict and the national
governments concerned. However, the efforts of the
United Nations should support and reinforce that role.
In situations where either the national Government or
the parties to an armed conflict are unable or unwilling
to protect civilians, the international community can
play an important role.

I would like to address the four challenges
highlighted by Under-Secretary-General Holmes and in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2007/643).

The United States shares the view that we must
stand ready to help ensure the safety and security of the
courageous and dedicated humanitarian workers who
attempt to provide relief throughout the world. As we
all know, there is a lack of humanitarian access in
many areas of conflict that must be urgently addressed.

In particular, we support the goal of the return of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, and
critical elements of the United Nations country team
from Kenya to Somalia, as soon as it is feasible, which
will help the United Nations to coordinate
humanitarian relief. We urge all parties to facilitate the
critical work of the United Nations and humanitarian
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we

welcome the recent appointment by Somali Prime
Minister Nur Adde Hassan Hussein of a humanitarian
focal point. We look forward to that appointment
facilitating humanitarian work in Somalia.

Regrettably, this challenge exists elsewhere in
Africa. As has been necessary to state all too often in
the Chamber, millions of people in the Darfur region of
the Sudan are at the mercy of the humanitarian
assistance lifeline provided by the international
community. But that aid continues to be hindered by
Government and rebel actions and inaction, despite
agreements and promises to the contrary.

The hardships facing the Israeli population in
southern Israel and the Palestinian people in Gaza also
rightly merit the continued concern of the international
community. Recent terrorist attacks by Hamas only
exacerbate the plight of the Palestinian people, by
making it more difficult for the international
community to deliver much-needed humanitarian
assistance and goods to the people of Gaza. While
Israel has an unquestionable right to defend itself
against terrorist attacks, we urge the Government of
Israel, when responding to attacks, to take all
appropriate steps to avoid civilian casualties and to
minimize the impact on innocent civilians.

My Government remains gravely concerned about
the ongoing and widespread use of sexual and gender-
based violence in conflict situations throughout the
world. It is one of the most significant protection
challenges, and one that is too often ignored. Sexual
and gender-based violence must be more effectively
addressed. United Nations peacekeeping missions have
a clear role to play in preventing that violence and
addressing its impact. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls on
all Member States to end that gross injustice. We were
encouraged last fall by the adoption without a vote of
General Assembly resolution 62/134, calling on States
to end impunity by prosecuting and punishing those
who use rape and other sexual violence to advance
military or political objectives, to protect and support
victims, and to develop and implement comprehensive
strategies on prevention and prosecution of rape. The
United States urges all Member States to take concrete
steps to end both the use of rape as an instrument of
war and impunity for perpetrators. During my
Government's presidency of the Security Council in
June, in a further effort to continue progress in that
area, we and others will pursue a draft resolution

08-3528]
addressing the role of women in conflict, in particular
as regards sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict, as part of a ministerial-level meeting on
women in conflict.

The United States continues to seek
comprehensive approaches to resolve protracted
refugee situations in all parts of the world through
support for durable solutions. We also seek innovative
approaches to develop livelihood strategies and to
maximize opportunities for refugees, self-reliance and
empowerment.

Where conflict is causing civilians to flee and
seek asylum, we are actively working with other
Governments to provide protection to those in need.
We call on all Member States to renew their
commitment to uphold the right to asylum, to protect
civilians from forcible return to face persecution and to
provide durable solutions for refugees.

The United States shares many of the
humanitarian concerns associated with the use of
cluster munitions expressed in the Secretary-General's
report. My delegation wishes to make clear that the
United States is committed to reducing the harm that
those weapons can cause to civilian populations.
However, we do not share the Secretary-General's
conclusions and related recommendations regarding the
desirability of a treaty emerging from the Oslo process.
We do not believe that abandoning cluster munitions is
tenable from a military standpoint, or that banning
them without the participation of those States most
likely to use cluster munitions is the option that will
have the greatest positive humanitarian impact. Rather,
my Government believes that a useful agreement that
would include all the primary users and producers of
cluster munitions is possible in the framework of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. Thus
far, negotiations in the context of the Convention have
been positive. The first two sessions have produced
some real progress towards a document. The July 2008
session will be pivotal to our work, and the United
States is preparing to make intensive efforts at that
session. We remain hopeful that an agreement can be
achieved this year.

The United States remains committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in connection
both with the work of the Council and with our
activities throughout the world. In that regard, we
commend the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-

08-3528]

General Holmes for their efforts and personal
commitment to help the people of Burma in the
aftermath of cyclone Nargis, in particular by pushing
for unhindered access by international humanitarian
experts and workers to conduct a thorough assessment
of the situation and to accelerate the flow of
desperately needed humanitarian assistance.

Overall, the United States would like to
encourage strong Security Council and multilateral
action generally to deal with one key source of
humanitarian crises in armed conflict, that is,
Governments or actors that deliberately target or fail to
protect civilians and generally fail to respect the
protected status of civilians and civilian objects. In that
regard, my Government fully shares the Secretary-
General's concerns about any erosion of the principle
of distinction, which requires parties to armed conflict
to distinguish at all times between combatants and
civilians and to direct attacks only against combatants
and military objectives, as well as about the all-too-
frequent disregard for the principle of proportionality
in balancing harm to civilians and civilian objects
against military gain in a particular attack. As the
Secretary-General's most recent report correctly
declares, "Deliberate targeting of civilians has become
more widespread" (S/2007/643, para. 22).

In closing, the United States once again
commends the Secretary-General, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
OCHA's humanitarian partners for their dedicated work
in life and death situations to provide assistance and to
be advocates for the protection of civilians, particularly
children, women, the elderly and other vulnerable
groups.

