Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Montenegro and Albania, as well
as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union's
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
subject to discussion in the Council for more than
two decades. Over that period, we have witnessed
an important transformation in the nature of these
discussions, reflecting the strengthened stability and
progress in the areas of democracy, the rule of law
and socio-economic development in the country. The
Council has contributed greatly to the advancements
seen since the end of the armed conflict in 1995.

Today Bosnia and Herzegovina is actively
contributing to United Nations missions, gradually
transforming from the role of the security consumer
to that of security provider. The country held a seat
among the Council's members and took its share
of responsibility for global peace and security. At
the same time, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism for
International Criminal Tribunals, supported by the
local judicial authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and other countries of the region, are continuing to try
to bring the perpetrators of war crimes to justice, and
peace to their victims

The European perspective ofBosnia and Herzegovina
has been a central driver in overcoming challenges
on the ground and in mobilizing citizens and their
elected representatives behind the necessary political
and socioeconomic reforms. A great majority of the
country's citizens strongly desire that Bosnia and
Herzegovina advance in its European aspirations. On
15 February, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted the country's application for membership of
the European Union. The European Union welcomed
that as a broad and unequivocal expression of the
country's commitment to continue its efforts along the
EU path. The application follows a further deepening
of the political dialogue with the European Union in
2015. That reaffirms the true and lasting commitment
and engagement of the European Union to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Together with our international partners, including
the international financial institutions, the European
Union continues to invest in Bosnia and Herzegovina's
reforms. Those joint efforts support domestic stability
and lay the foundation for future prosperity for all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has been a
long-shared goal of the European Union and that of the
Council.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities, with the
support of the European Union and its international
partners, have developed, agreed and are implementing
the most comprehensive package of socioeconomic
reforms that the country has seen in its recent history.
Those efforts require a serious commitment and a
readiness to make difficult political decisions in
overcoming the long legacy of underinvestment, lack
of structural reforms and burdensome administrative
difficulties. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
re-energize its economy and make it more competitive.
Meaningful progress in that regard is needed and will
enable the Council of the European Union to decide on
the next steps along Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU path.

The overall positive momentum on the ground,
however, continues to face important challenges flowing
from the persisting political divisions and inefficient
administrative and decision-making structures. In
anticipation of the municipal elections to be held in
October, we call for avoiding divisive agendas and
rhetoric, as that might weaken the positive momentum
and introduce inefficiency in decision-making at a time
when the country needs to mobilize all its resources
behind reforms.

Particular concerns have been raised by the
intentions of the leadership of Republika Srpska to
hold various referendums. Such political initiatives
distract attention from the mounting socioeconomic
difficulties, blurring the responsibility of the local
authorities, and have strong potential to undermine the
stability. Citizens will see through those actions, and
their elected representatives, whom they entrusted to
address those issues, will be held accountable. I would
like to take this opportunity to encourage all parties
involved to reach an agreement as soon as possible on
how to implement the electoral requirements to allow
for elections in Mostar in October.

Reconciliation needs to advance broadly among the
citizens and the political leadership representing their
interests. To succeed, the country needs to move forward
united. The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country, as
well as to Bosnia and Herzegovina's European Union
prospect.

The European Union will continue to use all available
instruments to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
stability and progress. The overall security situation
has remained relatively calm and stable, yet stability
has not been fully entrenched. In that regard, the
European Union confirms its decision to maintain its
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including through
the executive mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Operation Althea, while focusing
on capacity-building and training.

As the country's stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved in reforms and on the
EU path, the European Union will be looking forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community on the reconfiguration of the international
presence. We will do so in the appropriate forum. In
that regard, the European Union calls on the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the outstanding
objectives and the conditions for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made notable progress
since the last discussion in the Council (see S/P.7555). Its
European perspective drives the reforms in the country
and contributes to overall stability and development.
Political divisions remain, including across ethnic
lines, and require continued focus and efforts by the
international community, using appropriate tools. The
European Union looks forward to the continued support
of the Council in its role in guiding and assisting
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards peace, stability and
prosperity for all its citizens.

