Mr. Miyet: I think there were essentially two
questions raised by the Permanent Representative of
the Netherlands and by you, Mr. President. I will try to
respond with a few comments.

The first question is linked- and this was an
ongoing debate in the Security Council during the
retreat and will be part of the Brahimi report and the
discussions that will go on in the Council - to
assurances on the need for all peacekeeping operations
to have properly trained and equipped professional
troops to be dispatched. The question has been raised:
do we send a mission or even vote on a draft resolution
before having these assurances? It is a question being
debated right now and one of the key problems which
will have to be resolved.

As far as we are concerned, and members have
been told by the representative of Eritrea, there has
been an ongoing effort on the part of my Department,
and in particular by Mr. Annabi, to try to constantly
inform the parties in advance of all our intentions and
everything we have done to try to organize, set up and
launch this Mission. This has been done right from the
beginning and will continue to be done throughout this
process. I have been pleased with the quality of
relations that have been established with both
Permanent Missions here in New York. I wanted to
personally thank the Ambassadors and their teams for
their spirit of cooperation and the continuous exchange
of information and views.

Based on this, it is clear that, as in any operation,
we are relying on the troop-contributing countries to be
ready to provide troops and on their state of
preparedness. It is also important to know that the
commitment of the troop-contributing nations and the
agreement of the host nations and the parties to a
settlement is necessary for deployment. Without the
conjunction of that commitment, on one hand, and
agreement, on the other, the Secretariat faces
difficulties. So we must always try to help the troop-
contributing countries be prepared, ready and equipped
to do that. We must, at all costs convince the parties of
the professionalism and impartiality of the force we are
assembling in order to implement a peace agreement.
On this point we always need to explain, inform and
convince in order to have the capacity to move forward
quickly. All the cards are not only in the hands of the
Secretariat. These cards have to be shared with the
contributing nations and the parties, and with a spirit of
full cooperation and understanding we can move
swiftly and professionally.

The second question raised by Ambassador van
Walsum and you, Mr. President, was the question of
reports of violations of sanctions. On this point we
must first recall the content of resolution 1298 (2000)
and the general request made in paragraph 12 to all
States, relevant United Nations bodies and, as
appropriate, other organizations and interested parties
to report information on possible violations of the
measures. This must be applied across the board by all
United Nations agencies or departments in the field or
elsewhere. These must be reported to you, Mr.
President. It has already been proposed by the
Secretary-General.

Nevertheless, in paragraph 15 of the report of 9
August (S/2000/785), it is clear that the mandate
tailored in this text is in direct relation to the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities signed by the
parties, and it is what we propose for the Security
Council's agreement. As the Council knows, there is a
concept of operations, the size of the force and an area
of deployment which can allow us to implement this
mandate, but which does not give us the means or the
orientation to try to monitor the embargo and that has

not been set as an objective. This has happened in other The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
mission operations; and as far as any other United Miyet for the clarification and answers he has
Nations body has the capacity to get information, it
will be put at the disposal of the sanctions Committee.
But this is not the task or the mandate of the Mission to
try to do that. With that understanding, we will do what
we can. It is clear that this Mission has not been set up
for that objective, but we will try to assist and help as
much as we can.

Ijust wanted to come back to my first comment.
on a speedy deployment, which has been referred to.
As I said, this speedy deployment is not only in the
Secretariat's hands. We will be able to do it with the
goodwill. cooperation and commitment of everyone,
and I wanted once again to appeal for the cooperation
of all those who can help, parties, troop-contributing
countries and the Security Council, to try to do it.

provided.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at Ip.m.
