Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his report, and wishes also to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Danilo Turk for
his useful briefing on the latest developments.

The Russian delegation welcomes the
commitment in principle of the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the Bougainville parties to the peace
settlement and fully supports the parties' efforts to
implement the Peace Agreement.

Having approved in December 2002 the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB), the Security Council
proceeded from the need to maintain the positive
momentum of the peace process on the island and the
earliest possible progress to the constitutional stage. In
that connection, we agree with the concern expressed
today about the continuing problems in weapons
collection. We believe that it is important that the
political and former military leaders of Bougainville
who, on 17 February 2003, adopted an Action Plan for
the Completion of Weapons Collection make their best
effort to ensure its completion as soon as possible. A
necessary condition for this is also the adoption by the
parties to the Bougainville Peace Agreement of urgent
political measures to involve in the peace process all
those who have not yet taken part.

The assistance being given to the parties in this
effort by the UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring Group
deserves all our support. We take a positive view of the
activities of UNPOB. We also express our gratitude to
the countries in the region for their help in the peace
process.

We note with satisfaction the progress made in
the Bougainville Constitutional Commission, and we
express the hope that the process towards reaching an
agreement on the draft Constitution will take place on
schedule and that the final draft will incorporate the
interests of all parties.

We welcome the signature by the National
Government of Papua New Guinea and the
Bougainville parties in February 2003 of a
memorandum of understanding, which established a
mechanism for consultation on all aspects of the
implementation of the autonomy arrangements for
Bougainville. We note the decision of the National
Government to withdraw its armed forces from the
island.

We agree with the views expressed on the need
for assistance by the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations specialized
agencies in the processes of post-conflict rehabilitation
and peace-building in Bougainville, particularly in the
implementation of programmes of reintegration and
rehabilitation of ex-combatants, the restoration of
infrastructure and the provision of public services. We
are convinced that, through our joint efforts, we can
bring long-term peace to the island.

