Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary- General's Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am also
delighted to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo and His
Excellency Prime Minister Ivica Daeie of Serbia.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2014/68). As the
report notes, 2013 was indeed a year of significant
political progress in Kosovo. The United Kingdom
notes in particular the largely successful local elections
held at the end of the year. We once again welcome the
efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo to encourage a large
turnout to those polls. The European Union Election
Observation Mission, supported by 34 local observer
teams from diplomatic representations in Pristina,
assessed the election process to have been, by and
large, free and fair and orderly. That demonstrates that
political will and determination can translate into a
cleaner and fair process.

The United Kingdom welcomes the particiption
for the first time of citizens from the four northern
municipalities. We congratulate the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for successfully
fulfilling its facilitatin role in the north and commend
the robust security arrangements that were put in place
by the Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and NATO following
unrest in northern Mitrovica during the first round of
the elections.

We continue to support the important work of
EULEX, including its assistance on the implementation
of dialogue agreements, the integration of institutions
in the north under Kosovo's jurisdiction and on
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo. We encourage
further cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia on
the issue of missing persons, including through both
national commissions. That is an extremely sensitive
process for the families involved and is crucial for
reconciliation in the region. EULEX has made a
valuable contribution to that work, and we stress the
importance of retaining its Department of Forensic
Medicine as part of the current strategic review.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/68)
also makes clear that progress in 2013 must now
be consolidated and serve as a basis for further
achievements in the coming months. Both Belgrade and
Pristina must continue with the implementation of the
19 April Agreement in the European Union-facilitated
dialogue. Steps have been taken, such as the beginning
of the integration of former Ministry of Internal
Affairs special police officers into the Kosovo police.
It is crucial that the progress continue, including
after the upcoming municipal electoral processes.
The association of Serbian-majority municipalities in
Kosovo should be established as quickly as possible
after the municipal election rerun on 23 February, in
accordance with the 19 April Agreement.

The normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia is integral to both countries' European Union
(EU) accession paths, and the full implementation of
the dialogue agreement is necessary to unlock progress.
We are right to recognize that both Prime Ministers
have demonstrated courage and political leadership in
their commitment to the process, but it is important
now that both sides implement the day-to-day details of
the dialogue agreements so that the process develops a
momentum of its own. More ownership is needed at the
working level to turn those compromises into realities
on the ground and to explain the process to the people
whom it will affect, particularly the inhabitants of
northern Kosovo.

The United Kingdom welcomed the opening of
stabilization and association agreement negotiations
between Kosovo and the EU in October 2013. Following
the December 2013 European Council's unanimous
agreement to open accession negotiations with Serbia
and to the condition that, before joining the EU,
Serbia must normalize its relations with Kosovo, we
look forward to Kosovo being formally bound into a
corresponding programme of reform and dialogue by
completing a stabilization and association agreement as
soon as possible.

The United Kingdom welcomes the continuing
international trend towards further recognitions of
Kosovo, and it encourages those countries that have not
yet done so to recognize Kosovo and, accordingly, to
contribute to regional stability.

Finally, it is heartening that once again we are
reviewing a report of the Secretary-General that
underlines significant progress in Kosovo, and, of
course, long may that continue. Given the encouraging
trend, the United Kingdom reiterates the proposal that
the Council consider reducing the frequency with which
we meet for these debates.

