The President (spoke in Russian): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.

In my capacity as representative of the Russian
Federation, I would like to associate myself with all of
the previous speakers' words of gratitude addressed to
the Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr. Smith,
for today's comprehensive briefing and all of his very
substantial work.

Today's meeting, attended by many United
Nations Member States' delegations, is, in our view,
yet another confirmation of the fact that the Security
Council continues to play a very important role in
efforts aimed at countering international terrorism. It
also confirms that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate are both
repositories for our hopes for stepped-up cooperation
and a strengthening of States' security in this field.

Since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) in
September 2001, CTED has achieved substantial
progress in working with States on implementing its
key provisions, whether it be creating the necessary
legislative basis or strengthening regional cooperation
mechanisms. However, it is, of course, still premature
to speak of full implementation of the resolution or to
set out rigid timeframes for this process. Thus far, the
level of results achieved in individual areas of counter-
terrorism activities is quite varied. This is also true of
the state of the implementation of the resolution from
one region to another and from one country to the next.

The creation of a genuinely reliable system to
counter-terrorism requires additional efforts - mainly
the development of continuous and close dialogue
between CTED and Member States. The main task
today is not merely to monitor the implementation by
States of resolution 1373 (2001), but it is also to
precisely assess the capacities of States and the
readiness of CTED to mobilize the necessary resources
to provide technical assistance.

The Russian Federation welcomes CTED's new
organizational plan, which incorporates these very
principles as its foundation. I again wish to underscore
the fact that its final objective is to strengthen CTED's
functions as a coordinator for technical assistance,
forming a link in the chain between donors and
interested States. We expect that, as a result of the
aforementioned organizational reforms, CTED will be
in a position to more effectively focus on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and thus
organically involve itself in the important process of
implementing the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, and to contribute to the work carried out
under the aegis of the corresponding Secretariat task
force.

We are convinced that the organizational plan
will form a sound basis for strengthening CTED's
capacity. Here, we especially note such important
elements as the transition to closer dialogue with
potential donors, the development of cooperation with
international and regional organizations and improving
the practice of CTED's country visits: tailoring them to
the specific cooperation needs of individual States.

We note with satisfaction the readiness of CTED
to continue dialogue with States on implementing
resolution 1624 (2005), which remains an important
element of CTC's mandate.

I would like to highlight one other issue and to
underscore the special importance, which we attach to
the conclusion of CTED's preparation of the draft
global assessment of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), agreed with the CTC. In our view, the
earlier the Security Council receives such a
consolidated analysis, the more rapidly we will be in a
position to identify concrete achievements and
shortcomings in our endeavour to resolve this task of
overriding importance and measures, which CTED
could implement under the aegis of the CTC.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.

