The President: I thank Mr. Mauget for his briefing
and acknowledge in particular his outstanding frontline
service with the French Red Cross in Guinea. I should
also acknowledge that Mr. Banbury and his staff have
been working long days in combating Ebola. I think it
is around midnight in Ghana, so we deeply appreciate
his participation.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern about the unprecedented extent of the
Ebola outbreak in Africa, which constitutes a
threat to international peace and security, and
the impact of the Ebola virus on West Africa, in
particular Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for
the crucial contributions and commitments made
by the Member States of the region, to continue to

lead the ground-level response against the Ebola
outbreak, as well as to address the wider political,
security, socioeconomic and humanitarian impact,
including on food security, of the Ebola outbreak
on communities and the need to plan for the longer
term recovery in the region, including with the
support of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Security Council underscores the continued need
for robust contact tracing, social mobilization and
community-level engagement efforts, especially
outside of major urban areas in the most affected
countries.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
for the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) to continue to strengthen
coordination with the governments of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone and all national, regional
and international actors, including bilateral
partners and multilateral organizations, including
the Mano River Union, African Union, Economic
Community of West African States, European
Union, World Bank Group and the United Nations
System, in order to more readily identify gaps in
the response effort and to utilize all Ebola response
assistance more fully and efficiently, particularly at
the local level. In this regard, the Security Council
requests that the Secretary-General accelerate
efforts to scale-up UNMEER's presence and
activities at the district and prefecture level outside
of the capital cities.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the recent reported Ebola infections in Mali.
The Security Council recognizes the important
steps taken by the government of Mali, including
by appointing an Ebola Incident Coordinator to
lead a whole-of-government response. The Security
Council affirms the importance of preparedness
by all Member States to detect, prevent, respond
to, isolate and mitigate suspected cases of Ebola
within and across borders and of bolstering the
preparedness of all countries in the region. The
Security Council recalls the International Health
Regulations (2005), which aim to improve the
capacity of all countries to detect, assess, notify
and respond to all public health threats.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
undertaken by UNMEER to provide overall
leadership and direction to the operational work
of the United Nations System, as mandated
by the United Nations General Assembly. The
Security Council underscores the need for relevant
United Nations System entities, including the
United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions in West Africa, in close
collaboration with UNMEER and within their
existing mandates and capacities, to provide
immediate assistance to the governments of the
most affected countries.

"The Security Council lauds the critical,
heroic and selfless efforts of the first-line
responders to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa,
including national health and humanitarian relief
workers, educators, and burial team members,
as well as international health and humanitarian
relief workers contributed by the Member States
of diverse regions and non-governmental and
intergovernmental organizations. The Security
Council expresses its condolences to the families
of the victims of the Ebola outbreak, including
national and international first-line responders.
The Security Council urges all Member States,
non-governmental, intergovernmental and regional
organizations to continue to respond to the
outstanding need for medical personnel, as well
as related critical gap areas such as personnel with
expertise in sanitation and hygiene.

"The Security Council underscores the
critical importance of putting in place essential
arrangements, including medical evacuation
capacities and treatment and transport provisions,
to facilitate the immediate, unhindered and
sustainable deployment of health and humanitarian
relief workers to the affected countries. The
Security Council welcomes the steps announced
by Member States and regional organizations to
provide medical evacuation capacities for health
and humanitarian relief workers, as well as other
treatment options in situ.

"The Security Council notes the considerable
efforts of the international community to scale-up
its coordinated response to the Ebola outbreak and
the important progress on the ground as a result
of these contributions. In this regard, the Security
Council commends those Member States, which,
in concert with other actors on the ground, have
opened Ebola Treatment Units and provided other
crucial support in the affected countries. The
Security Council urges all Member States, bilateral
partners and multilateral organizations, to expedite
the provision of resources and financial assistance,
as well as mobile laboratories; field hospitals to
provide non-Ebola related medical care; dedicated
and trained clinical personnel and services in Ebola
Treatment Units and isolation units; therapies,
vaccines and diagnostics to treat patients and limit
or prevent further Ebola infection or transmission;
and personal protective equipment for firstline
responders. The Security Council calls on Member
States, especially in the region, to facilitate
immediately the delivery of such assistance to the
most affected countries.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
the dynamic needs on the ground in the most
affected countries require that the international
community's response remain flexible, in order
to adapt to changing requirements and rapidly
respond to new outbreaks.

"The Security Council strongly urges Member
States, as well as airlines and shipping companies,
while applying appropriate public health protocols,
to maintain trade and transport links with the most
affected countries to enable the timely utilization of
all efforts aimed at containing the Ebola outbreak
within and across borders of the region. While
recognizing the important role that appropriate
screening measures can play in stopping the spread
of the outbreak, the Security Council expresses its
continued concern about the detrimental effect of
the isolation of the affected countries as a result of
trade and travel restrictions imposed on and to the
affected countries, as well as acts of discrimination
against the nationals of Guinea, Liberia, Mali and
Sierra Leone, including Ebola survivors and their
families or those infected with the disease."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/24.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.

The Ebola outbreak in West Africa is
unprecedented in its scale, its reach and its impact,
and it is much more than a health crisis. This outbreak
has serious humanitarian, economic and social
consequences - rising food prices, closed schools, lost
livelihoods - and it threatens political stability.

The Council has rightly determined that the Ebola
crisis is a threat to international peace and security.
The human impact of the virus is one of its cruellest
features, denying our most basic instincts: for a
mother to comfort a sick child, for a family to take in
a sick relative or for a person to receive a traditional,
dignified burial. These are terrible reminders of the
human tragedy of Ebola, beyond the horrific death toll,
which has climbed to nearly 5,500 people. The current
outbreak has infected over 15,000 and left an estimated
3,300 children orphaned.

Women are being disproportionately affected, as is
so often the case. They are exposed to Ebola at higher
rates than men. They care for infected loved ones.
They make up the majority of front-line health-care
workers. We must ensure their needs are prioritized in
the response.

The Council was warned in October that the spread
of the virus was badly outpacing the response, and that
the consequences of failure would be catastrophic (see S/PV.7279). The briefings we heard today confirm that
we have started to pull together in this critical race to
catch up and stop Ebola.

At the Brisbane Group of 20 Summit last week,
leaders underlined their commitment to ensure the
international effort extinguishes the outbreak. The
response being mobilized under the leadership of the
affected countries and the coordination of the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) has begun to yield results.

I will make three brief points.

First, complacency is our worst enemy. The
epidemiological curve has started to bend. We are
making progress towards the initial 70 per cent targets
for isolation, treatment and safe burial by 1 December.
We are starting to see important behavioural changes
that can help contain the spread. But we are not there
yet. The gains to date could easily be reversed. The
spread of Ebola may have slowed in some areas - down
to as low as 80 new cases reported in Liberia last week,
from a peak of over 450 per week - but the virus is
still spreading and is proving elusive. We have also
seen the risk of further countries being affected, with
Ebola cases now reported in Mali. The examples from
Senegal and Nigeria show that Ebola can be beaten.
It is crucial that countries of the region enhance their
preparedness and vigilance to lower the risk. More
broadly, appropriate screening measures can play an
important role in stopping the spread of the outbreak.

Secondly, the response must adapt to the evolving

nature of the outbreak. Overall progress has been offset
by spikes in new cases, particularly in remote areas out
of reach of the response thus far. Our response must be
able to shift geographic focus to areas of need and to
rapidly respond to new outbreaks. Sufficient numbers of
medical personnel need to be deployed on a sustainable
basis. And we need clear, timely information from
UNMEER on where the current gaps are and how they
can be rapidly filled.

We must also deal with the secondary impacts of
the crisis, including the breakdown of national health-
care systems. We cannot focus only on Ebola, while a
pregnant woman is left to die in childbirth and while
preventable diseases go untreated. And we must also
support early-recovery efforts. Jobs and livelihoods
will be crucial to getting families back on their feet and
to underwriting social stability.

Those efforts require a comprehensive response
that involves all parts of society - Government,
the private sector and local communities, as well as
non-government organizations and the international
community.

Thirdly, Australia is committed to doing its part
in the international response. Australia will provide
$20 million to fund and staff 100 beds for Ebola
treatment as part of the United Kingdom-led efforts
in Sierra Leone, and it will provide $2 million to
fund technical personnel for non-front-line roles in
logistics, training and water and sanitation. We have
heeded Mr. Nabarro's call for quick and flexible
financial resources, providing an early contribution
of $10 million to the United Nations Trust Fund, in
addition to $8 million already provided to other front-
line services. And we are providing $2 million to help
our own immediate region - Papua New Guinea,
Timor-Leste and Pacific island countries - to increase
their preventative capacity. That brings Australia's total
commitment to date on Ebola to $42 million, and we
will of course continue to assess where we can best
contribute.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the heroism of
the front-line health-care workers who are working to
save lives and reduce suffering at great personal risk.
Over 300 of them have died from the disease. Nearly
600 have been infected.

We know how to beat Ebola. We owe it to the
victims of this terrible disease and to all of our citizens
to provide our full and unwavering support to overcome
this threat.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

