Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Nothing would do more
to pave the way for broader regional stabilization than
finding a political settlement to the conflict in Syria.
Norway fully supports the Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura's tireless efforts to that end. All sides bear a

heavy responsibility to turn the talks into a credible
negotiating process that can lead to a genuine political
transition. That means that the parties must start
tackling the difficult questions set out in resolution
2254 (2015). And that includes the establishment of
credible, inclusive and non-sectarian governance, an
inclusive transitional governing body and a process
for drafting a new constitution. The parties also bear
a heavy responsibility not to undermine the political
process through detrimental actions on the ground.

The Syrian population has already endured the
intolerable. The scale of destruction, death and hunger
has been immense. Three out of four Syrians are now
living in poverty. More than 2 million children are
out of school. We urge the parties to ensure that the
cessation of hostilities agreement is respected and that
humanitarian access is improved, including for medical
supplies. That is also crucial for the political process.

In February, donor countries pledged approximately
$12 billion in support of Syria and the region for 2016-
2020. The pledge for 2016 alone was $6 billion. That
was an unprecedented pledge, but disbursements are
lagging far behind schedule. It is time to honour the
pledges that have been made.

Resolving the conflict between Israelis and the
Palestinians remains vital for securing regional stability
and prosperity and for international peace and security.
We must seek to counter those who are eroding the
vision of the two-State solution, either deliberately
or by default. The status quo will not benefit anyone;
maintaining it will only cause more instability. For
every day the status quo continues, an opportunity for
peace is missed. The occupation is deeply damaging to
Israelis and Palestinians alike. The two-State solution
is the only credible way towards viable and long-term
peace. The parties themselves need to make greater
strides to resolve the conflict. The current tensions call
for immediate and coordinated steps by all sides. All
violence must stop.

Israel must stop building settlements and stop
house demolitions. The Palestinians must strengthen
their institutions and implement essential reforms.
The necessary political compromises must be found to
improve the situation in Gaza. The responsibility for
solving the conflict lies with the parties. At the same
time, the international community needs to make
greater efforts to ensure a just and agreed solution
based on the two-State solution. It is also in our
interest to do so. We cannot let this conflict continue
to aggravate the situation in a region that is already in
turmoil. The Security Council must therefore live up to
its responsibility.

Tomorrow in Brussels, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway will convene a meeting of the donor
coordination group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee.
The Commmittee's goal is to build institutions for
statehood and make the Palestinian economy as
sustainable as possible, until the conflict is resolved.
The aim of the meeting is to develop a plan for
balancing the Palestinian budget. The plan will address
matters such as plugging fiscal leakages, making the
revenue-sharing arrangements between Israel and
Palestine more effective and developing a sustainable
Palestinian economy through growth and private sector
investments. If the donors are to continue to develop
a Palestinian State, there must be a credible political
horizon for resolving the conflict. A sustainable
economy is essential for a future independent
Palestinian State, but the ultimate goal must be to
resolve the conflict.

As we all know, it is difficult to make peace. The
Security Council must show leadership and stake out a
path that leads to the resumption of the peace process.

