Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I take
the floor to say a few brief words on the excellent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/359) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), which has just been
introduced to us by Mr. Angelo. First of all, however, I
would like to extend my congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month of July.

With respect to MINURCAT, I note that it is
deploying to the satisfaction of my country and the
United Nations. Its positive role in protecting
vulnerable populations, including refugees, displaced
persons, humanitarian workers and others, should be
recognized and welcomed, as most speakers have done.
The international community, in particular this Council
and all peace- and justice-loving countries, should
work to meet its very urgent staff and equipment needs
so that it can effectively and fully carry out its mandate
in optimal conditions. We warmly thank the institutions
and countries that have contributed human and
financial resources.

We also express our gratitude and thanks to the
generous contributors to the Detachement integre' de
securite (DIS) trust fund. That local policing unit is
quite original and has a role on the ground that is of
great importance. The financing of the DIS will
unfortunately be a source of concern, if, by the end of
the year, additional financial efforts are not made both
by previous contributors, who have been generous, and
by new contributors. Chad, for its part, intends to
commit to progressively taking charge of the DIS
following negotiations planned for 2010 with the
Secretariat of the United Nations.

I would like to note, as most speakers today have
done, that the tireless resolve of Chad to resolve its
domestic problems has recently been illustrated by
three major events: the completion of a census of the
population, with a view to holding free and transparent
legislative and then presidential elections, beginning in
June 2010; the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, which is equitably
made up of 15 members of the majority and 15
members of the opposition, with its chairman chosen
by a consensus of all parties; and the return to legality
of several hundred elements of armed groups in the
country, which had come from the Sudan. I would note
in particular, as the Council has, the Mouvement
national of Mr. Ahmat Hassaballah Soubiane which on
25 July signed a reconciliation agreement with the
Government thanks to the ongoing good offices of our
brother and guide, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, to the
mediators of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States.

Faced with Sudanese aggression, we remain wary
and poised to deal with any eventuality. Given our
previous disappointment following Khartoum's
violations of many peace agreements, the international
community may well understand our suspicions.
Contrary to recent allegations made by our Sudanese
neighbour, we have not been flying over its airspace or
carrying out strikes against armed groups in Darfur.
Curiously, the Sudan claims that we are carrying out
flyovers of its territory with Jaguar and Mirage-type
planes, which our air force does not possess.
We acknowledge having carried out air strikes to
destroy forces that came from the Sudan and assembled
along the border on the side of Tissi, in Chadian
territory. The international community cannot reproach
us for exercising our legitimate and inalienable right to
self-defence by land or air military means. However,
we remain fully ready to normalize our relations with
the Sudan, in the interests of our two peoples, who are
brothers and neighbours. Therefore, we take due note
of the concerns and observations expressed by all
speakers and will do our best to provide them with
appropriate follow-up. We reaffirm our full cooperation
with the United Nations as it carries out its noble
mission of peace in our country.

