Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on the
manner in which you guided the work of the Security
Council during the month of January. Allow me also to
recall that Mexico joined the Security Council on 1
January, following a 20-year-long absence. Indeed, the
work carried out during this month has confirmed the
appropriateness of Mexico's decision to seek
membership in the Security Council, with a view to
participating in the creative and intensive work of this
body and thus contributing to the development of the
United Nations and to the quest to achieve international
peace and security.

Mr. President, we are gratified that the first 30
days of Mexico's participation in the work of the
Security Council took place under the presidency of
Mauritius, and in particular under your guidance and
leadership, because we have found that Mexico's major
concerns and the vision it wishes to contribute to the
work of the Council were reflected in the manner in
which you have guided the work of the Council during
the past month.

First, we agree with you, Sir, that the work of the
Council must progress in the direction of much greater
transparency. In the past 30 days we have seen
examples of how this greater transparency has
benefited, and will continue to benefit, the work of the
Council. The will of the United Nations and of the
Council to achieve this greater transparency has been
reflected in the fact that recent meetings on Africa,
held on your initiative and which successfully took
place in this very Chamber, were disseminated
throughout the world over the Internet, thus rendering
them accessible not only in Africa, where, I am sure,
there was great interest in the debate, but also in Latin
America and in Mexico itself.

This is useful because it means that, in our
countries, on the basis of the Security Council's
debates, people will become aware of the commitments
that are being undertaken in the United Nations and of
the efforts that are being made to resolve the problems
encountered in the process of achieving peace, in the
context of a broad vision and in a responsible manner,
focusing on the tasks that will enable us to establish
lasting peace.

There are many aspects of your presidency and of
the work achieved by the Council in the past month
that deserve to be perpetuated. With respect to the
debate on Africa, we believe that, through the
presidential statement we have adopted and through the
debates held in this Chamber, paths have been opened
and guidelines elaborated that should be followed. We
have committed ourselves to maintaining the Council's
focus on a further exploration of the various opinions
and points of view that have emerged in the context of
the consultation mechanism established by opening the
debate to the rest of the membership of the United
Nations, and through involvement with regional
organizations and with other agencies of the United
Nations system that are active in Africa.

The prospect of the establishment of a working
group on the basis of the discussions held in this
Chamber represents a commitment that we intend to
uphold and further deepen. What has been achieved
this month in terms of making Africa the focus of this
body should serve as a basis for further work in that
direction.

We believe also that it is very meaningful and
symbolic that under your presidency, Sir, we were able
to successfully complete the process of the
participation of the United Nations - not only of the
Council - in ensuring East Timor's transition to
independence. It is more than symbolic; it is the
culmination of lengthy and tireless efforts, fraught with
many difficulties, which have finally led to the
adoption of a resolution that will continue the work of
the Council and of the Organization in East Timor until
the day of independence, at which time we will
reassess the respective roles of the United Nations and
of the international community in supporting
development efforts and consolidating an independent
East Timor.

We believe that the consultation mechanisms and
practices that you have used and that the Council has
integrated into its work during this period are a
guarantee that its deliberations and decisions will
increasingly enjoy the consensus of the community of
States that are the United Nations, as well as the
support of international public opinion.

In this respect, we found it particularly
noteworthy that work was undertaken in the area of
combating terrorism. After resolution 1373 (2001) was
adopted as a result of the events in New York and
Washington, the international community found a work
dynamic, of which the Security Council was a prime
example, for discussing the immediate commitments of
countries in the fight against terrorism, and to do so in
a spirit that ensured that the decisions taken would be
supported by international law and would be taken by
States in the multilateral forums provided by the
Charter of the United Nations. The profundity, the
seriousness and the professionalism shown in the work
undertaken in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001)
to combat terrorism are also an obligation for the
Council's activities in the days to come.

I would like to conclude, Sir, by thanking your
country and you personally for the work you have
carried out at the head of the Council. Mexico's
presence means that we will continue to work together,
as colleagues, toward the same objectives of the quest
for peace that the Council has set for itself. You have
left us some tasks that we must complete, and two of
these are very important.

The first task concerns the reorganization of the
work relating to the report of the Council to the
General Assembly on its activities. We think the
groundwork has been laid for a discussion in the near
future that should soon enable us to reach a consensus
in the Council and provide to the Assembly in August a
report that reflects the concerns of members with
regard to the future work of the Council.

The second task, part of the same process, is the
analysis of the activities every month, about which a
consensus is gradually emerging - and today's fruitful
work is in this direction - to make this a participative
exercise, in which the opinions of Member States are
presented, that will enrich and nurture the work of the
Council with the points of view and contributions of all
the Members of the United Nations, in particular those
of us who are members of the Council.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
once again and congratulate you on the work you have
accomplished this month.

