Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the decision
by the United States to relocate its Embassy to the
occupied city of Jerusalem and to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of the Israeli occupation. We stress that
such decisions are flagrant violations of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and run
counter to the legal, political and historical status of
the city of Jerusalem. As such, they are no more than
unilateral decisions that have no legitimacy or value
whatsoever and have no impact on the legal status of
Jerusalem. They are part of the oppression practiced
against Palestine, and constitute attempts to displace
its people and establish an occupying settlement entity
on its territory.

The United States used its veto against a draft
resolution (S/2017/1060) on the status of Jerusalem on
18 December 2017 (see S/PV.8139). That underscores
its total disregard for international law and its flagrant
violation of the resolutions adopted with international
legitimacy. It also shows the unlimited support of the
United States for the racist and Zionist entity at the
expense of the Palestinian people, and proves that it has
never been a fair and competent negotiator in search of
peaceful settlement for the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Syria welcomes the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on Jerusalem on 20 December 2017
(resolution 72/240), which represents a slap in the face
of the United States Administration by the international
community that demonstrated how isolated it is in its
cooperation with the Zionist entity as a result of the
aggression and the arrogance that characterizes their
policies. Tensions and destabilization in the world
today are a result of their policies. The international
community has stood by the rights of the Palestinian
people in Jerusalem. It underscored the limited
American influence, and that people with a free
conscience cannot be bought. They are immune to
those kinds of threats.

The Syrian Arab Republic, despite the ongoing
terrorist war in Syria, has never lost its compass and
has always maintained its principled position on the
Palestinian question and on the rights of Palestinians,
Muslims and Christians in Jerusalem. My country will
do its utmost to regain all occupied Arab territories.
It has always maintained its principled position on the
Palestinian people and their right to self-determination,
and to establish an independent State on all its national
territory, with Jerusalem as its capital. Syria supports
guaranteeing the right or refugees to return, in
accordance with Council resolution 194 (1948). The
Syrian Arab Republic welcomes the fact that the State of
Palestine has been granted observer status at the United
Nations, but calls for granting it full membership.
My country, Syria, strongly condemns Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, who insists on disregarding the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan. He did not talk about the
United Nations position on the Israeli occupation of
Syrian Golan, according to relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981). He did
not address the suffering of more than 23,000 Syrian
citizens living there under occupation for 50 years,
not to mention the illegal Israeli practices and the
continued Israeli violations of the 1974 Separation of
Forces Agreement. Israel cooperates with the armed
terrorist groups, which have occupied sites related to
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
Mr. Mladinov did not address this issue despite the
fact that it is at the core of the item under discussion
and constitutes an integral part of his mandate as the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

Israel has refused to return the occupied Golan
to Syria or to abide by the relevant internationally
legitimate resolutions, especially resolution 497 (1981).
It has continued to confiscate territories in the occupied
Syrian Golan, expand its settlements there, exploit the
area's resources, distort its history and rob it of its
culture. Israel also continues to lay mines in the Golan
and is preventing the resilient Syrians living there
from communicating with their families in Syria. It is
depriving them of their right to an education based on
a Syrian curriculum and their right to possess Syrian
identity cards. It is preventing them from building
national Syrians hospitals in their occupied towns in
the Golan, and from receiving treatment in Damascus
hospitals. Since the very first day of the occupation,
Israel has instituted policies of terrorism, oppression,
racial discrimination and arbitrary arrest. It has
conducted mock trials and punished Syrians with long
prison sentences. In that regard, I would like to remind
the international community of Syria's captured
Mandela, Sidqi Suleiman Al-Maqt. After spending 27
years in Israeli prisons, he was detained again in 2015
and sentenced to 14 years because he showed footage of
Israeli cooperation with the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations in the Syrian Golan. We are
calling on the international community to release him
and all other detainees from Israeli prisons.

The international community has been silent in the
face of Israel's policies and actions, which encourages
Israel to continue them as well as to violate the Separation
of Forces Agreement and Security Council resolutions.
Those violations would never have happened without
the United States Administration's unlimited support to
Israel, which hinders accountability, ensures impunity
and encourages Israel to continue its threats to regional
and international peace and security.

The Syrians in the occupied Syrian Golan have
rejected all Israel's oppressive practices, most recently
the announcement by Israel's Minister of the Interior
to prepare for elections of the so-called local councils
in October of this year. This is a flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and international
conventions. The resilient Syrian people of the Syrian
Golan have pronounced all such practices null and void
and not to be recognized or obeyed, and have expressed
their continued allegiance to their homeland, Syria,
and their Syrian Arab nationality. They are opposed
to all such Israeli attempts and decisions, which will
ultimately fail. From the very first day of this heinous
occupation, the residents of the Syrian Golan have
continued to underscore that the occupied Golan is
an integral part of the Syrian territory, and that they
are Syrian nationals. Their land is holy, and they will
never relinquish it to the Israeli occupiers. We want to
emphasize the Syrian right to the Golan with its borders
of 4 June 1967. This right will be upheld forever. We
will regain our occupied territory and usurped rights,
and the Israeli settlers must leave the Golan sooner or
later. We will regain our territory and free our people
who are suffering under the yoke of Israeli occupation,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We call on the Security Council to take immediate
action against Israel, to stop its offences and violations,
and to oblige it to end its occupation ofArab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan. It should
withdraw to the border of 4 June 1967, in accordance
with Council resolutions, especially resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

Lastly, I was not going to respond to what we have
heard in some statements. But I would like to respond
to the representative of the Saudi regime. I condemn
him for what he said. This is an Arabic proverb. In
his statement, the representative of Al-Saud said that
we need a Syrian consensus in order to arrive at a
settlement in Syria. To that end, I say that the Al-Saud
regime should stop issuing terrorist fatwas, which fuel
terrorism in my country, Syria. We are all aware of that,
and not in Syria alone but all over the world. It must
stop providing support to armed terrorist organizations
in order to kill Syrians. The Wahhabi Saudi regime is
supporting more than 100 armed groups in Syria. It
should stop providing them with the toxic chemicals
that are being used against civilians and the Syrian
army. It should cease its lies and hypocrisy. Terrorism
that it has been spreading for decades must be addressed
on an international level in an urgent and decisive
manner before it is too late. The Saudi regime is fully
responsible for the evil of terrorism that is currently
affecting all countries of the world.

