Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Joseph Ballard, Senior
Officer of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, for their briefings.

The mere existence of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to humankind, and therefore to
international peace and security. The possibility that
such weapons may fall into the hands ofnon- State actors,

especially terrorists, is of particular concern - all the
more so today, as evidenced by the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq. We are also concerned about
the vulnerability of countries in the face of new threats
resulting from the development of new information and
communication technologies, which have been used by
non-State actors to carry out cyberattacks specifically
designed to target States' critical infrastructure.

As a member ofthe Security Council, Brazil actively
participated in the discussions that led to the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), and we have remained firmly
committed to its implementation - as demonstrated by
the national matrix prepared by the Group of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and approved by the Committee.

Our Constitution prohibits any nuclear activity for
non-peaceful purposes on Brazilian territory. Brazil is
a party to all of the major treaties and conventions in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. At the
same time, Brazil clearly promotes the peaceful uses of
sensitive and dual-use goods and products, especially in
activities related to industry, research and development.

Brazil has followed with interest the comprehensive
review ofthe implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004),
concluded last December, and participated in the open
consultations convened in June 2016 by the Chairman
of the 1540 Committee. As the report on compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004) acknowledges, the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-
term task that requires continued efforts at the national,
regional and international levels. We are pleased
that resolution 2325 (2016) also assigns a key role to
international cooperation and assistance for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

We recognize the important work carried out by the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts, in particular
in trying to match offers ofand requests for cooperation.
In order to address some of the shortcomings of
that process, countries in a position to do so should
assist countries to formulate requests for assistance.
Brazil has participated in cooperation and assistance
initiatives that contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially in the drafting of
national legislation on chemical and biological weapons
and related materials.

Despite the importance of resolution 1540 (2004),
the focusing of international efforts exclusively on
the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is insufficient. Disarmament measures are
a fundamental component of any reasonable strategy
to prevent such weapons from falling into the hands of
non-State actors.

Over the past 50 years, the international community
has successfully adopted legally binding multilateral
instruments banning biological and chemical weapons.
Given the destruction and unimaginable suffering that
nuclear weapons are capable of inflicting, the lack of
similar instruments for such weapons is unacceptable
and constitutes a flagrant violation of article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

As we meet in the Council, the United Nations - in
a debate open to all States, international organizations
and civil society under a mandate pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 71/258 - is taking a decisive step
to fill that vacuum through the negotiation of a nuclear-
weapon-ban treaty. We are pleased with the constructive
nature of today's debate, and we are optimistic that by
7 July we will reach a treaty to ban nuclear weapons.
Such a treaty would represent an important contribution
towards their total elimination, since, as evidenced by
the example of chemical weapons and anti-personnel
mines, prohibition is the first step towards elimination.

The international community has often been
confronted with the reasoning that security and stability
concerns hamper the goal of nuclear disarmament. That
is a false dichotomy. Relying on nuclear deterrence
doctrines and strategies undermines the medium- and
long-term security of all States. The risk that non-State
actors may wish to acquire nuclear weapons isjust one of
many examples of such threats to international security.

As former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has
repeatedly said, "There are no right hands for wrong
weapons." We hope that, after years of stagnation, the
international community will finally make concrete
progress towards the goal of a world free from all
weapons of mass destruction.

