Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the beginning of my statement, to express
to you, Mr. President, our thanks for your efforts in
addressing the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which is continuing to deteriorate in a
serious manner. This is a result of the Israeli
Government's persistence in defying and violating
Security Council resolutions and all of the principles of
international law. Israel is thus demonstrating a will for
war and a thirst for blood. It is under the illusion that
brute force is the only means of achieving peace and
security for Israel.

Kuwait calls upon the Security Council to take
the necessary measures, as is incumbent upon it under
the United Nations Charter and international law, to
pressure Israel to put an end to genocide and the
barbarous massacre of the Palestinian people. Kuwait
has paid close attention to the position of the
international community since the beginning of this
crisis, and we have not heard any valid argument to
counter the opinion of the Arab countries regarding the
core of the tragic struggle and the crisis we are
experiencing or of its cause, which is well known: the
continued Israeli occupation of Arab territories.
Furthermore, Israel is persisting in activities involving
genocide and oppression, as well as failing to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002).

The fact that this meeting is being held is
consistent with the role and responsibility of the
Security Council under the Charter. We do not agree
with those who say that such meetings are not useful.
On the contrary, we think this is part and parcel of the
Council's mandated responsibility vis-a-vis international
peace and security when they are threatened. Media
reports indicate that the situation today is extremely
grave; they illustrate the determined and wilful killing
of defenceless Palestinians and the destruction of their
infrastructure.

Kuwait adheres to national and international
humanitarian principles. Through a declaration of its
Council of Ministers on 7 April, it requested the
international community immediately to intervene to
stop the genocide being perpetrated by Israeli forces
against the Palestinian people. Kuwait has also called
for a lifting of the siege of the legitimate leadership of
the Palestinians and for the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all occupied Arab territories.

In the statement to the press issued yesterday by
its President, the Security Council said that it was
disturbed by the policy of the occupying forces to
continue to defy Security Council resolutions.
Consequently, we call upon the Council to set that
position out in a new resolution calling upon Israel to
respect the rules of international humanitarian law,
proposing the deployment of an international
observation force to restore stability to the region,
ensuring Israel's implementation of all relevant
resolutions and assisting the parties to implement the
agreements to which they have subscribed.

Kuwait would like to commend the United States
for its initiative to request Israel to withdraw and to
cease its military activities in Palestinian territories. It
should be pointed out that the United States
Government, which is one of the co-sponsors of the
Middle East peace process, should exert pressure on
Israel with a View to ensuring that vital United States
interests are protected vis-a-vis Arab countries. The
United States can play that role because it is also a
member of the Security Council, which presupposes
greater legal responsibility for the observance of
international law. It is because the United States is
aware of the will and resolve of the international
community and of the Council that it is in a position to
exert pressure against Israel.

Finally, we would like to thank the international
"quartet" - the Russian Federation, the European
Union, the United States and the United Nations - for
its efforts at compelling the Government of Israel to
comply with the international community's demands. I
would also like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General,
who took a very bold position in his statement before
the Council prior to the adoption of resolution 1403
(2002). Indeed, the Secretary-General has reminded the
Government of Israel that self-defence is not a blank
cheque for it to spill blood and occupy territory in a
manner inconsistent with the principles of international
law. We also welcome the statement made by the
Secretary-General today.

Kuwait believes that, through its mandate, the
Security Council implements the will of the
international community. It is for that reason that we
call upon the Council to put an end to this crisis as
quickly as possible by utilizing the tools and powers it
enjoys under the Charter.

