The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Francois Lonseny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in the Central African Republic.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Fall to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Belgium.

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic and the activities of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that
country, document S/2008/733.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Francois Lonseny Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic, and His Excellency Mr. Jan
Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium. I now give the
floor to Mr. Fall.


