Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Let me first thank
you, Sir, for convening this morning's meeting and for
proposing such a timely and important topic for the
Council's discussion. This will be another highlight of
the presidency you have held during the month of
August in a very remarkable and impressive way. May
we also wish you all personal success and professional
satisfaction in your new assignment in the beautiful
city of Geneva.

Peacekeeping has a long tradition in the United
Nations. It is almost as old as the Organization itself.
Not surprisingly, the way peacekeeping is conducted
has changed considerably over the decades. In general,
peacekeeping mandates have become increasingly
complex. Germany is sharing the burden of
peacekeeping both as the third largest financial
contributor to each mission's budget and through troop
contributions to United Nations mandated missions,
totalling approximately 9,000 persons.

This meeting gives us an excellent opportunity to
remind ourselves of our responsibilities and to reflect
on how best to exercise them whenever the question of
a new peace mission, or the renewal of an existing one,
arises. After all, those missions affect human lives, and
they may even cost lives. The Council, as the only
source of legitimacy for peace missions, carries a
heavy burden.

The multifaceted subject of peacekeeping has
been dealt with extensively over the past years, both
inside and outside the United Nations. The
recommendations made by the panel of experts led by
Ambassador Brahimi on the reform of peacekeeping
have provided the United Nations system with
invaluable guidance. I would therefore like to restrict
myself to a few points.

A well-designed mandate is no guarantee for the
success of a mission. On the other hand, without such a
mandate a mission is bound to fail. Rational decisions
can be taken only if there is a solid, comprehensive and
reliable information base. It may be worth thinking
about ways and means of broadening that information
base. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations in
particular has a vast amount of expertise from which
the Council has profited, and from which it may profit
even more in the future.

Apart from information and expertise, the role of
women deserves heightened awareness. New or
renewed mandates have to reflect the fact that in many
conflict situations the majority of victims are women.
Sexual violence is often used as a means of warfare, a
fact that will certainly be of major relevance for the
future work of the International Criminal Court. But we
have to go a step further by appointing more women to
high-level positions in peacekeeping operations,
increasing the overall percentage of female personnel,
including senior gender advisers in each and every
mission and training peacekeepers.

When dealing with the question of mandates, we
should not altogether ignore the good old principle of
"no taxation without representation". Hence, better
ways of involving contributing countries in early
decision-making need to be considered, be they troop
contributors or countries making other important
contributions. Otherwise we risk not being able to
generate the necessary public acceptance of and
political support for these demanding operations in the
future.

My second observation is a more general one,
applicable to each and every activity of the United
Nations. Taking into consideration the resources of the
United Nations, how can we make the best use of the
specific capabilities and know-how of the United
Nations system in the field of peace missions? We have
already experienced various ways in which peace
missions are organized, ranging from Blue Helmet
missions to multinational forces and missions carried
out by regional organizations. Each of those
approaches has its advantages and disadvantages. It
may well be worth studying them in more depth and
developing criteria for a division of labour between the
United Nations, regional organizations and individual
Member States.

Regional peacekeeping merits our particular
attention. Regional peacekeeping stands for the ability
of the regions of the world to take their fate into their
own hands, coming to terms with conflict through
specific means that are rooted in the culture and
tradition of the respective area. Yesterday's meeting
with Foreign Ministers of the Economic Community of
West African States made that clear once again. There
are commendable efforts under way to strengthen
regional peacekeeping, notably in Africa. Those efforts
deserve our attention and support. The United Nations
can provide valuable assistance through training and
know-how. Sound financing needs to be provided to
ensure the steady continuation of regional missions.

When it comes to rapid deployment - a subject
that has been on the Council's agenda for quite a
while - we need to ask ourselves what is feasible and
what is not, at least within the framework of the budget
that the United Nations has at its disposal. Would it not
be worthwhile to reconsider that question in the context
of a division of labour between the United Nations and
national forces?

There is yet another aspect to the division of
labour, namely, the consideration of the different tasks
that a mission has to fulfil. The various countries
contributing personnel to a mission have different
strengths and weaknesses, and they are operating at
differing expense. Those factors cannot be ignored
when a decision has to be made regarding which
countries will contribute which types of units and
services. However, let me stress one point in that
respect, in order not to be misunderstood.
Peacekeeping must, by its very nature, remain
compatible with the universal role of the United
Nations and the principle of international solidarity.

My third observation is inspired by the concept of
prevention. The United Nations system has been
dealing with this matter since the issuance of the
Secretary-General's report on the prevention of armed
conflict, and it will continue to do so. As we know, two
resolutions have ensued, one of them emanating from
the Council and another, more recently, from the
General Assembly. That serves to remind us of the fact
that peacekeeping is good but prevention is better.
Provided that the Security Council issues a mandate or
that the receiving State agrees to such action,
preventive deployment is an effective instrument that
should be considered more often. The case of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is a good
example of the success of such a mission.

My fourth point has to do with the phase
following peacekeeping. Peacekeepers need to have an
exit strategy. Peace will last only where it has been
consolidated. The vital role of peace-building has long
been recognized, as mandates for peace missions
increasingly draw upon it. It is for good reason that the
improvement of peace-building instruments such as
those pertaining to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the rule of law, civilian police and justice
are studied in great depth. Afghanistan and Iraq are
only the most prominent examples of what it means to
consolidate peace in countries that have to be rebuilt.

I would like to conclude my remarks by paying
my respects to all those men and women who have
given their lives in the course of peacekeeping and
peace-building duties. They have died for a cause that
will live on as long as the United Nations exists.
Protecting the lives of peacekeepers is of great concern
to us all. Baghdad has been a cruel reminder of how
vulnerable United Nations personnel often are.
Harming personnel in peace missions is a crime against
humanity, and it should be punishable as such under
international law.

