Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. We welcome the contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the High
Representative and his Office have made in the course
of the past 16 years.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to offer three brief observations on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First, the security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to be calm and stable. The
European Union Force (EUFOR) and European Union
Operation Althea and the preceding military
operations, namely, the Multinational Military
Implementation Force and the Stabilization Force, have
never had to intervene to restore peace. There are no
indications of violent destabilization. Looking back
less than two decades, when Bosnia and Herzegovina
was on the brink of violent disintegration, this positive
development deserves explicit recognition.

Against that backdrop, the European Union has
decided to reconfigure EUFOR and Operation Althea.
The mission's main focus will be directed towards
providing capacity-building and training to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's armed forces so that they can
themselves maintain peace and stability.

However, the continuing political paralysis gives
us a reason for concern. The recent EU progress report
highlighted the stalemate in the reform process. The
lack of a shared vision of the political leadership on the

overall direction of the country is particularly
worrisome.

That brings me to my second observation,
namely, what the international community can do to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina's resumption of the
reform process, and thus also its return to the path
towards Europe. It is up to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
political leaders themselves to place the well-being of
their county as a Whole, and that of all of its citizens, at
the top of their agendas, to form a new State-level
Government as a matter of urgency and to tackle the
outstanding reform projects. That should happen
without further delay. Since Dayton, however, the
international community has often ended up rectifying
shortcomings in the domestic political processes. That
cannot continue.

Given Bosnia and Herzegovina's history, close
monitoring and far-reaching supervision by the
international community have undoubtedly been
necessary in the past. But that approach has not
succeeded in creating incentives for local politicians to
choose the route of compromise over advancing their
nationalist agendas. In fact, the international
community's approach at times serves as an
impediment to political leaders' accountability to their
electorates and to their assumption of ownership of the
reform process.

We should not continue that way. Our focus
should be on employing instruments that are better
suited to initiate positive developments. Obsolete
approaches should be discontinued. Decoupling the
High Representative and the EU Special
Representative and endowing the latter with a sound
mandate was an important step. Further steps must
follow. The European Union and Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU perspective should become the only
game in town. That will include the continued
reconfiguration of EUFOR and Operation Althea. In
addition, we are of the view that the Office of the High
Representative should be downsized and relocated
abroad. Its staff levels should be commensurate with its
remaining tasks.

Thirdly, in order to save the footprint of the
Office of the High Representative in stabilizing Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a sustainable and comprehensive
answer to the question of immunity from legal
proceedings for present and former staff of the Office
has to be found. We intend to initiate a more thorough
discussion on the issue and to invite members to
participate.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that we fully
support the extension of the mandate of EUFOR and
Operation Althea for another year, to be decided by the
Security Council tomorrow. The mission provides an
important contribution to the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
epitomizes our joint commitment to the peaceful,
democratic and prosperous future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its people. Such a Bosnia and
Herzegovina, willing and able to conduct the EU
accession process on its own strength, is the best
guarantee for peaceful development in the region.
Germany will continue to support all efforts to advance
that goal.

