Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Nigeria congratulates you, Sir,
on the commencement of your country's two-year term
on the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also congratulate Egypt,

Japan, Senegal and Ukraine on their membership of
the Security Council. My delegation also thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well
as for the excellent concept note (S/2016/22) that your
delegation has provided to guide our deliberations. Our
appreciation also goes to Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, the Vice-President of the International
Committee ofthe Red Cross, Ms. Beerli, and the Senior
Humanitarian Policy Advisor ofOxfam, Ms. Rooijmans,
for their briefings.

Nigeria aligns itself with the respective statements
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and by the Permanent Observer
of the African Union on behalf of the African Union.

Conflict situations expose civilians to killings,
kidnappings, torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking
and other grave dangers. That is particularly so when
non-State armed groups are involved. Their complete
disregard for international law and international
humanitarian law underscores the challenge they pose
to the protection of civilians.

It is an unfortunate reality that women and girls
suffer the most in conflict situations. They face sexual
violence, sexual enslavement, trafficking and other
forms of exploitation and degradation. Situations where
women and girls are forced to provide for their families
expose them even more to exploitation and abuse. We
acknowledge the Security Council's commitment to
the protection of women and girls in conflict and post-
conflict situations, as exemplified by the adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013).
We believe that those resolutions provide suitable
frameworks for the security Council to enhance the
protection for women in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Nigeria recognizes the primary responsibility
of States to protect civilians within their national
jurisdictions. In that regard, we will continue to take all
the necessary measures as a country, in full compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, to protect civilians in the context of our war
against the terrorist group Boko Haram. The Federal
Government of Nigeria has no higher priority today
than that of defeating Boko Haram and rescuing all
kidnapped persons, including the Chibok girls. We are
utilizing all the resources at our disposal in that effort,
and we have seen positive outcomes, as the Nigerian
military has rescued hundreds of civilians held hostage
by Boko Haram, including women and girls.

Humanitarian access to those in need is another
important dimension of the protection of civilians in
conflict situations. Attacks on humanitarian workers
and their families, the seizure of humanitarian supplies
and other acts that inhibit the delivery of aid and
negatively impact the welfare of civilians in need are
grave violations of international humanitarian law,
which we condemn in the strongest terms.

Nigeria shares the view that considering political
solutions to conflicts in a manner that is inclusive
would aid the effort to protect civilians. Nigeria urges
the Council to bring its influence to bear in that regard,
with a View to achieving political settlements that lead
to lasting peace and thereby enhance the protection of
civilians in a sustainable manner.

Protecting civilians in conflict situations remains
a critical challenge, not only for the United Nations
but also for the entire international community. We
pay tribute to peacekeepers, humanitarian workers,
non- governmental organizations and other stakeholders
for their hard work, often in difficult circumstances, to
ensure the safety and the security of civilians.

