Mr. Spirie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; interpretation provided by the delegation):
May I first convey my warmest greetings to everyone
and express my pleasure at having once again been
given an opportunity to share my views with this body
about the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the challenges we face. I would also like to avail
myself of this opportunity to welcome the new High
Representative, Mr. Valentin Inzko, who is the third
High Representative during my time in office. I wish
him a successful tenure, which would also redound to
my country's success. This is also an opportunity for
me to express my readiness to cooperate with his
Office, thereby contributing to achieving the objective.

Despite different views as to the successes,
impasses and failures of my country during the
reporting period, I can agree that all of us in Bosnia
and Herzegovina could and should have done more to
make progress towards integration into the European
Union (EU) and NATO at a faster pace. In order to do
so, Bosnia and Herzegovina must have more
confidence in itself and political leaders must work
more and expect less. The much-needed compromise
must be viewed as a virtue, not a weakness.

Guided by this idea, the Council of Ministers has
been doing its best to ensure the progress of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic road in an
environment that, more often than not, has not been
one of compromise, dialogue and consensus. Since
December, we have held 19 sessions, two of which
were thematic - one devoted to European integration
and another devoted to NATO integration.

As regards our goal to attain full membership of
the European Union, over the past period the Council
of Ministers has focused on adopting laws and meeting
the requirements of the action plan for the
implementation of the European Partnership
commitments, and we have discussed and adopted 37
bills and draft laws, eight of which are related to the
European Partnership. We have also issued a number of
decisions and strategies that, in practice, constitute the
fulfilment of the European Partnership requirements.

Domestic authorities have been involved in
implementing the Interim Agreement on trade and
trade-related matters between the European Community
and Bosnia-Herzegovina, which will remain in force
until the full ratification of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. The quarterly report indicates
that, as of 31 December 2008, all requirements for the
period had been met in a timely manner and in line
with the action plan adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers. That trend
continues in 2009.

As regards the liberalization of the visa regime
for Bosnian citizens, we have focused on fulfilling the
requirements as laid down in the road map. Of 174
requirements set forth in the document, we have fully
met 149, 18 are being fulfilled, and 7 are still to be
met. I am well aware of the importance of this issue for
Bosnian citizens, given the fact that we are behind
other countries in the region in fulfilling the
requirements, and that six crucial laws required for the
visa regime liberalization have not received the
necessary support within the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament. Therefore, at the penultimate session of the
Council of Ministers, I tasked the State-level ministers
with convening a mini-ministerial conference as soon
as possible, to be attended by the responsible State and
entity ministers, and with producing a harmonized
wording of the said laws, which would subsequently be
forwarded by the Council of Ministers to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Parliament in a summary procedure.

I expect that, when we return to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we shall be in a position to forward the
new wording of the laws to Parliament and fulfil the
remaining requirements for the visa regime
liberalization. The messages that United States Vice-
President Joseph Biden and the EU High Representative
for Security Policy, Mr. Xavier Solana, sent during
their recent visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina are strong
encouragement on that path.

The White Schengen list for our citizens would
certainly strengthen the European idea within Bosnia
and Herzegovina and provide incentives to the forces
that are unequivocally committed to those processes.
The goal of our adoption of these laws is to send a
clear message to Brussels that we are resolute, which
gives us due cause to expect that the visa regime will
be liberalized by the end of this year or possibly early
next year. I hereby wish to urge Council members to
encourage the European Commission to expedite its
procedures and thus further strengthen the European
perspective of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress
towards NATO, at its thematic session devoted to the
issue the Council of Ministers discussed the level of
implementation of the plan of action for the
implementation of the Individual Partnership Action
Plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Action Plan is the
most important document for Bosnia's further progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration. The level of Action
Plan implementation, which has exceeded 85 per cent
of the total of 291 activities, further corroborates the
high level of success of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
process of acceding to NATO.

We have also focused on attaining the goals for
Bosnian institutions set by the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council. In that respect, the
Council of Ministers took the initiative to push forward
the constitutional amendment related to the status of
Brcko District, which was subsequently adopted by the
vast majority of the members of the Parliamentarian
Assembly. We have also adopted a strategy to reform
our judiciary system and address war crimes, by which
we have completed the goal related to the
establishment of the rule of law.

In addition, we have issued a decision to establish
the property census, which is a prerequisite for
adopting the law and for the ultimate resolution of the
issue. We are determined to fully attain the said goals
so as to enable the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council to issue a decision in
November to transform the Office of the High
Representative into the Office of the European Union
Special Representative.

Democracy, good governance and the rule of law
cannot continue to develop within Bosnia and
Herzegovina if the fundamental principles of democracy,
good governance and the rule of law are not observed
by the very international representatives who claim to
seek their establishment. The State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entities have the legal and moral
obligations to protect the rights of their citizens as set
forth in their laws, constitutions and human rights
instruments, and to adhere to general principles of
international law and the rule of law. It is now time for
the international community to end any support for
peremptory powers in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
instead to support the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entities in the discharge of their legal and
moral obligations.

The agreements that constitute the Dayton
Accords, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution set forth in annex 4, are the legal
instruments to which the relevant parties are bound as
the framework for enduring peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a fundamental principle of
international law and pursuant to Bosnian domestic
law, these cannot be amended or modified except by
further agreement of the relevant parties. The Security
Council should support the Dayton Accords as the
binding legal framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Attempts by foreign States or international
organizations to impose a system of governance that is
inconsistent with the Dayton Accords through the
exercise of peremptory powers or other methods will
not be legally valid, and such actions would not have
the support of Bosnia and Herzegovina citizens. The
consensus on which the legitimacy of all Governments
ultimately rests must come from within.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully committed
to full cooperation with the Hague Tribunal; hence,
over the past period we have adopted a strategy to
reform the judiciary system and address war-crime-
re1ated matters, as well as a decision to set up a
supervisory authority for monitoring the implementation
of the said strategy. Considering the importance of the
issue of the return of refugees and displaced persons,
we identified and adopted a revised strategy for the
implementation of annex 7, which was subsequently
adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly.

The issues of the global economic crisis and of
mitigating its consequences in Bosnia and Herzegovina
have dominated the past period. The establishment of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council and its
efficient operation have led to a coordinated approach
to the issue, which has resulted in successful
negotiations with the International Monetary Fund.
This example shows that when Bosnia and
Herzegovina speaks with one voice, it is possible to
reach agreement even on the most delicate issues. The
goal of such a package is to preserve macroeconomic
stability in the midterm and ensure further economic
growth.

I take this opportunity to express my concern
over the absence of a regional and European dimension
in resolving this issue, as I am almost certain that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, like any other State acting on
its own, will not be able to address the challenges
presented by the economic crisis. It is for this reason
that I have launched an initiative before the Regional
Cooperation Council secretariat, headquartered in
Sarajevo, to found an investment bank for South-East
Europe. Taking into account the economic challenges
to the region, as well as the European Commission's
announcement that the new strategy for the countries
of South-East Europe will prioritize economic
development and regional cooperation through joint
projects, I believe that this is the right time to launch
such an initiative.

As Council members know, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country that has managed to fulfil

various requirements, implement reforms and address
difficult issues emerging on its European path, with
varying success. I concur that this is the year in which
we will have to face constitutional reform as a new
challenge. It must go hand in hand with realistic goals,
and its ultimate success will require us to ensure
conditions in which civilized dialogue is possible. I
deem of the highest importance the fact that such
reform must be the fruit of internal dialogue and
compromise based on the Dayton Peace Agreement.

The assistance of international institutions in the
form of good advice is certainly more than welcome.
Such assistance will certainly result in achievable
constitutional reform. There are some who feel or hope
that constitutional reform that will come through
pressure or diktat from Washington, DC, or Brussels.
I believe that this approach would not only be a waste
of time, but also lead to instability.

On an earlier occasion, I have had an opportunity
to read the High Representative's report before the
Council (see S/2009/246). Without seeking to qualify
the report in any way, I note that no one is exclusively
guilty or absolutely blameless for what has happened
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, either before or after the
Dayton Accords. Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community must find a way to stop
identifying scapegoats and turn to seeking better
solutions. I am personally of the opinion that not only
is Bosnia and Herzegovina a greater success than is
reflected in the report, but also that there is greater
optimism within the country that will bring us further
success.

