Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his very comprehensive and sobering briefing, as well
as the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.

Portugal naturally aligns itself with the contents of
the statement to be delivered later by the Observer of
the European Union.

Let me first address Syria. As the conflict continues
to spiral out ofcontrol at an intensified pace, so does the
enormous human cost it entails. Last Friday, at an Arria
Formula meeting, Security Council members heard a
chilling account from the Independent Commission of
Inquiry ofthe horrific human tragedy that is taking place
in Syria. The death toll rises every day, and an already
dire humanitarian situation is worsening continuously.
Sectarian tensions are increasing dramatically and
threatening the fabric of the country. Widespread and
systematic gross violations of human rights proceed
unabated and with total impunity.

Let me once again reiterate that this situation is
totally unacceptable and that all violations of human
rights, war crimes and crimes against humanity must be
investigated and that their perpetrators will be brought
to justice.

The shelling by the Syrian armed forces of Turkish
territory has once again demonstrated the serious threats
the Syrian crisis poses to regional peace and security.
Portugal has condemned those actions in unequivocal
terms. Such violations of international law, which
furthermore victimize innocent civilians, are simply
unacceptable. They must cease immediately, and the
Syrian Government must fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all its neighbours, who
already bear the brunt of assisting many thousands of
Syrian refugees.

As I have often stated in the Chamber, there is
no alternative to a political solution in Syria. Further
militarization would lead to no end, except to yet more
human suffering. Even if one side were to eventually
vanquish the other, long-lasting peace in Syria will only
thrive if based on a political agreement that gathers
support from all segments of Syrian society. The intent
to pursue a military option will only deepen sectarian
rifts, radicalize positions and threaten the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria, while eroding the
conditions of sustainable peace and regional stability.

The violence must stop if the necessary political
space for a genuine inclusive and representative
political tradition that meets the legitimate aspirations
of all Syrian regardless of their affiliation religion or
belief is to be created. As we have often repeated, we
stand firmly behind the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and League of
Arab States. Portugal once again calls on the parties
to view the appointment of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as an
opportunity for them to rethink their options, end the
violence and engage seriously in a peaceful political
resolution to the conflict.

But ifthe Joint Special Representative is to succeed,
the Council has to exert united, sustained and effective
pressure on all sides, and on the Syrian authorities in
particular, in the light of their primary responsibilities,
and place itself at a centre of efficient, sustainable and
legitimate action by the international community.

As we continue to strive to bring an end to
the bloodshed in Syria and support the democratic
transitions under way in the Arab world, we must not
lose sight of the Palestinian question, as my German
colleaguejust resolved 4 an issue that remains the core
of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Indeed, no comprehensive
and enduring regional peace in the Middle East will
be possible as long as Palestinians are deprived
of their freedom and sovereign State. That is both
their inalienable right and a matter of justice for the
Palestinian people.

Nevertheless, it seems that the two-State solution,
which had become the stated objective of the parties
themselves, not the international community, is
drifting ever further away. Indeed, Israel's illegal
and intensified settlement activities are eroding the
territorial basis of such an objective - the very land on
which a contiguous and viable independent Palestinian
State is expected to emerge.

Moreover, settlements and unpunished settler
violence, which has spared not even religious sites or
places of worship, evictions of Palestinians from their
homes, the demolition of their property and destruction
of their livelihoods, as we heard from Under-Secretary-
General Feltman, are not only condemnable, but are also
exacerbating tensions and undermining confidence in
a peaceful process and solution, as well as weakening
moderate voices.

The Security Council cannot continue to shy away
from its responsibilities in this context and remain
impassive while the prospects for a Palestinian State
living in peace and security with Israel are rapidly
withering away and long-adopted Security Council
resolutions continue to be systematically ignored.

The Council must urgently renew efforts with a
View to the swift resumption of meaningful direct talks
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the road map and the agreements
previously reached by the parties. Such talks need
to be completed within a reliable time frame, as the
Palestinian people need a political horizon for the
establishment of their State.

Palestinian achievements in preparing for statehood
are also today at risk due to the Palestinian Authority's
fiscal crisis and the insufficient easing of Israeli
restrictions. Portugal welcomes the positive steps Israel
has taken in that regard, which have been alluded to
this morning, but more must be done, as others have
already underlined today.

In the most immediate term, our priorities
should be to ensure that the achievements, for which
the Palestinians have so diligently worked, are not
reversed. I can assure the Israeli Ambassador that
Portuguese taxpayers will carry on, in the framework
of the European Union, to do their share.

However, we cannot ignore that the problem
remains a political one - a continued occupation that
curtails the development of a sustainable Palestinian
economy, thus forcing Palestinians to be donor-
dependent. Palestinians must be able to explore their
resources, including in Area C, without which there can
be no viable Palestinian State.

Portugal fully understands and supports Israel's
legitimate security concerns and recognizes its right to
self-defence, consistent with international law. We once
again vehemently condemn the rocket attacks from
Gaza, which must stop immediately.

The security of Israel remains a key aspect of any
sustainable peaceful settlement. This is a matter to which
we must all - Palestinians, Israelis, their neighbhours
and the international community - seriously commit
in the framework of a comprehensive settlement.

There is only one way to fully ensure Israel's long-
term security, and that is by ending the occupation,
settling all core issues and claims between the parties,
and fully normalizing diplomatic, political and
economic relations between Israel and the Arab and
Muslim world, as foreseen in the Arab Peace Initiative.

In conclusion, the Middle East is living in a
time of change and uncertainty, of opportunity but
also of danger. Israelis and Palestinians must seize
the opportunity to engage diligently and truthfully
with each other in order to bring about a sustainable
and comprehensive peace in the region. There is no
alternative to a political solution, as Under-Secretary-
General Feltman rightly underlined.

