The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations.

First of all, I would like to welcome the
Secretary-General to our meeting and to thank him for
his important statement. For the past several months,
the Secretary-General has made unremitting efforts to
resolve the Darfur issue. I would like to express my
appreciation to him.

The Security Council just unanimously adopted
resolution 1769 (2007) to authorize the deployment of
an African Union/United Nations hybrid operation in
Darfur. The resolution is the product of a consensus
reached through dialogue and consultation by the
parties concerned and a long-awaited result for all
parties.

The Chinese side has always stood for political
settlement of the Darfur issue and is committed to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan and to
the parties' engaging each other through dialogue and
consultation on an equal footing.

Both the African Union and the United Nations
have a constructive role to play in this process.
Meanwhile, the Darfur issue should be addressed in a
comprehensive manner. Maintaining security and
stability, promoting the political process, increasing
humanitarian assistance and focusing on long-term
economic and social development are related aspects,
all of which should be treated on an equal footing. In
our View, positive momentum on the Darfur issue has
been generated in the past several months, providing a
rare opportunity that the international community
should not miss in order to push for a gradual,
appropriate and comprehensive settlement of the issue.

Today's resolution marks a major step forward in
addressing the Darfur issue. That issue cannot be
resolved without the efforts of the Sudanese
Government, whose cooperation is now even more
important for the deployment of the hybrid operation
and for the fulfilment of its mandate. The Sudanese
side has shown flexibility and has taken vigorous
measures in resolving the issue, for which it should
receive full recognition and encouragement from the
international community.

The consensus reached by the United Nations/
African Union/Sudan tripartite dialogue mechanism on
the hybrid operation is the political prerequisite on the
basis of which this resolution is adopted. It is
necessary to continue to attach importance and give
full play to the positive role of this tripartite
mechanism.

Moreover, today's resolution is the result of
endeavours by Security Council members to seek
common ground while setting differences aside and
achieving mutual understanding and accommodation.
The Security Council's speaking with one voice in
authorizing the hybrid operation provides an important
guarantee for the Darfur peacekeeping process.

It should be particularly emphasized that the
purpose of this resolution is to authorize the launch of
the hybrid operation, rather than to exert pressure or
impose sanctions. Throughout the consultations, China
has consistently stated that the resolution should be
simple and clear-cut, focusing on the core purpose of
the Council authorizing deployment of the hybrid
operation. Obviously, the text of the resolution still has
room for further improvement, but the Chinese side
believes that the final version, by and large, reflects
that spirit. It is on this ground that the Chinese side
joined the consensus and voted in favour of the
resolution.

Today's resolution is only the first step towards
full settlement of the Darfur issue. The next key step is
to faithfully implement it. In deploying the hybrid
operation, all parties should strictly abide by the
tripartite consensus and avoid deliberate
misinterpretation of the resolution.

The current positive momentum is the result of
hard work, so all parties concerned should attach high
importance to mutual political trust. As the hybrid
operation is launched, it is still essential to speed up
the implementation of the three-phased plan. As the
only international peacekeeping force in Darfur, the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) is
shouldering daunting tasks and is faced with huge
difficulties. In the near future, the Security Council
should first focus on urging the international
community to provide financial support to AMIS and
fully implement the United Nations light and heavy
support packages aimed at building the capacity of
AMIS so as to lay a solid foundation for deployment of
the hybrid operation.

Peacekeeping deployment is only one aspect of
the settlement of the Darfur issue. The two-track
strategy should continue to be implemented by
accelerating the political process. The fundamental
prerequisite for achieving lasting peace and stability in
Darfur is to encourage all factions in the region to
conclude and implement a comprehensive peace
agreement.

China welcomes the success of the second Tripoli
conference and appreciates and supports the great
efforts made by the two Special Envoys of the African
Union and the United Nations respectively. As a next

step, the international community should take effective
measures to persuade and press the non-signatories to
participate in the political process. Furthermore, it is
broadly agreed that a root cause of the Darfur crisis is
poor development in the region. We need to attach high
importance to rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development in Darfur. The international community
should take a long-term perspective, work out at an
early date a development strategy for Darfur in
consultation with the Government of the Sudan, and
provide more input for economic and social
development in Darfur, so as to fundamentally improve
the lives of the people and uproot the source of
conflict.

The Darfur issue has attracted world attention.
The African Union, the United Nations and other
parties concerned are all helping to resolve this issue.
China sincerely hopes to see an early, fair, equitable
and proper settlement of the issue. We hope that the
resolution adopted today will serve as a new starting
point for enhanced cooperation between the
international community and the Government of the
Sudan and that it will greatly promote the political
process of the comprehensive settlement of the Darfur
issue. The Chinese side will continue to play a
constructive and active part in the process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mrs. Alice Mungwa of the
Permanent Observer Mission of the African Union to
the United Nations.

