Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

The situation in the Sahel region was of great
concern to my delegation even before the impact of the
Libyan crisis last year. We therefore welcome the
initiative of the Secretary-General to dispatch a
mission to the Sahel to assess the impact of the Libyan
crisis and the security situation in the Sahel region.

We also welcome the support that the assessment
mission received from the countries of the region,
particularly the authorities of the five countries visited
and from relevant regional organizations, particularly
the Economic Community of West African States and
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA). We
commend the commitment of the Governments of the
countries affected by the Libyan crisis, which are
already taking steps to address the security and
humanitarian challenges.

The Sahel region has become a corridor in which
illegal activities - including drug trafficking, the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, terrorism
and transnational organized crime - are on the rise,
exacerbating existing socio-economic challenges in a
region in which most countries are listed as least
developed countries. In addition, the Sahel region is
facing extreme drought and flooding as a result of
climate change. For all these reasons, my delegation
believes that the United Nations should support all
efforts to assist the countries in the Sahel that share
these cross-border challenges and seriously consider the
situation in the Sahel, including the recommendations
of the assessment mission.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, Guatemala
is concerned that, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
20 million people in the Sahel require humanitarian
assistance, particularly in Mauritania, Niger, Burkina
Faso and Chad. We believe that early warning systems
to prevent a food and nutrition crisis need to be
strengthened. It is important that all donor countries
maintain their support for humanitarian activities
provided through OCHA, and for the strategy on
preparedness for a food crisis in the Sahel, launched by
the inter-agency standing committee in Dakar on
15 December 2011.

As to the security situation, we are concerned by
the proliferation and illicit trafficking of small arms
and other weapons, drug trafficking, and the expansion
and actions of terrorist groups. Guatemala agrees with
the conclusion of the report (see S/2012/42) that most
countries in the Sahel region cannot address on their
own the threat of transnational organized crime, in
particular the activities of such terrorist groups as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram.

Of course, we support the strengthening of
existing security mechanisms and strategies at the
regional level. What is new here is not the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which was
already taking place in the region, but the type of
weapons that are in circulation now - no longer just
small arms but also heavy weapons such as shoulder-
fired surface-to-air missiles, whose greater destructive
power increases the risk to the entire region. The
weapons reported to be coming out of Libya are, given
the proximity of the borders, circulating throughout the
Sahel region and could easily fall into the hands of the
criminal and terrorist groups operating in the area.

We deem it urgent to effectively implement
Security Council resolution 2017 (2011) and for
UNOWA and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya to continue their communication and cooperation.

We should also continue to support the countries
of the Sahel region in complying with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council aimed at combating
terrorism, in particular resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), and implement the United Nations Global
Counter-terrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006.

In conclusion, the economic crisis, migration,
drug trafficking, arms trafficking, organized crime and
terrorism have been exacerbated by the crisis in Libya
and could take root in the Sahel region, creating a
lethal scenario of insecurity and instability at a time
when the region is facing an economic contraction
brought on by various factors.
We therefore believe that the Security Council
should consider the recommendations of the report of
the assessment mission, especially those identified as

of immediate importance, at the national, regional and
international levels, and thus contribute to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to assist countries of the Sahel region on
security issues.

