Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank High Representative Wolfgang
Petritsch for his presence in the Council today and for
his detailed report and additional comments.

The first part of the report contained in document
S/2000/999, concerning political issues, shows, in our
opinion, that strengthening State institutions apparently
remains an elusive goal. Although some important
progress has been noted, such as, for example, the
establishment of a new Council of Ministers and of
three new ministries, it is disappointing that the reports
we receive consistently indicate procrastination in the
area of decision-making, a lack of commitment on the
part of officials, and the need for the international
community to bring continuous pressure to bear in
order to overcome obstructionism and a lack of
political will on the part of those who focus on ethnic
issues instead of the country's real needs, thus
jeopardizing the effective operation of the institutions.
For that reason, we would like to voice our full support
for Ambassador Petritsch's firm and decisive
management style.

We hope that the working group set up by the
House of Representatives and the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to overcome
difficulties related to the adoption of the electoral law,
thereby enabling the Parliamentary Assembly to adopt
a definitive electoral law as soon as possible. In this
respect, we hope that the forthcoming general
elections, to be held on 11 November, will be the last
to be held under the provisional rules established by
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.

We hope also that the positive trend noted during
the municipal elections on 8 April last will continue in
November. At any rate, during the pre-electoral period
we must not tolerate any incitement to violence by the
political parties or any advocacy of changes in the
structure of the State that are not in keeping with the
Dayton Accords. There must be no tolerance either for
any attacks on freedom ofthe press.

Turning the economy, the report of the High
Representative notes that important measures have
been taken to create a single economic state in order to
promote the private sector and stimulate investment.
We believe that these and other measures designed to
deepen economic reform are indispensable for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's economy to become self-sustaining
and therefore less dependent on external assistance.

As for the return of persons belonging to minority
groups, it is encouraging that as of 31 August 2000
about 29,700 had come back and that today very few
areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina are considered off-
limits for security reasons. In connection with what is
stated by the High Representative in paragraph 46 of
his report, we urge the Government of Croatia to adopt
the necessary measures to streamline procedures
relating to the return and restitution of property in
Croatia.
Finally, we hope that the democratic changes that
have occurred in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will make it possible to restore relations between that
country and Bosnia and Herzegovina and thus enhance
stability in the area. We believe that the summit held
yesterday in Skopje, which was attended by the
President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Vojislav Kostunica, is a step in the right direction.

