Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and the
Polish delegation for convening this important meeting
on threats to peace and security in the Middle East.

I also wish to welcome the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Pompeo, and thank him for his statement,
as well as the State Secretary of the Federal Foreign
Office of Germany. I welcome, as well, Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Executive
Office of the Secretary-General, and thank her for
her briefing.

His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of the
Kingdom of Bahrain has affirmed that security and
stability throughout the world hinge on the free flow
of trade. Security undoubtedly rests on what takes
place in this important region. The challenges that
the region has been encountering are complicated,
deep-rooted and liable to change the region for many
decades to come. It is therefore incumbent upon us,
as the international community, to undertake all the
necessary efforts to guarantee stability in the region,
and that all countries should be committed to the
principles of good neighbourliness, mutual respect and
the non-intervention in the internal affairs of others. In
doing so, we will avoid long-term destabilization in that
part of the world.

The Kingdom of Bahrain is convinced that the
achievement of lasting security, peace and development
in the region is a shared responsibility and that it is
necessary for us to agree on shared mechanisms
that ensure collective security in the Middle East, in
cooperation with allied States. That is key to achieving
peace and security for States and peoples alike. We
must also reject all those who attempt to destabilize this
strategic region, which is already riddled with various
threats, foremost of which is terrorism.

One of the most significant challenges facing our
region is the disastrous consequences and damages
resulting from terrorism. That is a noxious scourge that
claims lives, destroys infrastructure and imperils the
stability and security of States. It prompts us to reiterate
our firm condemnation of terrorism in all its forms,
regardless of the perpetrators, places or reasons. We
also reaffirm the need to make joint efforts to counter
the extremist thinking of terrorist groups and dry up
their sources of financing.

In that regard, Iwish to recallthe eleventh meeting of
the Counter Da'esh Finance Group Meeting, which was
held in Bahrain from 16 to 17 April. The international
efforts that have been undertaken to assiduously
counter Da'esh were under discussion during the
event. The potential of Da'esh to perpetrate attacks has
been significantly downgraded in many countries, as
well as diminishing its capacity to finance and wage
attacks. Such progress requires us to persevere in our
efforts to ensure that we defeat Da'esh and similar
terrorist groups, completely eradicate them and end
their channels of financing. The transfer of funds to
those terrorist groups outside of the global monetary
system represents one of the greatest challenges we
face, as Da'esh, Hizbullah and Al-Qaida illegally use
such funds.

The Kingdom ofBahrain reaffirms its firm position
regarding the Palestinian question and the right of the
Palestinian people to establish their independent State,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, on the basis of the two-State solution, in
accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. Together with
the United States of America, we held a meeting
from 25 to 26 June to address the need to facilitate a
promising economic future for the Palestinian people.
During that meeting, there was an exchange of ideas
on laying the foundation for a prosperous future for the
brotherly Palestinian people.

The Iran-backed coup militias continue to place
obstacles before the Government of Yemen and threaten
the security of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. In
that regard, we condemn the terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Saudi Shaybah oilfield, which was targeted
by the Houthi militias in a cowardly terrorist act that
constitutes a destabilizing and significant threat against
the oil reserves of the whole world. We support and
extend our solidarity to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in the measures that it has been taking to defend its
security and interests.

As part of our policy and initiatives, based on
effective participation to achieve security and peace
through cooperation with our international partners,
allies and brethren, we held an important military
meeting at the international level, on 31 July, regarding
the situation prevailing in the region, as well as the
ways to step up cooperation and coordination to tackle
repeated acts of aggression and the practices that we
reject that seek to subvert maritime security in Arab
Gulf waters and the Strait of Hormuz, and jeopardize
stability in the region and the world.

The Kingdom of Bahrain will host a meeting on
maritime and air security later this year, in conjunction
with the United States of America and Poland. That
initiative is in line with the role the Kingdom of
Bahrain plays in contributing to establishing security
and stability within the region, as well as to countering
the threats faced by the region as a result of Iranian
practices, which represent a grave danger to maritime
and air routes.

To conclude, we reaffirm that achieving
international peace and security requires that we all
work hand in hand and forge innovative mechanisms to
tackle challenges. We will continue to work alongside
the international community to settle conflicts in a
peaceful manner and establish peace and security in the
region and the world.

