Judge Pocar: I am honoured to present to the
Security Council the eighth report of the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1534
(2004). In my address to you today, I will also offer an
assessment of the work that remains to be completed in
light of ongoing challenges to the finalization of the
Tribunal's historic mandate and of developments since
the submission of the report.

Before reviewing the Tribunal's activities during
the past six months, allow me to personally thank you,
Mr. President, for the unwavering support shown by
your country and mine, Italy, to the important work of
the International Tribunal. Italy's support, as well as
that of the other members of the Security Council, is
critical to ensuring the lasting legacy of the Tribunal's
unique achievements.
The Tribunal will leave an incredibly rich and
important legacy to current and future international
criminal jurisdictions in substantive, procedural and
institutional terms. Many parts of the report offer
perfect examples of those realizations.

The first accomplishment I wish to highlight is
the Tribunal's unparalleled efficiency in the conduct of
international criminal proceedings. Out of the 161
accused indicted by the Tribunal, trial and appeal
proceedings against 111 accused have been completed.
Of the 50 accused whose cases remain to be completed,
four remain at large, eight accused have pending
appeals, 27 have commenced trial and 11 are currently
in the pre-trial stage. The dramatic increase shown in
those figures, particularly in recent years, clearly
surpasses any reasonable expectation.

During the reporting period, the three Trial
Chambers continued to operate at record capacity,
conducting additional hearings during the three-week
summer recess. Taking advantage of the fact that one
of those trials has entered into the phase of judgment
drafting and does not therefore necessitate a
courtroom, the International Tribunal was able to start
the trial of Vojislav Seselj on 7 November 2007,

bringing to eight the number of cases simultaneously
handled in trial phase. That was made possible because
all the members of the trial bench in that case are
currently sitting in two trials.

The Appeals Chamber has also increased its
productivity in relation to both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
For 2007, it has so far rendered 235 written decisions
and 15 judgments, including four review or referral
appeals and, since the submission of my written report,
two additional ICTR judgments on the merits. That
achievement is attributable to the implementation of
the various measures adopted to speed up trial and
appellate proceedings.

In addition to those measures, which are detailed
in the report, we have continued to explore new ways
to further streamline trial and appeals procedures. At
the most recent ordinary plenary session of 12 July
2007, two other rule amendments were adopted,
providing for greater use of testimony by Video link
and specifying timelines for the filing of pre-trial
motions for unrepresented accused.

To summarize, at this time, there remain only 11
accused in seven cases awaiting trial before the
Tribunal. That increase of two accused awaiting trial
since the last report is attributable to the arrest of two
fugitives, Tolimir and Djordjevic. That increase has
required the Tribunal to adjust its forecast. It is
expected that, with the exception of the two recent
arrivals, the Tribunal will be able to complete all of its
trials, including the Lukic & Lnkic case, which was not
referred to Bosnia, by the end of 2009. The trials of the
two recent arrivals are estimated to finish in early
2010, but I wish to stress that all appeals can still be
concluded within 2011. I must stress that such minor
adjustments are attributable to the new late arrivals and
that, as I indicated, the efficiency of the Tribunal has in
fact increased.

Let me emphasize that none of the achievements
that I have just mentioned could have been
accomplished without the full dedication of all of our
judges and staff. Their longstanding experience and
exceptional qualifications are yet another contribution
the International Tribunal will continue to make in the
field of international criminal justice long after we
close our doors. The Tribunal has in fact set the
example for other international criminal jurisdictions,
elaborating and developing, for instance, rules that
ensure the fair and expeditious conduct of international
criminal proceedings. The Tribunal has also lent
concrete support to other international criminal
jurisdictions through loans and transfers of staff and
through the conduct of training workshops.

In that regard, I cannot sufficiently underscore
the importance of retaining our experienced judges in
order to meet completion strategy goals. Many of the
International Tribunal's judges are currently serving
their second term, while a few are in their third term. It
is crucial that the conditions of service of judges be
correctly implemented as far as pensions are
concerned. In that regard, I must convey the judges"
disappointment with the delays suffered in the
commissioning of the study on options for designing
pension schemes for judges of the Tribunal. The longer
it takes for that question to be favourably resolved by
Member States, the greater the risk of losing some of
the most experienced judges, who will feel compelled
to leave the Tribunal to secure pension entitlements in
their national jurisdictions. Needless to say, such
departures would seriously affect the timely and
efficient completion of the Tribunal's work.

I must also caution that, during the reporting
period, the number of staff leaving the Tribunal for
more secure employment with other institutions has
increased. While the Tribunal has managed to
minimize delays in recruitment by using the roster
system, some delays are inevitable and will probably
increase. That will undoubtedly have a detrimental
impact on the expeditious completion of the Tribunal's
mandate. I would therefore urge the Security Council
and Member States to support the Tribunal in its efforts
to offer sufficient incentives to guarantee, as much as
possible, that its best staff will remain until the work of
the Tribunal is completed.

Finally, I want to stress the importance of the
work done by our ad litem judges. Of our 12 ad litem
Judges, two are serving both as ad litem judge on one
trial and reserve on an additional trial, while two ad
litem judges are serving on two trials. Three ad litem
judges have begun hearing an additional trial while
drafting the judgment in another case, thus serving on
two and, in one instance, even three cases
simultaneously and full time. In other words, all 12 ad
litem judges have been willing to take on an onerous
workload to ensure the expeditious completion of the
Tribunal's mandate.

Let me turn now to our partnership with domestic
courts. As members of the Council well know, the
referral of intermediate and lower-ranking accused to
competent national jurisdictions, which is provided for
under rule 11 bis, was developed in the context of the
completion strategy. However, the success of the
referral procedure also stands to be a key indicator of
our commitment to sharing know-how with domestic
courts, in particular in the former Yugoslavia, along
with our involvement in capacity-building and outreach
activities in the region.

Of the cases referred by the International
Tribunal, the Special War Crimes Chamber of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has completed two trials in the
Stankovic and Jankovic cases, three trials are ongoing
and one case is at the pre-trial stage. The Tribunal is
satisfied that the two completed trials respected
international norms of due process, as recognized by
reports prepared by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and by human rights
organizations. I must, however, emphasize that, in
order for our completion strategy to succeed and for
local judiciaries to carry on the legacy of the
International Tribunal, it is Vital that the international
community maintain its support for capacity-building
of judicial institutions in the region. A lot of work
remains to be done if those courts are to successfully
continue the mission of the Tribunal in the future. By
way of illustration, there is a desperate need to ensure
adequate detention facilities for remand and convicted
accused. Much also remains to be done in the training
of police and prison officers on due process and human
rights standards. Improvements in the quality of
cooperation between States of the region in the
investigation and prosecution of alleged war criminals
are also needed.

The Tribunal recently took the initiative to
strengthen cooperation and facilitate the work of our
domestic counterparts, especially in the former
Yugoslavia, through the adoption of an amendment to
rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence that
allows judicial authorities in other jurisdictions or
parties duly authorized by an appropriate judicial
authority to petition the Tribunal directly for access to
confidential material. The timeliness of that
amendment was evidenced by the fact that, shortly
after its adoption, judicial authorities in Bosnia quickly
petitioned the International Tribunal for such access,
thereby further reinforcing our existing partnership.

Turning to the question of State cooperation, I
must report that there has been some progress in that
area. It is undeniable that the fact that two fugitives,
Tolimir and Bordevic', were recently arrested and
transferred to the International Tribunal for trial is a
very encouraging development. However, I must still
regretfully note the failure to secure the arrest and
transfer of the four remaining high-level fugitives,
namely, Karadiic', Mladie, Zuplijanin, and Hadzie. At
this point the necessity of full cooperation by States
has reached a critical stage. I must therefore restate
that the Tribunal should not close its doors before those
fugitives are arrested and tried. I also reiterate my call
to all States to do all within their power to ensure the
arrest of those fugitives immediately.

With respect to the question of the International
Tribunal's residual mechanisms that will have to
remain in place after all trials and appeals on the
International Tribunal's docket are completed, let me
give the Council the following update.

Two joint reports were submitted by the Tribunal
and the ICTR, in December 2006 and April 2007,
respectively. After receiving comments from Member
States, we submitted a final report to the Office of
Legal Affairs in September 2007, and are pursuing our
work with the Security Council Working Group on the
International Tribunals on that matter.

Finally, I wish to underscore that the International
Tribunal's commitment to meeting completion strategy
deadlines has remained steadfast. In presenting the
report to the Council today, I have noted some of the
results achieved in terms of efficiency, which has not
come at the expense of upholding fundamental due
process standards. The slippage in previously projected
completion dates has occurred for reasons out of our
control, that is, the late arrest of the two fugitives
recently transferred to the Tribunal at a time when their
case could no longer be joined with other pending
proceedings. One year ago, I urged the Security
Council to take action to arrest immediately the
remaining fugitives and warned that any delays in that
regard would seriously undermine the Tribunal's
ability to meet projected completion strategy dates.
The failure to arrest the remaining four fugitives will
inevitably lead to further delays. If those fugitives are
arrested now, some, but not all of them, may be eligible
for joinder with pending proceedings. However, any
delays in their arrest will necessarily result in separate

trials, which will cause additional adjustments to the
currently projected completion strategy deadlines.

I should add that we have already considered the
conditions that would allow us to limit, to the greatest
extent possible, the impact of late arrests on projected
deadlines and to maintain the same level of
productivity during most of 2008 and 2009. One such
condition has actually already been met. One of the
ongoing trials will enter the judgement-drafting phase
by the end of January 2008, earlier than expected,
thereby creating courtroom availability. Two more
cases currently at trial will successively move to the
drafting phase, enabling us to start an additional trial in
February or March 2008. We currently have the
necessary staffing resources to support such a level of
trial activity, including the additional trial. But, as far
as judges are concerned, one permanent judge, who
expects to deliver a judgement in December of this
year, would be available to start a new case and could
finalize the pre-trial phase of that case by early 2008.
At that point two solutions could be envisaged with
respect to ad litem judges, both of which would require
the Council's intervention.

On one hand, the statutory three-year term of
current ad litem judges who would accept to sit in a
new trial could be extended for the time required to
complete it. Another option would be to appoint
additional ad litem judges, thereby temporarily
increasing the number of ad litem judges above 12. The
number of ad litem judges would return to 12, as
provided under the Statute, as soon as the first multi-
accused trial is completed, which is foreseen for
September 2008. Should the Security Council decide to
consider either of those two options, I would be able to
provide a chart reflecting their impact on the schedule
of trials.

In conclusion, I must emphasize that the success
of the Tribunal's legacy cannot be measured only by
the judgements it has issued or by the number of trials
and appeals completed. Obviously, the real measure of
its success lies in the invaluable precedent it has set for
the enforcement of international humanitarian law and
the contribution it has made to the restoration of peace
and stability in the former Yugoslavia. Indeed, after
having developed and expanded international
humanitarian law, it was essential for the international
community to see those norms enforced and to affirm
that those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law would not enjoy
impunity.

The Tribunal has clearly demonstrated that
international justice can be efficient without sacrificing
due process standards. In the last two years, we have
constantly developed creative approaches that have
proved particularly effective in meeting those goals, as
well as completion strategy objectives. It is now for the
Council to renew its support for the Tribunal's mission
and to the successful completion of its work.

I thank the Council for the attention and the time
that it has given to me today.

