The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. Madeleine Korbel
Albright, Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, for her service as President
of the Security Council for the month of February 1996. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Albright for
the great diplomatic skill with which she conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Burundi (S/1996/116)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Burundi, the Congo, Norway, Rwanda and Tunisia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terence
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Abibi
(Congo), Mr. Aass (Norway), Mr. Bakuramutsa
(Rwanda) and Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi,
document S/ 1996/ l 16.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1996/ 162, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1996/ l 10
and S/l996/l2l, letters dated 14 and 19 February 1996
respectively from the Permanent Representative of
Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council; and S/ 1996/ 146, letter dated
23 February 1996 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Zaire to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Burundi, on
whom I now call.


