Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
instability in the Middle East and North Africa over the
past four years is at the centre of Belgium's concerns.
I thank the Russian Federation for having taken the
initiative of convening this debate, which complements
our discussions yesterday when we met in the meeting
on the coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and violent extremism at the initiative of
the United States.

As again demonstrated in the general debate of the
General Assembly, we are united in our determination
to eradicate terrorism. The Security Council has
adopted resolutions listing many terrorist organizations,
including ISIL and Al-Qaida, and calling on all the
States Members of the United Nations to shoulder
their responsibilities in the face of the threat. We must
continue with our actions to eradicate this scourge by
taking measures in each of our countries, in particular
to dry up the financing in order to contain the flow
of foreign combatants who join the ranks of terrorist
organizations. Achieving those goals requires stepped
up cooperation among States in all aspects of the
counter-terrorism struggle.

In Syria and Iraq, the coalition against ISIL, which
is supported by some 70 countries, is fighting with
resolve against ISIL. Its work should be completed
coherently and in a coordinated fashion through the
individual action of all Members of the United Nations
by clearly and exclusively targeting recognized terrorist
groups.

We will not be able to defeat the terrorist threat if
the legitimate concerns of the populations are not taken
into account and if human rights, the responsibility for
which rests primarily with States, are not respected.
The use of inhumane weapons, such as barrel bombs,
and responding with violent outbursts to demands for
democracy, as in Syria, fuel the recruitment of terrorist
organizations that present themselves as alternatives
to dictatorship. We must also obviously support
neighbouring countries, which have demonstrated an
unrivalled generosity by welcoming the populations
who fled terrorism, war and repression.

In Syria, we must urgently work towards an
inclusive political transition. Belgium supports the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Staffan de Mistura. I also call on all countries
that have influence over the actors in Syria to encourage
them to urgently come to the table so that the language
of weapons finally ceases. We know that there must
be negotiations with the regime, as well as with the
moderate opposition forces, but the transition has to
occur in parallel with military action against Daesh.

In Iraq, the Government of Prime Minister Al
Abadi has demonstrated its determination to move
towards a more inclusive policy. We must continue to
support it so that its efforts are reinforced and sped up.

The situation in Libya remains a factor of instability
for North Africa and the Sahelian region. Terrorist
movements, some ofwhich claim to be the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, are profiting from the political
vacuum. Neighbouring Tunisia, whose evolution is
remarkable, has become weaker. The Libyan parties
concerned must urgently engage in an inclusive
political process to form a transition Government, and
I welcome the tireless efforts of Special Representative
Bernadino Leon in that regard.

In Yemen, where the process of transition has been
compromised by negative actors, the humanitarian
situation is deteriorating perilously. There must be a
political process without delay to end the suffering of
the population.

Finally, we must relaunch a credible peace process
aimed at establishing a Palestinian State side by side
with the State of Israel with respect for the concerns
of peace, sovereignty and security of their respective
populations. The recent growth of tension in Jerusalem
underlines that urgency.

Once again, Mr. President, I thank you for
organizing this debate and hope that we will progress
both in waging an effective militarily fight against
Daesh, and in finding a political solution in the various
countries Ijust mentioned.

