Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We once again welcome Mr. Jim Kubis, whom we
thank for introducing the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/721). We also welcome the statement made by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin. I have five brief comments
to make.

First, on the electoral process, we welcome the
fact that a foundation has been laid for credible
presidential and provincial council elections to take
place - in other words, elections that could be accepted
by everyone. Preparations are well under way with the
electoral framework in place, a final list of presidential
candidates and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission that has been established. At the same
time, we must continue to insist that the process be fair
and inclusive. In that regard, it is striking that there
are quite a number of women candidates for provincial
council seats and that three of the presidential tickets
include women as candidates for the vice-presidency.
The measures undertaken by the Independent Election
Commission have certainly had an impact in driving the
registration of women forward. Successful elections are
an important step towards the country's future and its
sustainability; however, we must also ensure security.

Secondly, as Mr. Kubis reminds us, it is
disheartening that terrorism, in its various forms and
spheres, is continuing to spread and even worsening in
some regions. The number of terrorist acts and victims
thereof has contiuned to increase, with their attendant
tragic toll in death and injury. The measures employed
are increasingly grotesque and nobody, not even United
Nations officials and humanitarian workers, is safe from
the danger of being afflicted by an act of terrorism. As
an illustration of that, we deplore the recent terrorist

attacks in Uruzgan and Faryab provinces carried out at
the end of November.

I mention that because we cannot leave behind a
security vacuum when international forces withdraw at
the end of 2014. It is imperative that the withdrawal
be offset by strengthening the capacities of Afghan
security forces so that they can be duly prepared to
meet the challenges and looming threats. That also
means dispelling the current uncertainty that prevails
in Afghanistan. A specific example is the approval
by the consultative loya jirga of the bilateral security
agreement with the United States. It is now important
that the agreement be concluded, so that NATO can
also move forward to define its mission proposal, which
the Security Council will have to examine.

Thirdly, we are concerned about the lack of progress
in the peace process over recent months. We know
from our own experience that the process is lengthy
and arduous: in the case of Guatemala, it took several
decades before a peace was signed. We therefore stress
the importance of continuing to move towards the goal
of stability and national reconciliation. We support the
efforts of the head of the High Peace Council towards a
national Afghan process led by Afghans. On the other
hand, we are encouraged by the heightened dialogue
between Afghanistan and Pakistan on peace and
stability underpinned by economic cooperation.

Fourthly, the Tokyo commitments acknowledge
the importance of safeguarding and strengthening the
progress made in the area of human rights over the
past decade so as to ensure the future development of
Afghanistan. The protection of the rights of women and
children should continue to be a priority. When it comes
to civilian casualties, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is providing
valuable cooperation through verification activities
and by promoting international humanitarian law and
respect for human rights, carefully following up on real
incidents of civil casualties.

Finally, I should like to refer to the upcoming
renewal of UNAMA's mandate. Guatemala will
continue to support a solid United Nations presence in
order to ensure that Afghanistan, with the support of
the international community, can appropriately face
2014 and beyond. In that regard, we believe it is vital
for the next Government to be able to rely on stability,
continuity and predictability in order to ensure an
orderly transition. To that end, it is advisable to extend
UNAMA's mandate for a further 12 months - without
any major changes to its mandate and while continuing
the same basic activities. Moreover, UNAMA has to be
given adequate resources to enable it to fully fulfil its
mandate.

