Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): At your request,
Mr. President, I shall go straight to the subject without the
usual complimentary remarks to Vice-President Gore, to
you, Sir, and to Ambassador Greenstock, which have been
well expressed by previous speakers with which my
delegation associates itself.

We are all too familiar with the AIDS statistics
affecting Africa. Many of these compelling facts have been
cited and highlighted by virtually all of the distinguished
speakers during this morning's session. I will therefore not
repeat them here. Suffice to say the AIDS epidemic in
Africa is indeed a pandemic affecting millions of people,
many of whom have succumbed to this terrible disease and
many still living but barely surviving. Many more will be
infected in the years to come until and unless humanity
finds a way to stop the spread of the pandemic once and
for all.

Clearly, the impact of AIDS on Africa has been
particularly debilitating. In the words of the Secretary-
General,

"the AIDS pandemic - unexpected, unexplained,
unspeakably cruel - presents us, especially Africa,
with a tragedy we can barely comprehend, let alone
manage".

Its effects are of tragic proportions, destroying the very
fabric of society. Over the last two decades, since it first
reared its head, it has become not just a public health
problem, but a problem with socio-economic and,
increasingly, security dimensions. It presents an enormous
challenge to African Governments in their developmental
efforts as the best of national planning goes awry in the
face of the devastating effects of the disease, especially
when valuable human capital trained at great cost falls
Victim to the disease.

It is obvious that the AIDS issue is no longer an
essentially African problem. It has become a global
problem affecting many regions of the world, including
my own region of Asia, where it is also becoming an
issue of major concern. Indeed, very few regions have
been spared its pernicious effects, although the developing
countries bear the greatest burden on account of their lack
of capacity to contain the HIV/AIDS virus. Therefore, it
is fitting and proper that the fight against AIDS be
mounted on a global scale, as that is the only way the
scourge could conceivably be contained and eventually
stamped out. For this purpose, there is a need to launch
a concerted and Vigorous global campaign against
HIV/AIDS involving a multipronged approach, involving
publicity to sensitize both Governments and publics, care
and education at every level of society, policy
coordination within and between Governments, medical
research, and greater involvement of civil society and the
private sector.

In this regard, the first ever meeting on international
partnerships against HIV/AIDS in Africa, held at the
United Nations Headquarters in New York on 6
December 1999, was welcome and timely. In his address
during that meeting Secretary-General Kofi Annan, inter
alia, underscored a number of priority objectives, namely,
to break the conspiracy of silence at every level, to meet
the needs of those already infected and their families, to
make effective treatment available at affordable prices to
Africans, to speed up the work of developing a vaccine
and to use all available means to halt the spread of the disease.

The meeting on international partnerships was the
first major step in the right direction in galvanizing and
coordinating global action towards addressing this scourge
of our generation. It was an action-oriented meeting. The
United Nations and other agencies involved, namely the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS

 

(UNAIDS) and its cosponsors, must be commended for this
initiative in focusing on the impact of AIDS in Africa. We
wished this meeting could have been organized much
earlier so that the AIDS issue in Africa could have been
addressed much sooner, but late is better than never. There
should be concrete follow-up actions in the coming months,
and in this regard my delegation looks forward to an agreed
plan of action expected to be finalized in May this year.

In our efforts to galvanizing global action to combat
the HIV/AIDS Virus worldwide, beginning with Africa as
being the most seriously affected region, we should not lose
sight of the fact that while the virus knows no boundaries
and attacks indiscriminately, it is the poorer developing
countries that are most traumatized by the disease.
Therefore there is a need for the wealthier developed
countries - out of enlightened self-interest, if not pure
altruism - to make available more resources to ameliorate
the effects of the disease in the developing countries,
particularly the affected African countries.

Many of the African countries, burdened with
crippling debts, simply do not have the resources to carry
out effective prevention programmes or to provide
treatment to their people infected by HIV, as the drugs
necessary for the treatment are exorbitantly expensive. This
is where developed countries can and should play a major
and constructive role. They can, through their economic aid
programmes, make available the necessary drugs to African
countries. More importantly, they should pressure their
pharmaceutical companies to reduce the prices of these
drugs or allow compulsory licensing of life-saving drugs.

Indeed, at the International Congress on AIDS in the
Asia-Pacific region held recently in Kuala Lumpur, the
Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad, drew
attention to the fact that compulsory licensing was allowed
under the World Trade Organization but that, regrettably,
certain countries had aligned themselves with the giant
pharmaceutical companies, thereby denying developing
countries the right to produce cheaper drugs to save the
lives of their people. While it is true that pharmaceutical
companies have made heavy investments in research, they
should not try to recoup their costs and reap profits at the
expense of the sufferings of the poor. As Prime Minister
Mahathir said, it is regrettable that profit is taking precedent
over people's lives. He felt that the developed countries,
with their unprecedented wealth, could do more to reduce
the burden of the poor countries in this regard.

We must not only do more in addressing the AIDS
epidemic; we must do it better. The United Nations system,
with its global mission of protecting and promoting
human rights, peace and security, is uniquely placed to
provide assistance on very often difficult policy matters
relating to AIDS. The role of the United Nations in
combating AIDS is particularly pertinent, for, after all,
two of the most fundamental of human rights are the right
to life and health.

It is regrettable that when the world first learned
about HIV/AIDS infections, we underestimated the
breadth of the deadly path it would cut through the world.
Even as we are gradually coming to grips with it, we are
still underestimating the impact of the epidemic. And,
unfortunately, we are also underestimating our ability or
capacity to stop it - or at least to slow it down, as
evidenced by some of the success stories we have heard
this morning, particularly regarding Uganda. We look
forward to hearing further success stories in the coming
months and years.
In Africa, comparisons with the medieval bubonic
plague are not misplaced. To prevent an even greater
catastrophe, we need to work together - Governments,
businesses, universities, non-governmental organizations,
religious organizations and the media - to do more, to
do it better and to do it now. Yes, new resources will be
required. But the cost of action will certainly be less than
the cost of inaction. In this regard, my delegation
commends the important package of initiatives that the
United States intends to take, as announced by Vice-
President Gore in his statement this morning.

We welcome these initiatives as a manifestation of
enlightened leadership on the part of the most influential
member of the international community. We trust these
initiatives will be vigorously pursued and emulated by
other developed countries that have not yet done so.
Indeed, nothing could be more appropriate and more
welcome than for the developed countries, led by the
United States, to launch a kind of Marshall Plan for
Africa to assist the continent in combating this scourge.

I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
organizing this meeting of the Council on the impact of
AIDS in Africa and its consequences for regional peace
and security, which has dramatized the concerns of the
international community on this important subject. It is a
timely wake-up call for the international community and
reinforces the efforts of the General Assembly and other
organs of the United Nations, as well as that of the
Secretary-General.

 

