Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, the
Permanent Representative of the People's Republic of
China, for having convened this meeting. I wish you
every success in your work.

With regard to the work and preparations on
today's resolution 2366 (2017), I would like to express
our particular gratitude to the Government of the
United Kingdom and to Ambassador Matthew Rycroft
and the diplomats at the Permanent Mission, as well
as especially to Ms. Catherine Carr for her availability
and role as penholder on the resolution.

I am very moved in thanking all of the members of
the Security Council for adopting this new resolution.
The Council has just adopted its third resolution in
support of peace in Colombia. We are grateful to the
members of the Council for remaining united on this
matter and for their ongoing dialogue over the past year
and a half. The Council's visit to Columbia last May
allowed members to better understand the reality of
Colombia, the strength of our institutions, our desire
for peace and reintegration as well as the challenges
we have faced in the months of implementing the
Agreement. That understanding is fundamental to
maintaining support for the steps that Colombia is
continuing to take in order to consolidate peace and
build a prosperous, modern society throughout all
regions of the country, especially in the countryside,
which is our main challenge.

Fostering political participation, greater equity
and improved justice will be fundamental to become
the country that we want to be - one of opportunities,
growth and education, but above all a tolerant and
reconciled country. That vision is one of a nation that
seeks to overcome the dynamics of the conflict and
violence and that has tirelessly for decades sought
coexistence and peace. The participation of the Council
has between very important in strengthening the
building oftrust between the two parties that negotiated
the peace. Likewise, the support of the international
community in the process has made it possible to
maintain the determination to overcome difficult
moments. As this resolution is adopted, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) have handed over their individual
weapons - a process guaranteed by the first United
Nations special Mission. The members of the FARC
must now turn over the remaining weapons in their
cashes, which the United Nations has been receiving.
The process should come to a conclusion in two months.

The second special political Mission, which begins
when the first one ends, will have a specific mandate to
verify the actions we will be taking in implementation
of the agreements related to political, economic and
social reintegration, security and protection guarantees.
This peace process has been built by Colombians for
Colombians. It should serve as a reason for all of us to
hope in a better future. Nevertheless, as in any robust
democracy, a lively debate is taking place. But, little by
little, people are beginning to see the benefits of peace
and are willing to give it a chance. The dividends of
peace are especially being felt in the countryside and
rural areas, where live millions of Colombians suffered
the consequences of the conflict much more than we
who live in the cities.

This peace and reconciliation process has had
unique characteristics, which we know the world
is watching as a model and which could be used as
lessons learned. Our process - according not to us,
but to experts on peace agreements - has been the
first in the world in which victims participated in
negotiations and were at the centre of the process.
The armed forces had direct participation and where
present during the negotiations, contributing their
knowledge and vision of the Agreement, especially
with regard to the ceasefire and the laying down of
weapons. More than 70 per cent of the Peace Agreement
includes measures that will mean social and economic
transformations for Columbia. It has been crucial to
ensure the strengthening of institutions and legislative
development for sustainable implementation over time.
Lastly, the determination of the parties and the support
of the international community made it possible to
overcome challenges at critical moments.

Once again, we thank the Governments of Norway
and Cuba, as guarantor countries, as well as Chile and
Venezuela as accompanying countries of the process.
We are grateful to all of the members of the Security
Council, to the Secretary-General for his interest and
commitment and to the members of the special Mission
in Columbia, in particular Mr. Jean Arnault. Against
that backdrop, I would like to reiterate to the Security
Council and to the United Nations the unwavering
commitment of my Government to peace and to
implementing all aspects of the Agreement. In this the
final year of the current Government, we will not rest in
implementing the Agreement. We trust that Colombia's
commitment to the Organization and our society will
continue under future Governments.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
determination to build a society that allows us to
dream and live in a Colombia that is at peace and
more equitable.

The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
