Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me in my turn to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura for the clarity and concision of his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan. I take this opportunity to
praise the courage, commitment and professionalism of
Mr. De Mistura and his team in discharging the
mandate entrusted to them by the Security Council.

I should also like to extend my condolences on
the death of Ambassador Holbrooke, who strove to
promote reconciliation and peace in Afghanistan.

Having listened to Mr. De Mistura's statement,
my delegation notes an overall positive evolution in the
situation in Afghanistan, which has been marked since
the London and Kabul Conferences by some progress
at the institutional and political levels, judging by the
satisfactory conduct of the recent legislative elections
and the national reconciliation process in a very
difficult security context.

My delegation wishes to discuss in particular the
following two points: progress made and the
persistence of some challenges that contrast with the
achievements made in the transition process.

With regard to progress, my delegation welcomes
the outstanding work done by the Afghan electoral
institutions to ensure the satisfactory organization of
elections to the Lower House of the National
Assembly. Despite certain shortcomings, the elections
demonstrated the capacity of the Afghan people to
assume control of their own destiny and the importance
they attach to the institutional and democratic
development of their country in a peaceful and united
environment. The new Parliament must now begin its
work to confirm its momentum towards democracy,
which is a prerequisite for peace and stability in the
country.

Such progress should not make us forget the
scope of the challenges ahead. The security situation
remains a source of concern, given the numerous
ongoing terrorist acts affecting the daily lives of
Afghan civilians, humanitarian workers and United
Nations personnel. Rampant corruption also persists,
fuelled by drug trafficking and impunity. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to do its utmost to
effectively combat these phenomena, which constitute
a real threat to the country's peace and stability. Such
action would undoubtedly contribute to creating a
climate of trust between the Government and the
people of Afghanistan, on the one hand, and the
international community, on the other.

Regional cooperation is an important link in the
political, security and economic development process
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we welcome closer
diplomatic and trade ties between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, especially Pakistan and Tajikistan. Such
cooperation can also be promoted in the fight against
drugs by improving law enforcement.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its contribution to the effort to stabilize Afghanistan.

I wish to add my voice, Madame President, to the
tribute you paid to our colleagues who are leaving the
Security Council. We have appreciated all their efforts
and contributions to the Council's debates.

