Ms. Kawaguchi (Japan): At the outset, Sir, I
wish to say how pleased I am to participate in this
Council meeting today held under your presidency. I
am privileged and truly grateful for the opportunity
afforded me to express my Government's position on
the issue of small arms and light weapons. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Mr. Nobuyasu Abe,
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, for
his comprehensive introduction of the Secretary-
General's report. This report, which effectively
identified both the progress made in the area of small
arms over a period of slightly more than a year and the
challenges to be addressed in the future, will serve as a
valuable guidepost for our future work.

The question of small arms and light weapons is a
multidisciplinary issue in the sense that the widespread
use of small arms not only results in a large number of
casualties but also has a socio-economic dimension,
insofar as it gives rise to other issues such as child
soldiers and the disruption of recovery and
development in post-conflict situations. In other words,
this is an important area where the nexus of peace and
development - which is the key underlying notion of
the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) - shows itself.
That is why Japan has been attaching great importance
to this issue. The General Assembly's annual
resolutions on small arms and light weapons provide
pragmatic prescriptions through which the international
community seeks to solve the problems, and as a
sponsor, along with Colombia and South Africa, we
think it significant that the resolutions were adopted by
consensus. The United Nations Panel of Governmental
Experts on Small Arms and the Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms, both chaired by
Ambassador Mitsuro Donowaki, are another example
of Japan's contributions to efforts in this area.

Let me focus on a few points that my
Government considers to be important in addressing
the issue of small arms and light weapons. I believe
that they are closely related to the important elements
in the report of the Secretary-General.

The guiding light in the United Nations process
to tackle the small arms issue comes from the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted in 2001. In order
to help implement the Programme of Action, we have
taken a number of actions, including the sponsoring of
seminars and workshops in various places in regions
such as Tokyo, Bali, Kazakhstan and Fiji. Another
workshop is being planned for April of this year by
Japan, China, Switzerland and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia
and the Pacific as a regional initiative, by inviting
countries from the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and Central Asia in order to support
their national implementation of the Programme of
Action.

Marking and tracing illicit small arms and light
weapons is one of the most important tasks set out in
the Programme of Action. As the Secretary-General's
report points out, the Open-ended Working Group
established by the General Assembly has made some
progress, and Japan has made a number of constructive
contributions to discussions there, especially as a non-
exporter of weapons in principle. Japan will continue
to do so to achieve a successful outcome at the
Working Group.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process in post-conflict situations, the detailed
updates of which are provided in the report, has
become an important tool to ensure that a country in a
post-conflict situation does not backslide into a state of
conflict. While progress has been made in a number of
areas, the report reminds us that there are many more
challenges to overcome.

In order to help make progress in DDR, Japan has
been taking concrete actions. For instance, in
Afghanistan, a country afflicted by the protracted internal
conflicts, the implementation of DDR is imperative to
attain sustainable peace and security. With this
perspective in mind, Japan, as a lead nation in the area
of DDR in Afghanistan, has been assisting the DDR
process by providing vocational training for ex-soldiers
to facilitate their reintegration through dispatching
experts and by implementing reintegration projects at the
grass-roots level. Japan has also been involved in similar

projects in Africa; in Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of Congo, we are cooperating with United
Nations organizations involved with DDR projects.

Behind these actions is the idea of the
consolidation of peace that I promoted as one of the
pillars of Japan's foreign policy during my tenure as
Foreign Minister of Japan, which ended not long ago.
The idea is to provide the necessary assistance for
countries in post-conflict situations to make a smooth
transition towards nation-building. I am confident that
those efforts are gradually bearing fruit.

This idea of consolidating peace is in line with
the High-level Panel's key notion that in today's
globalized world, international peace and security
issues are closely linked to international development
problems. From this viewpoint, we will continue to
provide assistance on the ground to countries affected
by the scourge of small arms. Collection and
destruction of illicit small arms and light weapons,
capacity-building in the development of appropriate
legislation and regulations and import and export
control are the areas where cooperation from the
international community is especially needed. With this
in mind, Japan has been conducting a Weapons-for-
Development project in Cambodia for the past two
years, funded by Grant Aid for Peace-Building
Assistance in the amount of over $8 million. We are
now studying the possibility of cooperating further
with some African countries, utilizing, among others,
the Small Arms Trust Fund that Japan has established
under the United Nations Global and Regional
Disarmament Trust Fund.

In June 2006, the United Nations Review
Conference on the implementation of the Programme
of Action will be convened. Through our efforts
towards that review meeting, I hope there will be good
progress in the area of small arms and light weapons to
be reported in the Secretary-General's report next year.
We reaffirm our commitment to cooperate with the
United Nations in implementing the Programme of
Action, and, as a nation dedicated to world peace and
stability, we are determined to intensify our efforts to
address the issue of small arms and light weapons.

