Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council this month.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Ghassan Salame on his assumption of the post
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), and to thank him for his important
briefing, wherein he reviewed the report of the
Secretary-General on UNSMIL (S/2017/726). As the
report was published with some delay, we have not add
enough opportunity to examine it fully and discuss
it in detail it with our capital. We greatly appreciate
Mr. Salame's efforts to communicate with all parties
in Libya in order to bring together the points of view
among political stakeholders and we would like to wish
him every success in his work.

I should like to confirm once again to the Council
that the Government of National Accord is committed
to supporting all of United Nations efforts to achieve
a solution for the political crisis in Libya. I would
like to thank Ambassador Carl Skau, Permanent
Representative of Sweden, for his briefing as the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011). In his briefing, he talked about recent
developments regarding sanctions imposed upon Libya.
In this context, I would like to express my appreciation
for his outstanding efforts in guiding the Committee.

Since the last briefing by Mr. Martin Kobler, the

previous Special Representative of the Secretary-
General (see S/PV.7961), the political scene in Libya has
remained ambiguous, despite all the communication
undertaken by Mr. Kobler and taken up recently by his
successor, Mr. Ghassan Salame', since his arrival in the
post. Furthermore, we take note of the ongoing efforts
deployed by our friendly brotherly countries aimed at
bringing the points of view of political stakeholders
together in Libya in order to achieve reconciliation.

In the context of the ongoing ambiguity of the
situation and of the deadlock in the political process
in Libya, the concerned Libyan parties need to achieve
agreement on some amendments to the Libyan Political
Agreement, which was signed in Skhirat, Morocco,
on 17 December 2015, in a manner that will ensure
that all parties will strive to meticulously implement
the Agreement, which could in turn pave the way for
forming a Government of National Accord that can
carry out its work effectively, particularly to alleviating
the ongoing suffering of the Libyan people, who
experience it on a daily basis and in different areas,
deal with a variety of challenges in the country, ranging
from terrorism to illicit migration and the smuggling
of Libyan assets, namely, oil, oil derivatives and other
natural resources.

The Government has to address other harmful
challenges,such as human rights violations and the
absence of the rule of law. In this context, we note
the road map proposed by Mr. Faiez Serraj, President
of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord, in a statement to the Libyan people
on 15 July 2017. In his statement, which was published
as a document of the Security Council (S/20l7/622, annex), Mr. Serraj took stock of the current situation
and talked about the different types of suffering that
the Libyan people are facing as a result of the impasse
in the implementation of the Libyan Agreement.

At the end of his statement, he proposed an
initiative to resolve this situation, saying that he wanted
to communicate with all parties in Libya, without
exception, in order to achieve peace and stability in the
country through dialogue and reconciliation with all
actors. His statement contained no menacing language
nor did it threaten the use of violence or force. Everyone
needs to understand that there is no military solution to
the crisis in Libya. The solution can come about only
through dialogue and a political process under the
auspices of the United Nations. This could be the only
clear and positive aspect of the current situation that
we are all aware of, given that all parties have said that
they are ready to participate in the political process.
Despite a lack of capacity to deal with the
enormous challenges with which the Government of
National Accord is confronted, the most important of
which is achieving security and stability in Libya, it has
nonetheless managed not just to significantly hamper
the illicit militias that took control ofpart of the capital,
Tripoli, but to dismantle their arsenal and chase them
out of the capital, which has had a positive impact on
the security situation there. We welcome the desire of
UNSMIL to make a progressive return to Libya in the
future. We hope that this return will take place as soon
as possible. We believe that it will enable UNSMIL
to deal with the issues before it by cooperating and
communicating directly with the legitimate State
authorities. We further hope that it will bolster the
Libyan people's confidence and trust in the role played
by the United Nations.

While we appreciate the role played by the sanctions
committee, in particular in terms of banning the illicit
export ofLibyan oil, in line with resolution 2146 (2014),
amended by resolution 2362 (2017), which added
refined petroleum products to the list of sanctioned
items - and we note how the committee has been
keen, through considerable interaction and interest, to
preserve the assets of the Libyan State, namely, oil and
petroleum products - we hope that the members of the
committee will display the same interest in the issue of
improving the management of the frozen Libyan assets,
which have been subject to annual erosion, as foreign
banks do not manage them in the same way they manage
other funds. High negative interest rates are imposed
by these banks, resulting in a depletion of capital of the
frozen assets. This is a very serious situation, as it is
draining away the value of Libyan frozen assets, which
are funds that belong to the Libyan people and to future
generations.

The main purpose of the asset freeze under
resolution 1970 (2011) was to protect these funds and
not to punish the Libyan State, but what we are seeing
today runs counter to this objective and even contributes
to the depletion of assets. We believe that it makes no
sense to try to justify the loss of Libya's frozen assets
by connecting it to political differences and divisions.
The legitimate Government of National Accord has not
asked for the freeze to be lifted at this critical juncture,
but to find a particular formula that would help it to
protect and preserve these funds and investments, even
as they remain frozen - I repeat, even as they remain
frozen.

In that regard, I would refer to document
S/2017/629, which contains a letter from the President
of the Presidency Council, Mr. Faiez Serraj, in which he
went over the deplorable situation of the assets frozen
under the current sanctions regime. We cannot ignore
the fact that the existence of dual institutions in Libya
has had the negative effect of perpetuating an interim
Government that is a parallel Government, according to
resolutions of the Security Council, which have asked
other States to refrain from dealing with illegitimate
parallel entities. What wonder, in that respect, whether
it is enough to refrain from dealing with parallel
entities or if more effective measures should be taken
to eliminate them.

In conclusion, I would like to once again wish
Special Representative Salame every success in his
work. We are confident that his exceptional expertise
will enable him to achieve great results.

