Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and to express our appreciation to you for
convening this very important open debate on the issue
of small arms and light weapons. My delegation is
particularly pleased by the continued involvement of
the Security Council in this issue.

South Africa also wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report S/2005/69 on the state of the
implementation of the 12 recommendations he made in
September 2002. Of particular importance to my
delegation are those recommendations that pertain to
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, and how the Security Council contributes to
this implementation process.

Three years after the adoption of the Programme
of Action in 2001, it is sobering to note that large
numbers of illicit small arms and light weapons
continue to circulate in Africa, fuelling conflicts and in
most cases with peacekeepers unable to ascertain the
origin of these weapons.

The Second Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action, which
will be held this coming July, will, in our view, present a
last opportunity before the 2006 Review Conference to
reflect on the degree to which Member States have
implemented undertakings in the Programme of
Action. My delegation is of the view that this Biennial
Meeting should provide an opportunity for Member
States to identify difficulties in the implementation and
areas where assistance is needed, particularly at the
national and regional levels. South Africa continues to
believe that the implementation of the Programme of
Action at the respective national levels is imperative if
we are to succeed in our combined efforts to prevent,
combat and eradicate this scourge in all its aspects at
the regional and global levels.

The adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 58/241, mandating an open-ended working
group to negotiate an international instrument to enable
States to identify and trace small arms and light
weapons, presented an opportune moment for the
international community to effectively deal with this
issue. South Africa remains convinced that an effective
international instrument would enhance the ability of
States to uncover lines of illicit supply and identify
traffickers and points of diversion from licit to illicit
spheres.

South Africa is pleased to note from the
Secretary-General's report that progress is being made
on the tracing of illicit small arms and light weapons,
as mentioned under Recommendation 1. However, the
significant challenge that remains is that of obtaining
consensus on the establishment of an international
mechanism with the capacity to process and manage
the tracing of these illicit arms in a timely and efficient
manner.

It is through such collective efforts on the tracing
of illicit small arms and light weapons - as well as the
envisaged subsequent initiatives outlined in General
Assembly resolution 59/86 to enhance international
cooperation to prevent, combat and eradicate illicit
brokering in these weapons - that we will be able to
put in place the framework to halt the scourge of the
illicit proliferation of small arms that the Secretary-
General has outlined in his Recommendation 4. My
delegation is therefore pleased that that resolution
requests the Secretary-General to hold broad-based
consultations on the issue of brokering, with a view to
establishing a group of governmental experts on this
issue not later than 2007.

South Africa's National Conventional Arms
Control Act, which was implemented on 1 May 2003,
represents the cornerstone of my country's conventional
arms control legislation and related policies. This Act
contains specific guiding principles and criteria to be
considered when arms transfer applications are
assessed. These provisions include the principle of
adherence to international law, norms and practices and
the international obligations and commitments of the
Republic, including the United Nations Security
Council arms embargoes. This prerequisite had already
been included in our draft bill even prior to the
inclusion of Recommendation 5, relating to national
legislation, in the aforementioned report of the
Secretary-General of September 2002 (S/2002/1053).

Similarly, the Act stipulates that arms export
applications require the provision of authenticated end-
user certificates, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's Recommendation 9.

Through its extensive involvement in
peacekeeping operations in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa has
experienced the value of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) activities. It
has recognized that provisions relating to DDR are an
essential part of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, as the Secretary-General has mentioned in
his Recommendation 7. We believe that the Secretary-
General's Recommendation 8, that strengthened
financing of DDR programmes needs to be secured, is
vital in guaranteeing that the entire peace process is a
success.

Effective DDR programmes should include
specific measures for the collection and disposal of
illicit and surplus small arms and light weapons. We
urge the international community and the donors to
complement such DDR programmes in order to assist
countries emerging from conflict in the implementation
of these programmes.

One of the pillars in the implementation of the
Programme of Action is the regional approach. The
South African Government has since identified the
importance of this approach in addressing the problem
of proliferation of small arms and light weapons. The
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
which is a programme of the African Union, includes a
Peace and Security Initiative that maps out the
promotion in our continent of long-term conditions for
development and security. In this context, we
collectively aim to build our continent's capacity to
manage these conflicts by strengthening our regional
and subregional institutions to deal with conflict-
prevention, as well as by combating illicit proliferation
of small arms and light weapons.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to note the
Secretary-General's observation that the Programme of
Action has emerged as a key issue on the agenda of
both the General Assembly and the Security Council.
South Africa continues to view the General Assembly
as the organ with the primary responsibility to oversee
and monitor the implementation of the Programme of
Action, to undertake its review and to launch initiatives
such those on marking, record-keeping and tracing, as
well as on illicit brokering of small arms and light
weapons within the framework of the Programme of
Action. However, it is also my delegation's belief that
the Security Council should continue its involvement
in this issue. Accordingly, we trust that the Council
will remain seized of this matter and continue with the
practice of having open debates on this important issue.

