Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to reiterate France's condolences to the
Afghan people and the families of the victims of the
terrible attack of 31 May in Kabul and the incidents
that followed it. France stands with the Government of
Afghanistan in the fight against terrorism.

I would like to warmly thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his informative briefing, and pay tribute
through him to the United Nations personnel who
are working every day, in difficult conditions, for
Afghanistan's recovery.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

France is deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan, first because
the principal victims of the conflict continue to
be Civilians, especially women and children, and,
secondly, because the increasing numbers of attacks
serve only to destabilize the country even more, despite
the considerable progress made by the Afghan security
forces, whose commitment and courage I pay tribute to
today. We should therefore treat the establishment and
spread of armed and terrorist groups in Afghanistan
very seriously. Lastly, the deterioration in security is
exacerbating an already fragile humanitarian situation
that has recently been intensified by the large-scale
return of refugees from Pakistan and Iran. In that
regard, France encourages the Afghan Government to
focus on ensuring equal treatment for all refugees and
displaced persons. We also welcome the work being
done by the United Nations, particularly by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In this highly volatile security situation, it is more
important than ever for the Afghan Government to
remain united. The best response to the terrorists is to
display unity, to rally to the cause and to demonstrate
a determination to deepen and consolidate Afghan
democracy. The Government should continue to make
a priority of working to achieve the reforms to which
it is committed, especially electoral reform and the
fight against corruption and drug trafficking, which
continues to fuel the Taliban's insurgency. I would like
to emphasize that last point in particular, since in view
ofthe fact that in 2016, drug production in Afghanistan
reached a new record of 4,800 tons, the Afghan
authorities' implementation of its national anti-drug
plan of action is urgent.

On the human rights front, the situation of women
and children continues to be extremely precarious. It
is vital to ensure that the Afghan authorities continue
to work to fully implement their commitments to
women's rights and the protection of children. Besides
the Government's implementation of reforms in both
the short and long term, lasting stability in Afghanistan
can be achieved only through national reconciliation.
France welcomed President Ghani's initiative on 6 June
in convening the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation, for which we reiterate our full support.
While it is up to Afghans to lead the process ofrestoring
peace in their country, the wholehearted commitment
and unambiguous support of all its neighbours is
essential. We urge them to work with renewed energy
and concrete efforts to that end. We have a collective
responsibility to actively support the stabilization
of Afghanistan and contribute to establishing lasting
peace there.

In that context, support for Afghanistan by the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, has never been so important, as
the Secretary-General's recent visit emphasized. In that
regard, France and the European Union continue to be
fully committed to Afghanistan's cause. We await with
great interest the conclusions of the strategic review of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) next month. We value the Mission's role in
exercising its good offices. We also have to ask what the
role of the United Nations and UNAMA in supporting
Afghanistan's reconciliation and peacebuilding efforts
will be. Ultimately, simplifying the coordination

mechanisms that are in place could very likely bring
about an improvement in the effectiveness and visibility
of United Nations assistance.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country's
full support to Afghanistan and its Government and to
the activities of the United Nations in aid of their efforts.
