Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting to examine the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
wish to thank Mr. Bernard Kouchner, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presence here among us and for the enlightening and
useful statement that he has just made.

During his most recent visit here in March, Mr.
Kouchner focused his comments on strategic
objectives. He raised the question of time constraints
and the relevant elements to the success of the peace
process. Three months later, following a Security
Council mission to Kosovo at Mr. Kouchner's
invitation, we are in a position to evaluate the progress
made in different political, institutional, economic and
social fields, without losing sight of the fragility of the
situation, which requires the sustained efforts and
action of the international community.

The report of the Secretary-General covering the
past 12 months is enlightening in this respect. The
progress in the political sphere, especially through the
creation of a pluralist political landscape, Serb
participation in the Kosovo Transitional Council and
the creation of a Joint Interim Administrative
Structure, are all important achievements. The
demilitarization of the KLA and respect by the
Yugoslav authorities for their commitments under the
Military Technical Agreement, all deserve mention as
evidence of the will to achieve the normalization of life
in Kosovo.

We can also cite as positive achievements of this
mission the progress made in the establishment of the
judicial system and the rule of law, as well as the
success of humanitarian activities and the return of
refugees. Furthermore, encouraging signs in the
economic situation give us hope that we will see a
lasting improvement in social conditions.

Municipal elections will be decisive in the
process of political transition. The transparency of the
electoral process is a determining factor for the entire
operation. This process offers the parties an
opportunity to adhere to the principle of multi-ethnic
and peaceful coexistence, which remains the
foundation of stability in the region. The growing
participation of all the components of society in the
administration of the province is an indispensable
factor for long-term stability.

All of these positive elements, however, must not
conceal the sad reality of the daily lives of the citizens
of Kosovo. The fragility of the security situation, as
well as the cycle of violence, intimidation and threat
which seem to have taken hold of the province, can
undermine all efforts that are being made to restore
social peace. We deplore the rise of tension in this
region, and we support the efforts of UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force to restore peace to Kosovo.

With a view to the full achievement of the
objectives of the international community, the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo should have at its disposal
the appropriate financial and human resources.

Furthermore, the question of the detainees and
missing persons remains central to a return to normal
life in Kosovo. Memories of displaced persons and
prisoners are persistent. Their families will not agree to
forgive or forget unless this question is resolved. In
this respect, we have already expressed our support for
the appointment of a special envoy of the Secretary-
General who would be in charge of this complex
matter.

I want to insist on the need to promote a culture
of peace, tolerance and multi-ethnic coexistence as the
foundation for any lasting solution, not only for
Kosovo but for the entire Balkans region.

In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo and to the dedication of its
personnel, as well as all those working on the ground,
mentioning in particular the positive role of the parties
that have chosen to cooperate with the Mission. I
cannot fail to extend my Government's encouragement
to Mr. Kouchner in the important task that he is
undertaking in such a serious and self-sacrificing way.

