Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium would like to begin by warmly thanking His
Excellency Mr. Dian Djani, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his
very comprehensive briefing.

Belgium notes with satisfaction that substantial
progress has been made in the global implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption almost
15 years ago. We welcome the efforts of the Chair of
the Committee to encourage the 11 remaining States
to submit a national report. We also thank the Group
of Experts of the 1540 Committee for contributing to
drafting such reports, at the request of Member States.
As the Chair indicated, the full implementation of
the resolution is a long-term endeavour and a work
in progress.

The terrorist threat has not diminished. Terrorist
groups and individuals adapting continuously new
realities on the ground and seem to be persistently
reinventing themselves. The end of Da'esh as a terrorist
organization with a territorial base does not mean the
end of the threat it poses. Indeed, Da'esh continues to
indoctrinate individuals and groups around the world.
In that context, the risk of terrorist groups acquiring
weapons of mass destruction remains a major concern
and we must not lower our guard. To address that
threat, it is important to remind Member States of their
responsibilities in the process. Member States should
take all necessary measures to put in place national
legislation and controls to prevent non- State actors from
acquiring nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, or
the equipment necessary for their production.

With regard to guidance and assistance, as has
already been mentioned, the 1540 Committee plays a key
role in matching supply and demand and in providing
support throughout the process. We therefore highlight
the important role that can be played concurrently by
international and regional organizations, civil society
and industry in the comprehensive implementation
of the relevant resolutions. We warmly welcome the
engagement and increased cooperation of the 1540
chairmanship with such organizations so that they can
provide recommendations and strengthen the capacities
of States Members making such requests.

I would also like to draw attention to the important
support of international export control regimes in
meeting the goals ofresolution 1540 (2004). Belgium is
a member of all such regimes and calls on non-member
States either to join or to adhere unilaterally to
their principles.

While terrorists seem to be constantly adapting
to new realities and able to exploit scientific and
technological advances, as well as open borders and
international trade, let us remain vigilant. Let us
continue to pay particular attention to developments
in all those areas and the resilience of terrorist
organizations, and pursue our efforts to achieve the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We extend to the Committee our full support
and cooperation in that crucial area.

