Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference): On behalf of the Secretary General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and on my
own behalf, I extend to you, Sir, our heartiest
congratulations on your assumption of the high office of
President of the Security Council. I also take this
opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference is
collaborating with the United Nations in promoting the
ongoing peace process in Afghanistan. Throughout the
civil war in that country, the OIC has focused
unreservedly on endeavours to promote a cessation of
hostilities so that the necessary climate for a credible
peace process, leading to the formulation of a broad-based
representative Government, may be created. In our
contacts with various Afghan leaders, especially during
the OIC missions to the country, including those led by
Ambassador Bakr after 1994, and the three that I led in
the summer of 1995 and winter of 1996, we have
consistently emphasized the futility of resorting to the use
of force and seeking a military solution, instead of
negotiation, in finding a common workable settlement to

 

their present predicament. Mr. Norbert Holl, Head of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, with whom
we have maintained close relations, has also advocated this
view, and together we have endeavoured to defuse tensions
and assist in fostering the spirit of mutual trust and
confidence among the various Afghan factions so that a
climate for peace may emerge.

In this context, I would like to refer to paragraph 15
of the Secretary-General's report (8/1997/240), which deals
with the detention in Kabul of two French humanitarian
workers. I am pleased to report that following the calls for
their immediate release by the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, the OIC secretariat promptly responded
by using its good offices with the Taliban authorities, and
with their cooperation arranged for the release and safe
return of these French nationals.

The apparent overwhelming military successes of the
Taliban over several of the areas previously held by the
other Afghan factions have, indeed, sketched a different
scenario of realities that face the country today. But if
experience of other conflicts in that very region, as well as
in other regions, is any guide, then there is a need, now
more than ever before, for the cessation of hostilities and
the serious resumption of the collective search for an
honourable, workable and sustainable solution that would
rescue the people of Afghanistan from the uncertainties and
insecurities imposed on their lives by the devastating events
of the past two decades. We fully share the Secretary-
General's assertion in his report that no one should imagine
that a military victory by one party over the others will
resolve the Afghan problem in the long term.

While the prerogative of and the principal
responsibilities for bringing peace to Afghanistan rests with
the people - and especially the leadership, or leaderships
of Afghanistan - other affected and interested countries in
the region and elsewhere also have a role to contribute to
the peace process. And it behoves those States that have
influence over any particular political or military faction in
Afghanistan to rise to the occasion and play a constructive
role by preventing the sale and supply of arms to any of the
factions in Afghanistan, by preventing the harbouring and
training of militarists and by eliminating the devastating
drug traffic, which has grown to an abominable volume and
needs to be halted now before it reaches a catastrophic
level.

As I said a moment ago, we in the OIC are
endeavouring to complement the work of the United
Nations to assist the diverse Afghan leadership to bring
peace and tranquillity back to their country and to restore
precious human rights, including those of women and
children, which have been much trampled in the ensuing
turmoil. To this end, the convening of a meeting of all
Afghan factions that are active both inside and outside
Afghanistan, including the monarchy, and other
potentially influential leaders, such as General Abdul Haq,
to explore and develop a commonly acceptable framework
for addressing the country's political and security issues
and a peaceful transfer of power, has been proposed and
is being actively pursued. We in the OIC are certainly
prepared to co-sponsor such a meeting, which may take
place anywhere from Jeddah to Geneva, in Turkey or
Germany; indeed, at any venue that is agreeable to all the
Afghan participants. I hope that this approach will receive
the support of the Security Council. The Secretary
General of the OIC will soon visit New York, in response
to the call of the Secretary-General, among other things,
to consult on the advisability of such a meeting.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the OIC's full
commitment to continue to play its role, constructive and
complementary, to that of the United Nations, in
facilitating the overall peace process in Afghanistan.

