Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this year's second quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

At the outset, I would like to extend the Republic of
Korea's heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families
of the victims of the earthquakes in Ecuador and
Japan. The Republic of Korea is actively participating
in international efforts aimed at rapid recovery in the
affected areas.

The Republic of Korea expresses serious concern
about the continuing violence between Israel and
Palestine at the cost of many lives and the viability
of the two-State solution. Genuine and lasting peace
can never be imposed by one party's unilateral and
coercive measures; rather, it can be achieved only
through direct negotiations between the parties,
based on mutual recognition and coexistence. The
Republic of Korea joins the international call for the
parties to end the violence and incitement, and to take
confidence-building measures with a view to resuming
negotiations and creating a viable framework for the
two-State solution.

In particular, we take note of the recent report of
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, according to which
the demolition of Palestinian homes and livelihood
structures more than doubled in the period of October
2015 to March 2016, in comparison with the previous
six months, and that the number of demolitions by
mid-April of this year had already exceeded the total
for 2015. Confidence-building measures, including
ending settlement expansion in the occupied territory,
are urgently required to create an environment that
is more conducive to dialogue for sustainable peace
between the parties.

We also express concern about the lack of unity
among the Palestinian parties. Unity and consensus
among the Palestinian people is a prerequisite to achieve
peace and an independent, sovereign and democratic
State. At the same time, the Republic of Korea calls
for the Middle East Quartet to step up its mediation
efforts and looks forward to seeing produce practical
recommendations to advance the two-State solution.

With regard to Syria, the Republic of Korea
welcomes signs of progress on the ground, including the
stabilization ofthe security situation since the cessation
of hostilities on 27 February, increased humanitarian
access to some areas and the new round of intra-Syrian
talks from 13 April. However, great concerns remain
about the non-compliance by all parties with the agreed
cessation of hostilities and the serious impediments
to access to international humanitarian assistance
for millions of Syrians in dire need, including the
4.6 million people in the besieged or hard-to-reach areas.
Compliance with the agreed cessation of hostilities by
all parties and guaranteed unhindered humanitarian
access throughout the country are not only critical to
creating conditions that promote the peace process,
but that also hint at the results of such a process. The
Republic of Korea once again urges all parties to strictly
comply with the cessation of hostilities and urges the
Syrian Government to guarantee full, sustained, and
unimpeded humanitarian access. We support the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, Staffan de Mistura, to reach consensus among
the parties and to forge a road map for a viable political
transition in Syria.

Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea expresses
regret that the third round of peace talks - which
were supposed to begin today in Kuwait - has been
postponed. We urge all parties to strictly abide by the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities and resume
peace talks without further delay. The Republic of
Korea reiterates its strong support for the critical role of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, in mediating between the parties
in order to establish peace in Yemen.

With regard to Libya, the Republic of Korea
welcomes the arrival of the Presidency Council in
Tripoli on 30 March as a significant step towards the
establishment of the Government of National Accord,
in accordance with the Libyan political agreement and
resolution 2259 (2015). Considering the grave threat
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
attempts to further expand its influence into the central
part of the country, establishing the Government of
National Accord and normalizing its functions are
more urgent than ever. The Republic of Korea urges
all parties to put national security ahead of their own
interests and to cooperate with the Presidency Council
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Martin Kobler, in this process. The
Republic of Korea will join in international efforts for
the stabilization and reconstruction of Libya.

The situation in the Middle East has long been
one of the main items on the agenda of the Security
Council. However, the peace process between Israel
and Palestine has been stagnant for too long and the
multifaceted crises in Syria, Yemen and other countries
in the region have resulted in enormous human
suffering in the region and beyond. The status quo is
not sustainable. We still have the political momentum
necessary to resolve these overdue conflicts and crises.
The Republic of Korea once again urges all the parties
to the conflicts to take the necessary measures to
resolve them and bring about peace, and reiterates its
commitment to play a constructive role to that end.

