Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and the protection of the medical staff who work to
save the lives of others while risking their own lives is
of great and particular significance. Belarus attaches
great importance to the strengthening of guarantees for
the protection of all categories of civilians not directly
engaged in hostilities.

Nevertheless, today I wish to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to another vulnerable
professional group that is present in hot spots, namely,
translators and interpreters. Yesterday the General
Assembly adopted resolution 71/288, on the role of
professional translation in connecting nations and
fostering peace, understanding and development. The
resolution acknowledges the practical contribution
of language professionals to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to peacekeeping.

In high-risk settings of armed conflict and in post-
conflict peacebuilding, translators and interpreters face
grave danger in carrying out their professional duties as
they seek to help establish dialogue among the parties
to conflict and with civilians. They are subjected to
threats. They are abducted and murdered. They are
subjected to torture and degrading treatment.

A single database that reflects the genuine
scale of losses amongst translators and interpreters
working in armed conflict has never been established.
Some statistics have been compiled by international
translators and interpreters associations from open
sources, and they are appalling.

From 2003 to 2008, no fewer than 360 translators
and interpreters were killed; 1,200 were wounded
while working alongside American troops for its
subcontracting organizations in Iraq. According to
some reports, the likelihood of the death of translators
and interpreters in Iraq is 10 times greater than for
regular troops. In 21 days in late 2006, British armed
forces in Iraq lost 21 interpreters, 17 of whom were
deliberately killed due to their professional activity.
The list of such examples goes on and on.

Indeed, at present there is a fundamental principle
in international humanitarian law of a distinction
between civilians and individuals directly taking
part in armed conflict. Non-compliance with this
principle is considered to be a war crime. We would
like to clarify that we do not mean to apply the term
"civilian" to interpreters that are part of regular
troops. Rather, we are referring to those categories of
interpreters who do not take up arms and serve solely
to establish dialogue among the parties to conflict.
Those include interpreters who do not act on behalf of
a party to a conflict and interpreters assisting agencies
or individuals who do not engage in conflict, including
international organizations, media professionals and
non-governmental organizations.

However, interpreters and translators are neither
regular civilians when they represent a party to
conflict, nor are they, in those instances, regular
fighters - at least, not so long as they do not directly
engage in hostilities. So this is a special category of
individual in need of special protection.

We believe that the time is ripe to craft an
international instrument - be it an international
treaty or a Security Council resolution - a document
that would affirm the special status of translators and
interpreters under dangerous conditions so as to raise
the level of their protection de lege ferenda - with
a view to a future law. Why not have special signage
to distinguish interpreters from civilians or parties to
conflict, as was done for medical staff?

There are issues that need to be addressed in these
documents, and there are a great number of such issues.
We must acknowledge the fact that due attention is not
being paid to the issue of the protection of translators
and interpreters under dangerous conditions. We must
consider how best and most expeditiously to bridge
this gap.

If the issue raised today is duly taken into account
by delegations both within the Council and beyond, then
we will stand ready to work jointly to seek solutions
to the issue of the legal protection of translators and
interpreters in high-risk settings.

