Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Ghanaian presidency for having convened this timely
open debate on peace consolidation in West Africa, a
subject of the utmost importance for my country. I
would like to extend our warmest greetings to you, Sir,
Minister Nana Akufo-Addo, as you preside over the
meeting.
I am also grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa, Ahmedou Ould-
Abdallah, and to the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for their
informative statements.

This Council meeting addresses two topics of
particular interest to all of us: peacebuilding and
Africa. Brazil has long held that lasting peace can be
achieved in post-conflict situations only by means of
the early implementation of concrete measures aimed
at attaining social, economic and institutional
development.

It is in the interests of the international
community to contribute to the consolidation of peace
in West Africa. Peace, security and development not
only are crucial for the people in the region, but also
help spread progress to a wider area in the continent. In
that sense, Brazil considers the Zone of Peace and
Cooperation in the South Atlantic, which comprises
countries from West Africa and South America, to be a
valuable instrument in fostering peace and
development and in promoting closer cooperation
among countries on both sides of the ocean.

In recent years, countries in West Africa have
been involved in a number of conflicts. But today,
thanks to the return of peace, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau can aspire to enjoying economic growth
and political stability; C6te d'Ivoire is making every
effort to return to constitutional rule.

The stability of those countries, however, is
fragile and requires continuous support. For this
reason, the various United Nations missions in the
region should be maintained and reinforced, and
cooperation among them should open a new and
dynamic process to tackle cross-border issues. Without
neglecting the immediate humanitarian and security
needs, the main task of the United Nations is to support
long-term initiatives in West Africa that can produce a
"virtuous cycle" of socio-political inclusion,
sustainable development and peace, thereby preventing
a relapse into violence and political instability.

That long-term effort must be predicated on the
understanding that no peace is sustainable if the root
causes of the conflict are not addressed, as rightly
elaborated in the concept paper prepared for this debate
(S/2006/610).
The countries in West Africa require the creation
and reinforcement of capacity-building, which is
essential for a prosperous and stable economy. In
addition, cooperation among neighbouring countries is
to be encouraged. We are of the View that, in the short
run, two interrelated issues deserve special attention:
the reduction of youth unemployment, and programmes
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) and for security sector reform.

Unemployment deprives young people of a
legitimate source of income and makes them prey to
warlords in their petty but bloody conflicts. Foreign
investment and trade can help put the region back on
the track of development. DDR programmes must have
reliable resources in all of their phases and, when a
peacekeeping operation is deployed, should rely on
assessed resources for funding. To that list, one could
add the use made of the natural resources of the region.
It is important to prevent the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, the proceeds of which are used to
fuel war. The Kimberly Process has shown us the way
ahead.

The newly established Peacebuilding
Commission represents an important instrument for
supporting the consolidation of peace in West Africa.
We are happy that Sierra Leone will be considered in
the country-specific configuration of the Commission.
The Peacebuilding Commission has been created to
garner resources and support in order to address the
problems of countries in the rebuilding process. The
Commission's work on Sierra Leone will certainly lead
us to understand better the regional dynamics and the
needs of other countries in the region.

In West Africa, the Brazilian Government
considers that Guinea-Bissau deserves particular
attention. That country has struggled to achieve
stability, but its situation is fragile. The lack of
economic growth remains a source of unrest, and State
institutions sorely need to be supported and
strengthened. The United Nations and its Member
States should show, with practical deeds - as Brazil
has tried to do - its solidarity with Guinea-Bissau.
The Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and
the India-Brazil-South Africa Forum are also assisting
that country with projects that, we hope, will have a
positive and immediate impact on the population.

It is important that the Council continue its
quarterly review of the United Nations Peacebuilding

06-46 124
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and consider
broadening its mandate. We firmly believe that
investing a little more time and money in Guinea-
Bissau now will spare suffering in the future and
obviate the need to return after a hasty exit.

Brazil would like to pay tribute to the endeavours
of the African Union in West Africa. I would also like
to congratulate ECOWAS for its relentless efforts in
the defence of peace and development in the area. In
particular, I would like to express my Government's
appreciation for the decision to transform the
moratorium on small arms into a convention, which
will represent a credible framework for action. We
equally commend the contribution made by the United
Nations Office for West Africa in drafting the
convention.

My country has a special interest in the
development of Africa, the source of the majority of
the Brazilian population. The current administration of
President Lula attaches high priority to strengthening
relations with the African continent. We are committed
to supporting all initiatives designed to make the West
African countries prosperous and stable.

I believe that this debate provides further
evidence of the relevant and active role of Ghana in
building peace in the region. As President Lula said in
welcoming President John Kufuor on his recent Visit to
Brazil,

"for decades Ghana has been writing a
fundamental page in the African saga. The heroic
struggle of Kwame Nkrumah against colonialism,
for the right of Africa to decide its destiny,
enthused the continent and the world. Many
Brazilians mirrored themselves in that example".

