Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): It is with great
pleasure that I take the floor for the second time in the
Security Council to address the issue of the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), which is of great concern to
the African Union (AU), as members of the Council are
aware. The inclusion of this item on its agenda
demonstrates the Security Council's commitment to
finding a solution to this problem, which has assumed
an alarming regional dimension, as was just stressed by
Mr. Moussa.
3

On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
thank you, Sir, for your kind invitation to our
organization to participate in this meeting. The
convening of this debate under Portugal's presidency is
further proof of the extent to which your country, close
as it is to Africa, is concerned with the fate of the
continent and its inhabitants.

I take this opportunity to commend the Secretary-
General on his very comprehensive report
(S/2011/693). I welcome the presence here today of the
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa,
whose briefing shed a bright light on the situation in
Central Africa, in particular the range of issues related
to the LRA. We wish him every success in
accomplishing his noble mission.

I also welcome the presence of Mr. Louis
Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States.

The AU involvement in resolving the security
issues created in Central Africa by the LRA can be
traced back to its special session on the consideration
and resolution of conflicts in Africa, held in Tripoli,
Libya, on 31 August 2009. In the action plan adopted
at the session, the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union agreed, inter alia, to redouble their
efforts, including military efforts, to neutralize the
LRA and to put an end to its atrocities and
destabilizing activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic.

The fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government, held in Kampala,
Uganda, in July 2010, reiterated the commitment of the
African Union and asked the Commission to organize
as soon as possible action-oriented consultations
among countries affected by the activities of the LRA
and all other interested parties in order to facilitate
regional coordinated action to address the threat posed
by that group. In that context, regional ministerial
meetings were held on the activities of the LRA in
Bangui, Central African Republic, on 13 and
14 October 2010, and in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on
8 June 2011.

The seventeenth African Union Summit, held in
Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, in July 2011 welcomed in
particular the initiatives taken by the Commission. The
meeting lent its full support to the decisions taken, and
asked the AU Peace and Security Council to speedily
authorize the planned operation and all its components,
including the regional intervention force, the joint
operations centre and the joint coordination
mechanism. The conference requested the United
Nations and other AU partners to support the initiative
to protect the affected civilian populations, including
through financial and logistical support.

In following up on these decisions, the AU
Commission has undertaken the necessary
consultations with the countries concerned to designate
a special envoy for the LRA. The special envoy will
have to ensure political coordination and overall
strategy. The AU Commission also established an
integrated planning team, comprised of officers of the
Commission and of affected countries, to conduct
detailed operational planning. The team has undertaken
a series of activities, in particular developing a mission
plan for ongoing operational procedures, as well as
force generation and finalizing the legal framework
and the protection of civilians strategy document.

On 27 September, the Commission submitted an
interim report to the Peace and Security Council. The
Council took note of the efforts made and asked the
Commission to submit as soon as possible final
planning documents so that the mandate could be
adopted. The Peace and Security Council will meet on
21 November to consider the draft operational mandate
submitted to it. In the meantime, the Commission is
striving to finalize arrangements for role-sharing
among the affected countries so as to mobilize support
for capacity--bui1ding of the countries affected by LRA
attacks and to ensure the availability of financial,
material and logistical resources necessary for the
regional cooperation initiative.

In that context, the Commission has pursued
consultations with the European Union on financing
certain components of the initial phase of the
operation. I welcome the European Union's willingness
to contribute to the success of the AU's efforts. At the
same time, other contributions will be Vital to allow for
the effective implementation of the operation. The
Commission is in contact with other partners,
particularly the United States, in order to mobilize
additional support and ensure the closest possible
coordination of efforts to neutralize the LRA and put
an end to its activities.
11-59157
The Commission is also in contact with the
United Nations Secretariat to follow up on the
conclusions of the earlier meeting of the Security
Council on the LRA. The AU is grateful to the United
Nations for its renewed commitment to supporting our
implementation of the regional LRA initiative.

The AU anti-LRA regional cooperation initiative
is an important action. It is the object of great interest
and expectations on the part of countries affected by
LRA atrocities, as well as of the attention of foreign
partners. It complements and gives new impetus to the
earlier efforts of the States concerned. This meeting of
the Council is therefore opportune to take stock of
efforts already made and to maintain and to enhance
the mobilization of the international community.

