Judge Meron: I should like to start by thanking
those representatives who this morning made very
helpful comments and suggestions about our work. I
thank them in particular for their expressions of
appreciation for the work we are doing, for their
recognition of the constant improvement in our
efficiency, for our contribution to combating impunity,
and for the very impressive corpus of jurisprudence
that we have created.

May I just single out for very special thanks the
representative of France, who said, very importantly,
that there can be no impunity by default. That is
critical. We will try to finish on time, but fugitives
should not be allowed to wait us out. I am greatly
encouraged by that statement.

(spoke in French)

France has always said that the mission of the
Tribunal will not be concluded as long as the principal
indictees remain at large, and, in particular, as long as
Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic, Mr. Gotovina and
Mr. Kabuga have not been brought to justice. Indeed,
the timetable we have set for the Tribunals cannot lead
to impunity by default. I appreciate that comment very
much.

(spoke in English)

Let me now reply briefly to specific questions
asked of me by members of the Council.

The representative of Romania asked about the
policy governing provisional release. I would like to
draw his attention to rule 64 of our Rules of Procedure
and Evidence, which states that a Trial Chamber will
grant provisional release only after it is satisfied that
the accused will appear for trial and if release will not
pose a danger to any victim, witness or other person.
The Trial Chamber may impose such conditions as are
necessary to ensure the presence of the accused for
trial and the protection of others. If we have recently
granted more provisional releases than in the past, I
believe that is, in part, a reflection of the fact that we
can place greater trust in the cooperation and
guarantees of States in the area. Also, being a court
that treats the concept of human rights and due process
as part of its constitutional system, we are of course
anxious to be able to grant provisional release when the
requirements under the Rules have been satisfied and
when we can be sure that the person will return for trial
and will not intimidate witnesses. Those are the
guidelines that we find in the rule that I have
mentioned, namely, rule 65 of our rules of procedure.

The representative of Russia mentioned the fact
that, so far, there have not been enough nominations
for ad litem judges. I would not like to speculate as to
why States have been slow in submitting nominations.
I hope that my appeal today and the reminders by the
Security Council will achieve their goal and that
between now and 7 July, the new final date fixed by the
Council, we will have a great number of very eminent
jurists presented.

The representative of the United Kingdom raised
the question of the number of judges on the Appeals
Chamber who will be required to deal with the backlog
of cases on appeal. I would like to mention that I
already raised that matter in my written report
submitted in May. I said then that, in the not-too-
distant future, the Tribunal would have to address the
matter of speeding up appeals, once it could be
foreseen when trial activities would near completion.
In preparation for that stage, the Tribunal may examine
such options as proposing that the Appeals Chamber
operate through two, or even three, benches of five
judges each, drawing on judges who have served at the
trial level. In that way, we would be able to double, or
even to triple, our capacity to dispose of appeals.

I now turn to comments made by the
representative of Japan. First, with regard to a fourth
courtroom, it is of course true that we are slowly
approaching the phasing-down stage in the life of the
Tribunal. At the same time, we are an institution that
has to maintain full speed, and even go faster, during
our final years in order to meet the targets laid down by
the Security Council for the completion of our work.
We have not yet come to final conclusions on a fourth
courtroom; the issue is still before the study group that
I mentioned, chaired by my colleague Judge Bonomy.

But this is what I would like to say. First, if we
decide on a fourth courtroom- and it is entirely
possible we will - we would try to find voluntary
contributions for the basic construction costs. Of
course, there will be some additional costs and a need
for additional staff. I do not expect that those will be
major costs. In any event, it is quite clear to me that if
we go that way, we would do so only if we were quite
convinced that there would in fact be very considerable
savings in overall expenses as a result of the fact that
the life of the Tribunal would, thanks to the fourth
courtroom, be shortened by quite a few months. I know
that the representative of Japan, who has been very
helpful in making various suggestions on cost
efficiency, will be sensitive to that point, namely, that
it would simply produce savings.

I can assure the representative of Japan that we
are very conscious of the goals established by the
Council, as well as of our commitments to do our very
best to adhere to the goals and to those dates. In every
single one of my appearances before the Council, I
have spoken to the various factors that cannot be
predicted and that will necessarily impact upon the
duration of our work. I think that we, including the
international community, have been fortunate enough
to see an unprecedented 50 per cent increase in the
number of fugitives and indictees who have arrived at
The Hague. We have to accommodate those arrivals,
and we must do so without cutting corners on due
process or human rights. I can assure the representative
of Japan that we are determined to minimize any
encroachment upon the deadlines or the target date
established by the Security Council. But I am sure that
all of us here are united in the desire to have fair trials,
which require time. It is a question of fairness; it
cannot only be a question of the calendar.

I think I have covered the principal questions.

