Ms. Incera (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to support this draft resolution on
the reactivation of the International Commission of Inquiry
into the flow of arms in Rwanda. It is undeniable that the
illegal flow of arms to the Great Lakes region lends itself
to civil violence and acts of genocide. The massacre of
civilians and refugees in Mudende, which occurred in
December 1997, shows the need for clear and resolute
action by the Security Council so as to ensure the full
implementation of the arms embargo that it imposed on
Rwanda. In this context, we believe that the work of the
Commission of Inquiry is highly constructive.

Costa Rica condemns the continuing sale and supply
of arms to the forces of the former Government of Rwanda
and to other militias in the region, as well as the training of
new militias. We also condemn fund-raising to finance the
military efforts of such militias, as well as the recruitment
of refugees to these forces. In addition, we view with
profound concern the increased coordination and
cooperation among the various insurgent forces in the area.
We hope that the International Commission will identify
those responsible for these violations of the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council and of the principles of
the United Nations Charter.

Infiltrations and flows of arms and combatants in the
various countries of the area endanger international security.
Cooperation among all the States of the region is
indispensable if peace is to be achieved. In this context, we
hope that all States, in the Great Lakes region and in the
rest of the international community, will cooperate to the
best of their ability with the Commission of Inquiry. We
also hope that all States will ensure that their territories are
not used for arms trafficking and that they will not allow
illegal forces to organize their activities there.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
complete readiness to consider favourably the
recommendations that the Commission may make to this
Council.

