Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts
and contributions in the presidency of the Council to
promote the Council's work. I would also like to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O'Brien; and the World Food Programme Regional
Director, Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for their briefings.

At present, the situation in Yemen remains
complicated. Peace talks are stagnant, conflicts are
ongoing and the humanitarian situation is grave. China
is concerned about the situation and empathizes with the
suffering Yemeni people. Political dialogue is the only
way to achieve lasting peace in Yemen. China therefore
welcomes Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed's contact
with the parties concerned and his active mediation.

In the current circumstances, China maintains
that the parties to the conflict in Yemen and the
international community should take the following
actions expeditiously.

First, parties to the conflict should exercise restraint
and cease hostilities as early as possible so as to create
the necessary conditions for relaunching peace talks
and improving the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

Secondly, it is imperative to further support Special
Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed's mediation, so as to have a
positive influence on the parties concerned, and to push
for peace through negotiation.

Thirdly, parties to the peace talks should exercise
sincerity and flexibility, narrow their differences
through consultations, and properly address a series
of sensitive issues, including withdrawal, disarmament
and the establishment of a Government of national
accord, so as to reach a comprehensive solution that
fits the national condition in Yemen and addresses the
concerns of all the parties.

Fourthly, parties to the conflict should take effective
measures to alleviate the humanitarian situation. They
should follow international humanitarian law and
actively cooperate with international relief efforts. We
hope that the international community will join hands
in alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.

