Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are again honoured
by your presence, Mr. Minister. We congratulate you,
and we thank you and your delegation for convening
this important meeting to discuss ways and means to
address cross-border issues in West Africa.

We also welcome the comprehensive briefings by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA) and by the representative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
the situation in West Africa is a mixed picture of
positive developments and continuing challenges. One
of the significant developments is the increased
collaboration among the United Nations presences in
West Africa: UNOWA, the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone. This includes regular
meetings among the heads of the five peacekeeping
and political missions to promote joint planning and
strengthen opportunities for regional cooperation. At
the operational level, we note the meetings of the force
commanders of the three peacekeeping operations.
Inter-mission cooperation at that level maximizes the
operational capability of the United Nations on the
ground and creates synergies, which gets the job done
more efficiently and saves on costs. We welcome the
establishment of an inter-mission secretariat to
coordinate the meetings, and we look forward to the
forthcoming report on inter-mission cooperation, which
will provide details on information sharing, joint use of
mission assets and logistics. We also commend
UNOWA for the specific work it has done to raise
public awareness about subregional and cross-border
problems by undertaking field missions to sensitive
areas not covered by the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and by developing mechanisms and
enhancing linkages with ECOWAS, the Mano River
Union and other international partners. We reiterate our
support for UNOWA and for the recommendations that
have been made to strengthen it.

The contributions of ECOWAS and the newly
reactivated Mano River Union also deserve attention
and recognition. We have been informed that ECOWAS
and UNOWA have developed a detailed work
programme of cooperation which includes priority
projects on security sector reform and electoral
assistance and a regional strategy for addressing youth
unemployment. We hope that this institutionalized
cooperation will yield great benefits in the field. The
next summit meeting of the Mano River Union
countries, to be held later this year, will continue the
momentum that has already been generated.

My delegation also recognizes the important role
played by civil society in addressing subregional and
cross-border issues. Aside from disseminating
information and raising awareness, they play an
integral part in post-conflict peacebuilding with their
established networks for the actual implementation of
programmes in the field. UNOWA has been actively
engaging members of civil society in its work by
inviting them to meetings with United Nations
partners, as well as by informing and consulting them
when going on field missions. We support that type of
collaboration and hope that it can be expanded in the
future.
Three specific issues and challenges should be
highlighted: the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; harmonization of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes;
and focusing on post-conflict peacebuilding. My
delegation welcomes ECOWAS efforts in
implementing its moratorium on the import, export and
manufacture of small arms, through the establishment
of a small arms unit and the adoption of its Small Arms
Control Programme. We hope that ECOWAS will
further strengthen the intent of the moratorium by
transforming it into a legally binding instrument.

The need to harmonize DDR programmes was
addressed by the Security Council mission to West
Africa in June 2004 when its members held intensive
discussions with their interlocutors on the ground. We
note that the resulting workshops came up with a set of
policy recommendations and practical guidelines on a
regional DDR programme in West Africa and that the
participating national commissions on DDR established
a network for regular exchange of experiences. My
delegation hopes that the Secretariat can brief us
regularly on developments on this issue.

Emphasis should be placed also on post-conflict
peacebuilding. Addressing the root causes of conflict
as a preventive strategy and properly addressing post-
conflict challenges deserve equal, if not greater,
attention. Jobs and economic opportunities are
essential elements for lasting peace as they address
related problems such as refugee crises, high youth
unemployment and other social and economic ills.

Like Brazil and the United Kingdom, we consider
that the suggestion by the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change relating to the establishment of
a peacebuilding commission to address precisely those
issues deserves support.

In conclusion, my delegation underscores the
need for subregional and cross-border issues to be
addressed in a comprehensive manner and stresses the
great importance of that approach. Best practices and
lessons learned from ECOWAS countries could well
serve as examples and could migrate to other regions
and subregions.

We commend your delegation, Mr. President, for
drafting a presidential statement on this subject, which
we support and which we hope will be adopted at the
end of this meeting.

