The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a few brief comments in my capacity as
representative of Bulgaria.

My delegation wishes to begin by thanking the
Secretariat for preparing the draft report and the
delegation of Singapore for being the moving force
behind the improvements that have made it more
concise and easier for Members to use. As all have
done before me, I thank Ambassador Mahbubani and
Minister Lee.

The discussion thus far has been a useful
dialogue- or rather, "polylogue" - although, as
Ambassador Valdivieso quite rightly said, it has gone
in two directions: an analysis of the working methods
and procedures of the Council, which is very
important, and a discussion of the substance of its
work. Since this is the first discussion of its kind, such
a dichotomy was perfectly predictable and normal.

I agree with Ambassador Mahbubani that the
Council must find a way to meet more often in order to
discuss its strategy. The annual retreat organized by the
Secretary-General is not enough. That is clear,
additional proof of which is provided by this debate.
Moreover, I would like in passing to express my
support for Ambassador's Levitte innovative idea that
the written texts distributed at the outset of a meeting
be made part of the official record and that delegations
extrapolate in their statements on the basis of these
texts. That could only increase and enhance the
interactive nature of our discussions.

I must say that one of the first observations to be
made on the annual report indubitably is that the
workload of the Council has enormously increased.
That is due simply to the impact of globalization, as
was quite rightly pointed out by Ambassador
Greenstock. Globalization requires the Council to do
better and to do more. These two somewhat
contradictory necessities have caused the time we
spend in deliberations to grow exponentially, often
testing our physical limits, in order to allow the
Council better to communicate with the rest of the
United Nations membership and, beyond that, with the
other actors in international relations. This is a genuine
problem that we have to face. Indeed, on reading the
report, I note that what is missing is an account of the
relations which the Council and the United Nations in
general increasingly and appropriately enjoy with non-
State and non-governmental entities. With the advent
of globalization, the role of such actors has become
increasingly important and we must take note of it.

There is work to be done in that direction. I know
that this is an extremely sensitive subject, but it is a
problem facing the entire United Nations system. I
believe that the Council has work to do in that regard.
Ambassador Levitte talked in this context about the
Arias formula meetings. That is a useful format, but,
first, it is not used regularly and, secondly, it is
insufficient.

A second point I wish to raise in the context of
the partnership ofthe Council with various actors is the
importance of partnership not only with Member
States, but also with regional organizations. From that
standpoint, I believe that the case of the Western
Balkans is very revealing. The Council has established
an extremely successful and useful partnership with
regional organizations, including the European Union
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
which are ready to assume their responsibilities. In the
case of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, this is an
extremely successful partnership, in that the Council
provides a legal and political framework for the
activities of those regional organizations, whose work
on the ground is strictly determined by Security
Council resolutions.

Africa is another such example. Much of the
Council's time - perhaps 60 to 75 per cent - is
rightly devoted to the various conflicts in Africa. We
should note that the weakness of local African partners
means that the Council has to work harder, and I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome the creation of
the African Union. It is very important for that new
regional African organization to become a much more
effective partner for the Council in managing various
African crises that has been the case in the past.

While on the subject of Africa, I would like to
say a few words about Somalia. Here, I agree fully
with the comments of Ambassador Strammen of
Norway. The Bulgarian Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee on Somalia has taken the necessary steps to
revive that dormant Committee. The implementation of
sanctions and the arms embargo are only one part of
the overall strategy that the Council must draw up with
regard to that country, which has been neglected for too
long.

I should like in conclusion to refer to the role
played by individuals. Ambassador Greenstock
mentioned this matter, and I must say that two
examples come to mind. The first is the decisive
practical role played by Ambassador Levitte in the
various Council missions to the Great Lakes region.
His energy and determination have counted for a great
deal. If we can see some light at the end of the tunnel
with regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
it is due to some extent to his determination. The other
example, to which many have referred, is the work
done by Ambassador Greenstock at the head of the
Committee established under resolution 1373 (2001),
which is a model of transparency. I fully agree with all
the speakers who have preceded me: the example set
by the United Kingdom delegation and its Ambassador
is truly one for the Council to follow in its dialogue
with Member States.

Two conclusions can be drawn from the Report.
The Council has been effective every time it has been
united. Members of the Council are aware that the
Bulgarian delegation has working tirelessly for such
unity, since without unity it is very difficult to preserve
the essential and central role of the Council in
international relations. Those two aspects - unity and
centrality - are obviously mutually enforcing, as can
be clearly seen from the report.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

May I take it that the draft report, as corrected, is
adopted by the Council?

There being no objection, it is so decided.

This decision will be reflected in a note by the
President of the Security Council to be issued as
document S/2002/1068.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration ofthe item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10pm.
