Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I should like to begin
by thanking all of our briefers this afternoon.

The United Kingdom shares the ambition expressed
by other speakers today for inclusive, peaceful and fair
elections next year and an end to the humanitarian,
human rights and political crisis in Burundi. However,
since our last meeting on this item (S/PV.8465), there has
been no progress in securing a solution to the political
crisis that could enjoy the support of all Burundian
parties ahead of the elections. We regret in particular the
lack of progress in the inter-Burundian dialogue set out
by African Union Commissioner Chergui today. If the
political situation is not resolved, there remains a real
risk of violence, an increase in human rights violations
and an escalating humanitarian crisis, which threatens
peace and stability within Burundi and the region.

We have seen before, through the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, that it is possible to find a
solution through unified and effective leadership from
both the region and Burundi. We therefore call on the
region, especially the East African Community, the
African Union and Burundi, to demonstrate leadership
again, with the support of the Special Envoy for
Burundi. We underline the United Kingdom's support
for the efforts of Special Envoy Kafando and emphasize
that any solution must be in line with the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement. The United Kingdom remains
ready to review its approach to Burundi, including
its support for measures taken through the European
Union once tangible steps have been taken to improve
the current political and human rights situation.

Next year's elections in Burundi represent a
critical juncture for its political development. There is
an opportunity for a democratic transition of power in
Burundi for the first time in 14 years. We take note of
the administrative preparations that have been made,
as outlined by Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-
Taranco this afternoon, but we remain concerned by
wider restrictions on the political freedoms that are
essential to the conduct of free and fair elections.

In particular, since the last Security Council briefing
in February, the Government of Burundi has made the
disappointing decision to revoke the BBC's operating
license. Concerning comments have also been made
by officials within the National Independent Electoral
Commission, proposing restrictions on the Burundian
media. We call on the Government of Burundi to engage
with the BBC to reinstate its operating license and to
commit to enabling an independent media environment
within Burundi.

Finally, I would like to underline the United
Kingdom's concern about the humanitarian situation
in Burundi and stress the importance of maintaining
international support for humanitarian efforts. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimates that 1.8 million Burundians - some

15 per cent of the population - will need humanitarian
assistance in 2019. As of 31 March, some 125,000
Burundians remained internally displaced. I would like
to particularly draw attention to the fragile situation
faced by refugees and pay tribute to the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, which is assisting 350,000 refugees through
the Burundian refugee response plan.

In conclusion, with elections next year taking place
amid this fragile political and humanitarian situation, it
is vital that the Security Council remain seized of this
issue and engage to support efforts to find a solution
and build stability in Burundi.

