Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to consider measures
whose inherent dangers go beyond Israel's siege against the
Palestinian people, and whose effects add another to a
series of Israeli violations of the rules of international law,
as well as of Security Council resolutions and commitments
entered into by the Israeli Government itself.

The situation is even more serious in View of the fact
that the Security Council will later today consider the
matter of Israel's new and repeated attacks against
Lebanon. Egypt calls on Israel to put an end to those
attacks and to withdraw forthwith from all Lebanese
territories, in accordance with Security Council resolution
425 (1978).

Although Israel justifies such measures on the pretext
of safeguarding its security, a quick overview of the Israeli
measures listed in the Palestinian complaint to the
Security Council belies those justifications.

First, Israel has imposed limits on the freedom of
movement inside the Palestinian territory. Israeli forces
have surrounded some regions and prevented Palestinians
from moving between cities, villages and towns.

Secondly, Israel has imposed further restrictions on
entry to occupied East Jerusalem.

Thirdly, Palestinian borders are closed to Palestinian
people and Palestinian goods from the West Bank and
Gaza; no Israeli goods are allowed to enter the Palestinian
territory or some parts of it. Furthermore, restrictions
have been imposed on the movement of third-country
nationals between Israel and Gaza.

Fourthly, Israel has closed the borders of the West
Bank and Gaza with Jordan and Egypt, respectively,
preventing the movement of people and goods that are
imported legally by Palestinian businessmen. All links
have been out between the Palestinian territory and the
outside world. It has been truly isolated from
neighbouring countries.

This closure does great harm to the Palestinian
economy. It is imposed, in most cases, against people and
goods, even those goods going to or coming from third
parties. This has resulted in great suffering and difficulties
for a large sector of the population, particularly those
Palestinian workers who rely on their jobs in Israel as the
only source of support for their families.

During years of occupation Israel used Palestinian
workers as a source of cheap labour in order to double
the gains of the Israeli economy. By preventing those
workers from reaching their jobs now, Israel is shirking
its responsibilities until a Palestinian economy can be
built.

Furthermore, such Israeli practices run counter to
Israel's obligations as the occupying Power, under the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949, as
well as under Security Council resolutions and other
international agreements.

Furthermore, such Israeli policies undermine the
efforts of those calling for peaceful negotiations as a
means to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict - particularly
between Israel and Palestinians - and strengthens the hand

 

of those calling for extremism, violence and terrorism on
both sides.

The international community, represented in the
Security Council, is called upon today more than ever
before to reaffirm its position on the illegitimacy of the
Israeli measures. The silence of the Security Council in the
face of such measures would undoubtedly raise great
questions as to the legitimacy of the measures and
standards applied by the Security Council in dealing with
different types of aggression and would point to double
standards in the application of such rules and norms. In the
end, that will weaken the ability of the Security Council to
deal with any potential act of violence in the future.

In calling upon Israel to put an end to those measures
that run counter to its commitments as the occupying Power
- and are in Violation of its agreements with the Palestinian
side, Egypt is not underestimating the threat of terrorism or
the need for us to consolidate our efforts in the face of
terrorism.

However, we do not believe that demolishing homes
and starving innocent Palestinians are ways to defend
security. We believe that the ideal means to achieve
security for all parties in the Middle East is to push the
peace process forward towards a just and comprehensive
peace and to help the countries of the region cooperate in
order to raise the living standards of their peoples.
The Summit of Peacemakers, held at Sharm El Sheikh
under the co-chairmanship of Presidents Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt and Bill Clinton of the United States, reaffirmed this
essential interlinkage between peace, security and economic
progress. In the final statement of the Summit, the two
Presidents, laid out several steps designed to achieve three
essential objectives: supporting the Israeli-Palestinian
agreements; supporting continuing negotiations towards a
comprehensive settlement; and working together to promote
security and stability in the region through effective means,
cooperation and further assistance. The Presidents severely
condemned all acts of terrorism, whatever the motive and
whoever the perpetrator, including the most recent terrorist
attacks in Israel. They denounced such acts of terrorism and
expressed their firm intention to work against them. They
called on all Governments to join in that condemnation and
in their stand against terrorist acts.

Despite the positive developments in the Middle East
since the Madrid peace conference, we acknowledge the
existence of threats to peace efforts in the Middle East,
including those posed by terrorist acts. A number of
Palestinian extremists have exploded bombs which have
killed dozens of Israeli civilians. Before those attacks an
Israeli extremist assassinated the late Israeli Prime
Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and before that, an Israeli
extremist was responsible for a massacre at the Ibrahimi
mosque in Hebron. All those offences remind us that the
enemies of peace are prepared to use the utmost violence
to achieve their ends. We must agree to reject such means
and to take all legitimate measures against them.

While renewing our condemnation of such terrorist
acts, we cannot accept the exploitation of those terrorist
crimes by one side in order to impose collective
punishment against the other. We call upon the Israeli
Government to abide by the commitments it made with
the Palestinian side. We call upon it to respect the agreed
timetable to end the Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories and to be more positive in
negotiations with both Syria and Lebanon.

Perhaps the strongest response to those trying to kill
peace in the Middle East is to accelerate the achievement
of that peace. Violence does not lead to peace; it produces
further Violence. Therefore this Vicious circle must be
broken. That requires wisdom, courage and far-
sightedness by all.

The Palestinian and Israeli sides succeeded in
achieving a historic reconciliation through the Declaration
of Principles signed on 13 September 1993, in which it
was agreed to take specific steps towards a peaceful
settlement in the dispute between them. The settlement
was based on Israel's withdrawal from the occupied
territories under resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
as well as on the legitimate political rights of the
Palestinian people. The Middle East has begun to move
from a period of war and struggle towards a new stage
which promises a just and comprehensive peace between
the peoples of this important region of the world. This
transitional period places further burdens on all the parties
concerned with the well-being and stability of the peoples
of the region.

Let us not believe that the continuing progress of the
peace process will be automatic or that it is inevitable.
Indeed, we believe that all parties concerned must give
greater impetus to negotiations. The wide support for the
peace process has until now been linked in the minds of
all concerned with expectations of regaining land and
rights, an end to bloodshed, and the beginning of regional
cooperation towards arms control and the development of
the economies of the States of the region in order to raise

 

the living standards of the people. Such noble objectives
must be obtained before true peace can prevail.
Consequently, the Security Council must, in its
deliberations today, deal with this problem as a source of
destabilization in the security of the entire Middle East
region.

The delegation of Egypt believes that the Security
Council will consider all aspects of the issue, especially the
consequences of the latest Israeli measures, within the
framework of the peace process. The long-term
repercussions of the breakdown of the peace process may
lead to violence taking over from the logic of peace and
cooperation.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt reaffirms that a just
and comprehensive peace will not be achieved unless all
parties respect their international commitments in good
faith. The Security Council's debate today will undoubtedly
send a clear message to the Israeli Government about the
need to end all measures which jeopardize the rights of the
Palestinian people so that the peace process can continue
progressing towards a just and comprehensive peace, which
all peoples of the region are searching for.

