Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor and organizing this debate. Iwould
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous and Executive Director YurI Fedotov
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of
Ambassador Tanin and his statement. They have all
given us a broad and accurate depiction of the current
situation in Afghanistan and described the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

I would like to focus now on three points that
Portugal deems of outstanding importance.

First, I would like to mention capacity-building
within the Afghan National Security Forces now that
the third tranche of the transition is under way and that
the Chicago Summit has determined that the NATO-led
combat mission in Afghanistan will cease in 2014.
Professional, capable and sustainable security forces
are absolutely indispensable if a free, independent and
democratic Afghanistan is to provide essential services
and goods to its population and to continue to play its
role in the region and in the world.

Portugal entirely supports the efforts to focus on
the training of security forces, particularly the police,
and to ensure that they are more professional and better
equipped, both in materiel and in capacity to deliver.
As such, I believe that the following sentence in the
Secretary-General's report clearly illustrates a crucial
capacity for the security forces to have in the very
specific Afghan framework:

"The United Nations continues to advocate for

attention to accountability mechanisms within the

Afghan security forces, ensuring the protection

of civilians and children amid conflict, as well as

the specific needs of women and girls as a central
component of transition and post-transition security

frameworks." (S/2012/462, para. 12)

In this regard, measures taken recently to prioritize
community-based policing, strengthen crime detection
and prevention, safeguard human rights and combat
violence against women and children cannot but be
commended and encouraged. We find it particularly
noteworthy that the national police plan sets a truly
ambitious goal of inducting 5,000 women into the
police by 2014. Women agents are essential elements for
addressing serious cases of crimes against women and
girls, and have shown all over the world that their action
has a tangible impact in the fight against gender-based
violence and the promotion and protection of the human
rights of women.

Secondly, I would like to mention the issue of
human rights in Afghanistan. The challenges caused by
the security situation in the country are of the utmost
seriousness and defy the time constraints of a Security
Council debate. Suffice it to say this time that Portugal is
encouraged by the declining trend in civilian casualties,
and we hope that it may be maintained over time. We
continue to witness the most blatant disrespect for
civilians by the insurgents, to whom more than 80 per
cent of all casualties can safely be attributed. Reaction
by the authorities of Afghanistan is imperative, not only
as an element of the ongoing struggle for peace in the
country, but also as a matter of addressing the essential
needs of the population.

As regards the human rights of women, we hear of
efforts to achieve the adherence of the Government of
Afghanistan to the principles of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. The development of
an action plan to implement the resolution appears to
us to be a very relevant instrument for strengthening
the promotion and protection of human rights and the
rule of law, and is in line, furthermore, with the mutual
commitments assumed at the Bonn Conference. The
Afghan Government and security forces may count on
Portugal's full support and available expertise for that
task.

Finally, I would say a few brief words on the
multilateral efforts undertaken by both Afghanistan
and its friends and partners throughout the world.
"Geography is destiny" has become a catchphrase,
sometimes all too easily misused. Afghanistan
consistently shows that it can find friends and partners
that are at a great distance but are clearly and seriously
committed to a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
The path chosen by Afghanistan - the path of
international partnership and productive interaction
with its neighbours - provides an opportunity for the
development of its resources. It shows, at the same time,
how truly regional and international the problems that
afflict Afghanistan are. These include issues such as
counter-narcotics, energy and transportation networks,
which require international cooperation at its highest
level.

I conclude by reiterating my country's support
for the work of UNAMA. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has played and
will continue to play an essential role in strengthening
Afghan institutions towards peace, democracy and
the promotion and protection of human rights, and in
supporting Afghanistan's full assumption of leadership
and ownership in the security, governance and
development areas.

