Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2327 (2016),
convinced of the need to conserve the unity of the
Security Council with respect to the situation in South
Sudan and given the important role of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on the
ground, in particular its mandate to protect civilians and
the support it can provide towards the implementation
of the peace agreement.

Although my country decided to support the
resolution just adopted, we wish to stress the fact that
the negotiating process did not address certain special
interest concerns expressed by Venezuela. Among the
issues that were not addressed, we wish to highlight the
language of today's resolution referring to sanctions,
and reiterate our emphatic condemnation of the attacks
on the Mission, its personnel and facilities, which must
be respected in accordance with international law. We
believe it unnecessary to include threats of a potential
imposition of additional measures against South
Sudan when those measures are not directly related
to a text that is intended to renew the mandate of the
Mission - all the more so when the resolution sets out
the expansion of the sanctions regime imposed on that
country. In our opinion, this would be the appropriate
context for addressing the sanctions.

However, in that regard we note the position of the
region, which only 10 days ago stressed that an

"an arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country and stresses
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation
and commitment by all South Sudanese parties
to faithfully implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and
for the region and the international community to
support them".
We therefore reiterate once again our position on the
necessity of applying African solutions to African
problems. We believe that in order to maintain
consistency in the supremacy of the political
process, the Security Council should join efforts in
revitalizing the political process in South Sudan and
progress in drawing up a clear political strategy to
comprehensively deal with the conflict in South Sudan
in strict coordination with countries and organizations
of the region.

That is why we not only note, but also welcome
the recent announcement by President Salva Kiir of his
decision to convene an inclusive national dialogue and
the decision of the Transitional Government of National
Unity to authorize the unconditional deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. Furthermore, once again
the concerns expressed by several countries, including
Venezuela, about references to unmanned aerial
vehicles or unmanned, unarmed aircraft systems were
ignored. These systems have frequently met with the
opposition of the State of South Sudan because of their
implications for the safeguarding of its sovereignty.

The same thing happened when we indicated
concerns about any interference by the Council in
the affairs of the African Union, when the intention
was expressed to assess the work of that regional
organization in the establishment of the hybrid court
for South Sudan, in accordance with international
standards that are not clearly defined. As in the past, we
participated actively in the discussion and negotiation
of the draft resolution, in a consistently constructive
spirit in search of consensus. However, the penholder's
negativity and inflexibility in accepting questions of
principle, such as that I have just raised, with a view
to adopting a text that might generate dissension, has
required us to speak out.

In conclusion, we trust that future concerns will
take these concerns into account so that we may achieve
a balanced text for an appropriate instrument to support
the work of UNMISS.

