Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting today on the
situation in Kosovo. I would also like to thank Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing on the latest
situation in Kosovo.

Like other Council members, Pakistan has
strongly condemned the violence of 17 and 18 March,
which claimed at least 19 lives. We condemn not only
the loss of life and the injuries, but also the damage to
Kosovo's cultural and religious sites during the
onslaught. We are happy that the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is
working with the local authorities in Kosovo to rebuild
some of those sites. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
restoring stability in Kosovo. We appreciate the
effective way in which the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, helped to defuse
this very difficult situation. In that regard, we support
Mr. Holkeri's request for additional police investigators
and prosecutors for UNMIK. We hope that UNMIK
will continue its investigations into the causes of the
violence and, in due course, report to the Council on its
findings. We also commend all those in Kosovo who
have strongly condemned the violence and have called
for calm and reconciliation.

Some have described last month's violence as a
wakeup call. Pakistan has been one of those few
countries that have consistently called for the
clarification of the final political status of Kosovo -
and perhaps the lone voice in the Council to do so. Let
me be clear: violence must not be rewarded. There
must be no impunity for those who carried out these
acts, whether Albanians or Serbs. Nevertheless, the
longer any movement towards status is delayed, the
more the delay will continue to feed into the
frustrations of one side and the nationalist rhetoric of
the other and the more it will perpetuate the cycle of
violence. Such violence will keep repeating itself
unless and until some solution is found to the thorny
issue of status. We will say this again, as we have said
before, the key to peace and prosperity lies in
clarifying Kosovo's final political status.

Pakistan's position on status is independent of our
support for standards. We take note of Mr. Holkeri's
recent remark that "the standards are not an obstacle to
Kosovo's progress". In our view, they are not meant to
be. We agree that the establishment of a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic and peaceful society in Kosovo
remains a fundamental objective in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999). We welcome the
announcement of the Standards Implementation Plan
by Mr. Holkeri in Pristina on 31 March. The Plan
identifies policies in each of the eight standards,
policies that have to be implemented by certain
deadlines, along with assigned responsibilities. The
Plan is to be implemented by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo, through the
support and assistance of UNMIK and the international
community.

However, Pakistan is concerned that not every
community has participated in the preparation of the
Implementation Plan. We hope that, later, this will not
be put forward as an obstacle in the implementation of
the plan. We are also concerned that the policy on two
of the most important standards - relating to returns
and to freedom of movement - has not as yet been
finalized. These are crucial areas, on which we hope
early progress can be achieved. Also crucial is the need
to revive the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade,
which, as Mr. Guehenno said, is currently on hold. Like
others, we are still in the process of studying the
Implementation Plan. At this point, we wish to offer
our initial, though cautious, support for it - but with
the following caveats.

First, the lack of support by any community or
party must not be allowed to be used as an excuse to
delay the achievement of standards or to prevent
progress towards the finalization of the status issue in
the future. Secondly, in implementing the plan, the bar
should not be set so high that most countries
represented in the Organization, including those in the
European Union, would have difficulty in meeting
those standards. Finally, the Plan should remain
realistic and achievable. In that regard, we are happy to
note Mr. Holkeri's observation that

"The plan overall is a living document: it will be
revised as time goes on. This makes sense,
because some policies may not work and we may
need new ones".

We understand that the Contact Group on Kosovo
is preparing a presidential statement on Kosovo. We
look forward to working with other Council members
to finalize such a statement. While we support the
efforts of the Contact Group and understand the
delicacy of the situation, we nevertheless would
encourage the Group to consult more widely than they
have been with other Council members when preparing
such documents. The automatic concurrence of other
Council members, who may have their own views on
the issues involved, should not be taken for granted.

