Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
deeply appreciates your initiative, Madam President,
not only in convening this open debate, but also in
providing a timely concept paper (S/2008/29l, annex),
which highlights the underlying principles and
challenges confronting post-conflict peacebuilding.

We share your view that peace operations are a
shared responsibility that depends on the support and
cooperation of a range of actors. As a result of our
experience in Nigeria, and as a country that has
devoted enormous resources - including lives - to
United Nations peacekeeping around the world, we
believe that the primary challenge is how to translate
peacebuilding initiatives into concrete benefits that
touch human lives at basic levels. Another persistent
challenge is how to coordinate and create synergy
among various peacebuilding actors and stakeholders
for a fully integrated response following the signing of
peace agreements. Overcoming those challenges
demands swift implementation of the strategic
frameworks developed for the countries on the agenda
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Peacebuilding requires sustained political
attention as well as flexible financial and material
resources. Only when these are combined with speedy
delivery can tangible results become manifest. We are
witnesses to situations where the slow delivery of
approved funds has compounded the difficulties of
recovery efforts and, in fact, has impeded the
deployment of international personnel and materiel. We
would therefore like to caution against political and
financial apathy, especially when time is of the essence
and the situation is urgent.

In that context, and mindful of the ever-
increasing demands on the Peacebuilding Fund, which
have raised valid concerns about its sustainability, we
urge the establishment of a funds monitoring and
tracking mechanism to follow up on the commitments
often made at donor conferences. My delegation
endorses the call for the establishment of a United
Nations fund to provide support for reconstruction. In
order to ensure its efficacy and solvency, such a fund
should, in addition to seeking contributions from
national Governments, explore voluntary funding
sources such as multilateral banks, international
foundations and global corporations.

Regarding the enhancement of civilian capacity
in critical functional areas, such as justice and security
sector reform, health services, civil service
administration and transitional justice, we believe that
Nigeria's Technical Aid Corps programme constitutes a
model that the Peacebuilding Commission should seek
to adopt to fill capacity gaps in post-conflict countries.
Since its inception, in 1987, more than
3,000 volunteers have been deployed on a bilateral
basis across 38 African, Caribbean and Pacific
countries. Under the Technical Aid programme,
specialized personnel - medical doctors, nurses,
lawyers, educationists and engineers - are deployed
from Nigeria to provide support and capacity-building
for the receiving countries, on the basis, of course, of
the requests and expressed needs of those countries. In
post-conflict situations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, in consultation with national
Governments and other stakeholders, can build on this
model to solve capacity limitation problems, especially
in addressing the need for judicial experts, human
rights specialists and civilian police. That is a crucial
way to ensure that appropriate experts are rapidly
deployed.

In a globalized world, there are imperatives for
effective peacebuilding. Coordination and coherence
constitute such imperatives. We therefore call for
improved coordination among international
peacebuilding actors in the field. The Peacebuilding
Commission needs to strengthen its relationships with
non-governmental development partners and with
regional and subregional organizations. In that context,
we believe that the African Union's Policy Framework
on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development and
the conflict resolution mechanism of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which
deals explicitly with peacebuilding, should guide
peacebuilding efforts in Africa.

My delegation wishes to underline the importance
of the regional dimension to the entire peacebuilding
process in Africa. The threats posed by illicit arms
trafficking, human and drug trafficking, the energy and
debt crises, internal militancy and other transboundary
challenges cannot be neglected. The nexus between
those threats and incessant relapses into conflict should
never be discounted. Indeed, my delegation believes
that those issues, in particular the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, constitute the greatest threats
to peacebuilding in Africa. In recognition of that
reality, Nigeria has been unrelenting in providing
financial and material support for the implementation
of several peacebuilding projects in the subregion -
under, of course, the rubric of ECOWAS - and we
pledge to continue to do so.

