Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate Croatia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I believe that, under your guidance, the
work of the Security Council will proceed very
smoothly.

We appreciate the briefing to the Security
Council by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the latest
developments in dealing with impunity in Darfur. The
question of the Sudan covers two issues: the North-
South question and that of the Darfur region. The
problem of Darfur involves the political process,
peacekeeping deployment, economic development,
humanitarian relief assistance and judicial justice. The
situation is complex and very tough. Currently, the
international community is focused on two major
issues: first, whether the peaceful situation can be
maintained in the Sudan; and secondly, whether the
largest mission in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping can be implemented smoothly and
achieve its desired results.

At present, North-South relations in the Sudan,
next year's presidential election and the political
processes in Darfur are at very sensitive junctures. As
the Sudan is the largest country in Africa in terms of
geography, the question of whether peace can be
maintained there is of great significance to the region
and the African continent as a whole. It will take a
great political wisdom to find a balanced and
comprehensive way to achieve peace and justice.

Regional conflict usually leads to massive human
rights violations and criminality. In recent years, in the
context of the international community's cooperative
efforts to address regional hotspots, answers have been
proposed for addressing impunity and achieving
international judicial fairness. However, the pursuit of
international judicial justice should be carried out with
the ultimate aim of putting an end to conflict and in the
wider context of restoring peace.

We recall that, in recent years, international
judicial action against impunity has been successful
only in situations where conflict has ceased and peace
has been consolidated. In such circumstances, judicial
practices are less likely to experience interference from
political factors and are thus more likely to achieve
justice. The hasty launch of legal proceedings while
conflict is ongoing will inevitably result in interference
in the relevant political processes. In such
circumstances, no good results will be obtained, even
with the best intentions to pursue international justice.

The International Criminal Court embodies the
expectations and aspirations of nations to pursue
international justice. To that end, the Court needs the
political trust and support of all nations. In July, the
Prosecutor of the ICC announced the Court's charges
against leaders of the Sudan, causing considerable
worldwide repercussions. Many States are concerned
that this move will have a negative impact on peace in
the Sudan. The League of Arab States and the African
Union have both expressed their serious concern.

The Government of the Sudan is working to end
impunity in Darfur through national proceedings.
Furthermore, the Government of the Sudan has also
been making new efforts, including through active
cooperation with the United Nations peacekeeping
deployment. It has expressed its support for the Carter
initiative and for the peaceful efforts of the Joint Chief
Mediator to promote negotiations. It has also
announced a ceasefire in Darfur. All these measures
deserve to be acknowledged and welcomed.

The Chinese Government supports the
international community's efforts to achieve peace and
international justice in Darfur. We appeal to the
International Criminal Court in the spirit of
cooperation to create a situation in which its efforts,
together with those of other parties of the international
community, can interact positively to jointly promote
the peace process in the Sudan.

