Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing and his commitment day in and day out, and to
reiterate France's support for him.

Every day that passes reaffirms something that
we regularly condemn before the Council: the false
status quo that we are witnessing and which in fact
masks a daily deterioration of the situation, which may
at any time degenerate into an open crisis, as we have
once again seen in recent days in Gaza. Today, I will
specifically focus on Gaza, which is once again on the
brink, by highlighting three main elements.

First, between 11 and 13 November, the Gaza Strip
was on the point of toppling into a new deadly conflict,
such as the territory has experienced three times over
the past decade. Given the potential consequences of a
new conflict for the populations concerned, we join the
Secretary-General in calling for calm and restraint on
all sides. In a particularly tense context, we also stress
the need to avoid any initiative and action likely to
provoke an escalation.

Between 12 and 13 November, nearly 500 rockets
were launched towards Israeli territory in less than
24 hours. The fact that there were several victims is
to be condemned. The intensity of those strikes is
unprecedented, even during the conflict of 2014. We
have condemned in the strongest terms such firing of
rockets by Hamas and other armed groups at Israeli
territory.

The return to calm that we have now seen for
almost a week needs to be perpetuated based on the
2014 security arrangements in order to prevent a new
cycle of violence, of which the civilian populations
would again be the primary victims. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of Egypt and the United
Nations Special Coordinator. The restraint seen since
13 November should be noted. It must be preserved
regardless of the political cost for each side.

Secondly, the most recent peak in tensions, the
third since the summer and the most serious, is part ofa
context of humanitarian collapse and political stalemate
in the Gaza Strip. For more than six months, there has
been a succession of violent incidents in Gaza against
the backdrop of a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
severity. The number of protests that have taken
place and that continue along the separation fence is
terrible: 170 Palestinians killed and nearly 6,000 shot
since 30 March in the context of rallies fuelled by the
desperation of the population. France has condemned
the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
and called on Israel to respect the right of Palestinians
to demonstrate peacefully, as well as its obligation
to protect civilians under international humanitarian
law. We have also condemned the manipulation of the

protests by Hamas and other armed groups.

To give immediate hope to the people of Gaza,
we must first address the humanitarian emergency.
The efforts of the Special Coordinator and all United
Nations agencies to rapidly improve the humanitarian
situation contribute significantly to such a response.
All actors must coordinate their efforts to that end.
Ultimately, only lifting the blockade, accompanied by
the necessary security guarantees for Israel, will make
it possible to meet the needs of the population.
Lastly, there can be no lasting solution to the crisis
in Gaza without a reconciliation agreement, which
must enable the Palestinian Authority to regain all its
prerogatives in the territory. We support that goal in
the framework of the efforts of Egypt and the Special
Coordinator. We call on all parties to resume the
dialogue to relaunch the process of inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, as an extension of the agreement reached
in Cairo a year ago.

Let us also remember that Gaza is not a stand-alone
territory and cannot be dissociated from the Palestinian
question as a whole. There will be no lasting peace in the
region without agreement between Israel and Palestine,
no viable Israeli-Palestinian agreement without a
Palestinian State, and no Palestinian State without an
agreement that allows for unity between Gaza and the
West Bank under the aegis of the legitimate Palestinian
authorities.

Given the situation in Gaza since last March, the
Security Council has never been able to speak with one
voice. That deafening silence more incomprehensible
by the day to the populations of the region, as it is to the
world watching us.

I would like to expand on my remarks regarding
the Palestinian question as a whole. Twenty-five years
after the signing of the Oslo Accords and 30 years after
the Algiers Declaration, we are close to the point of no
return. The promise oftwo States threatens to fade away
before our eyes, like a desert mirage. That promise is
deteriorating on the ground, as a result of settlements
and the political and territorial fragmentation of
Palestinians. But it is also vanishing from our minds,
in the absence of a political horizon. Generation after
generation, despair and fatalism are overcoming
Palestinians and Israelis, who live in two parallel
worlds and do not talk to one another. Accordingly, the
dynamics can only be negative.

Therefore this point must be hammered home:
there is no viable or realistic alternative to the two-

State solution. The unique territorial reality, which is
taking shape before our eyes, would ultimately mean
that the Palestinians give up their national aspirations
and that the Israelis relinquish their democratic project.
It is therefore essential to fill the current political
vacuum. But I would like to remind our American
friends, as the President of the Republic has said to
President Trump on several occasions, that a peace
plan that fails to recognize the internationally agreed
parameters, particularly with regard to Jerusalem,
would be condemned to failure. Those parameters are
not options or a menu from which we can choose. They
are the indispensable foundation of any peace plan and
any future negotiations. Throwing off those parameters,
in particular where it concerns Jerusalem, is to take
the risk of transforming a conflict of a territorial and
political nature into an identity and religious conflict,
which would make any compromise impossible and
open a space into which all radical groups in the region
would seek to rush.

Allow me to revisit those parameters. They provide
for two States living in peace and security, along safe
and recognized borders, drawn on the basis of the 1967
lines, with possible territory swaps as agreed by the
parties. In that respect, the decision announced last
month to suspend the demolition of the Bedouin Village
of Khan Al-Ahmar is a first step, but one that remains
tentative and revocable at all times. We therefore ask
the Israeli authorities to renounce it definitively. Khan
Al-Ahmar is in an area that is essential to the Viability
of the two-State solution.

Jerusalem would be the future capital of the two
States. Nearly 600 housing units in settlements in
East Jerusalem - Ramat Shlomo and Ramot - were
approved earlier this month. Those advances further
weaken the project ofa viable, sovereign and contiguous
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital. With
nearly 5,800 approvals, the year 2018 is close to
reaching the record of 2012 in terms of settlements in
East Jerusalem.

There must be a fair and realistic solution for
Palestinian refugees. In the wait for a negotiated
solution, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays a key
role, which is crucial to preserve. The goal must be to
sustain the exemplary mobilization of the international
community following the United States decision to
suspend its contribution to the Agency.

France is a friend to both Israelis and Palestinians.
It has no other interest than peace in the region and
the possibility for the populations concerned to live
in safety and dignity. The events that occurred a
week ago must be a warning: in Gaza as elsewhere,
the same causes always produce the same effects. If
we do not deal with those causes, we will not succeed
indefinitely in avoiding a new conflict. We therefore
have a collective responsibility within the Council to
act before it is too late. France will continue to spare no
effort in that regard.

