Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to start by conveying our
gratitude to the Secretary-General and Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, as well as to all our colleagues, who during
the previous meeting took the floor and extended
kind words of condolence to us following the killing
of Ambassador Karlov in Ankara. Their words of
condolence and support are extremely important for us.

I now to turn to South Sudan. We note the progress
in implementing the South Sudanese peace agreement
of last year. The Transitional Government of National
Unity and the Parliament are working effectively with
representatives of the armed opposition. Practical
steps are being taken to strengthen mechanisms aimed
at providing security and to draft a new constitution.
President Salva Kiir launched an inclusive national
dialogue. Amnesty has been declared for the partisans
of Rick Machar who participated in the July events in
Juba.

We are concerned by reports of armed clashes
in various parts of the country. However, one has to
understand clearly what their exact nature is. We share
the view of the United Nations and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) that, to a large
extent, those incidents have been the result of problems
in the command structures and a lack of discipline in
units of the Government's armed forces and those of the
opposition. Another factor is the split in the opposition
forces of the partisans of Taban Deng Gai and Rick
Machar. There are also groups that are under no one's
control. On top of all that there have been spontaneous
clashes that are the result of interethnic tensions or
even simply criminal actions.

Against that backdrop, we have doubts with regard
to the widely circulating rumours that the Government
is amassing its forces and mobilizing local armed
elements in the Equatoria region for a large-scale
offensive that is about to start after the end of the rainy
season.

I would like to take the opportunity of the presence
of representatives of the Secretariat to ask whether they
can comment on the fact that the Juba Government has
said that what is involved are normal rotations of the
armed forces? We would also call upon our colleagues
from the Council and the Secretariat to refrain from
speculation about the threat of genocide in South
Sudan. Naturally, we are concerned by the proliferation
of venomous rhetoric in South Sudan, as well as actions

against various ethnic groups; however, those actions
are not targeted against any particular community,
rather there has been an increase in ethnic tensions in
general.
We also note that those manifestations and actions
have emanated, as a rule, from various types of armed
and criminal groups and undisciplined elements of
the security apparatus. This is why we would refrain
from concluding that there is any form of targeted or
systemic policy.

Among the positive events of late, we have Juba's
unconditional agreement to and acceptance of the
Regional Protection Force. That step was welcomed by
the Secretary-General, as well as by the IGAD summit in
Addis Ababa. Practical issues regarding the deployment
ofthe Force are being discussed by representatives ofthe
Government and the United Nations in a constructive
manner, which was demonstrated, inter alia, by Juba's
consent to the request of the United Nations for the
provision of plots of land for the use of the Force.

However, even the deployment of a full-
fledged 4,000-strong Regional Force is unlikely to
significantly improve the difficult political, military
and humanitarian situation in the country. We agree
with the view of the Secretary-General and IGAD that
that would require the full implementation of the peace
agreement by the parties, with international partners'
support.

Our position regarding new sanctions against South
Sudan is well known and is shared by many members
of the Council. In the IGAD summit communique dated
9 December it was clearly stated that new targeted
sanctions or an arms embargo would not serve to
establish lasting peace and stability in South Sudan.
Furthermore, the African Union's Peace and Security
Council's summit communique dated 19 September
includes no calls for new sanctions.

Put succinctly, the sponsors of the draft resolution
on sanctions are essentially ignoring Africa's position
regarding the counterproductive nature of new
restrictions on the process aimed at trying to reach a
settlement. Those colleagues are clearly demonstrating
in their statements that they only accept those African
documents that are in line with their interests and
approaches.

The sponsors of the draft resolution on sanctions
are ignoring the fact that differences among African
States will probably undermine the effectiveness of
any such restrictions. We see that in the example of a
number ofAfrican States, including the Central African
Republic, where targeted sanctions and the arms
embargo are simply not working. South Sudan is awash
with arms. That is evident from the fact that the group
of a few hundred supporters of Riek Machar who fled
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo had very few
weapons with them, so quite obviously they dumped or
hid them somewhere in South Sudanese territory.

The former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ellen Laj, also confirmed the presence of
weapons in camps for the protection of civilians as well
as in arms caches in the immediate vicinity. That, by
the way, might have been what motivated the decision
by the authorities to shut down the displaced-persons
camp in Juba.

Generally speaking, in order to establish lasting
peace in South Sudan, we do not need a Security Council
arms embargo but rather targeted measures aimed at
disarming the population as well as at demobilizing and
reintegrating combatants. Targeted sanctions against
the Minister of Information and the Chief of General
Staff of the Government Army may have unpredictable
consequences. We suspect that someone really wants
to get rid of President Salva Kiir by ensuring that he
gets into a fight with various influential figures in his
immediate surroundings.

Instead of helping to resolve the conflict, a number
of Security Council members are attempting to increase
pressure on Juba, including through targeted sanctions
and the hybrid court. Such short-sighted tactics will not
help the situation.

