Mr. Bessho (Japan): I wish to thank Mr. Lacroix
for his briefing. I welcome his visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last month to urge key players
to fulfil their commitment to the December agreement,
especially his engagement with President Kabila. I
thought that was very important.

Having heard his briefing, we remain deeply
concerned about the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is regrettable that there has
been little progress in the political process, including
on the implementation of the December agreement.
This has been the case since the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) mandate renewal
and troop reduction in March. Security in the country
has declined, and the situation is especially dire in
Kasai. We support MONUSCO's efforts to adapt to the
situation and its trying to be as flexible and agile as
possible within its mandate, as Mr. Lacroix explained
to us today.

Since the consultations we held three months
ago, the situation of declining security is spreading,
as evidenced by the serious violence in Kasai. The
implementation of the political agreement has been
slow at best, and the prospect of timely elections
remains uncertain. In this regard, we are concerned
by the announcement by the Independent National
Electoral Commission that it will be unable to conduct
the elections by the end of the year. The international
community, including the Council, must remain united
and committed in sending a clear message to the parties
in the Congo, especially the Government, on the need to
swiftly implement the agreement, including the holding
of elections.

Supporting the political and electoral process is now
one of MONUSCO's core mandates. Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix has explained to us the main challenges
that MONUSCO is currently facing, including the
extreme difficulty of voter registration in Kasai given
the situation and the lack of resources in general. He
gave us some idea ofwhat else MONUSCO can and must
do in supporting the Congolese authorities and these
processes, including in particular the early holding of
elections. We support the work of MONUSCO.

Regarding another priority task of MONUSCO,
that is, the protection of civilians, the Mission has been
adjusted to relocate a substantive number of personnel
and resources to the western and southern areas so as to
better respond to this challenge. The situation in Kasai
is dire, with more than 3,300 killings reported by the
Catholic church since last October. Civilians continue
to be attacked by armed elements in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Does this
mean that the reinforcement of up to several hundred
personnel in Kasai that is envisioned is not sufficient to
achieve results on the ground?

The Council should continue to monitor whether,
in the light of the current security situation across the
country, the current posture of the Mission is sufficient
to ensure the effective and dynamic protection
of civilians.

While the overall strategic review is under way,
we support MONUSCO's efforts in acting actively
and flexibly, adapting to the situation under such
difficult circumstances.

