Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to express my
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. We are indeed very pleased to see
Mr. Maman Sidikou in his new capacity and we thank
him for sharing the perspective of the States members
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We
are also grateful to Ambassador Fatima Mohammed,
whose statement we align ourselves with, and Mr. Vale
de Almeida for their very useful remarks.

The Sahel region continues to face growing threats
from terrorists and other international organized
criminals. Coupled with the lack of progress in the
Malian peace process, this is exacerbating the situation.
The scale and sophistication of the recent terrorist
attacks, including yesterday's incidents, as Ms. Keita
mentioned, is unprecedented. It once again underscores
how important it is that we continue fighting this menace
in a coordinated manner by supporting the efforts of
the countries in the region, and we want to reinforce
what Ambassador Fatima said earlier in that regard.

The role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel remains essential, and we appreciate the
military operations it has conducted in the tri-border
area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. We note
the progress made towards its full operationalization,
including through the creation ofa dedicated trust fund,
the establishment of a coordination and liaison office
for its headquarters in Sevare and the setting up of the
G-5 Sahel's Permanent Secretariat in Nouakchott.

Nevertheless, we also recognize the enormous
challenges that must still be addressed to accelerate
the Joint Force's full operationalization, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/432) and
indicated in today's briefing. In particular, we
understand the Joint Force's urgent need for air
assets for intelligence gathering, transportation and
communication equipment. In the absence of transport
assets, communication between the sector headquarters
and command posts, as well as the battalion camps, no
doubt presents a serious challenge. Constructing the
camp infrastructure and enhancing the Joint Force's
headquarters should also be a matter of priority so as
to expedite its full deployment and operationalization.

We note the series of high-level meetings that have
taken place over the past couple of months to mobilize
international support for the Joint Force. We appreciate
the financial pledges made by bilateral and multilateral
partners, including at the high-level international
conference on the Sahel held in February in Brussels.
I would be remiss ifI failed to commend Rwanda in
particular for its demonstration of African solidarity by
contributing $1 million in support of the Joint Force's
operationalization. We hope that all the recent financial
pledges will be redeemed. In the light of the serious
difficulties on the ground, as we heard in the briefing
today and as was also underscored in the Secretary-
General's report, the urgency of this matter cannot
be overemphasized.

We welcome the signing of the technical arrangement
between the G-5 Sahel countries - Burkina Faso,
Chad, Mauritania, Mali and the Niger - and the United
Nations and the European Commission for the provision
of operational and logistical support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, in line with resolution 2391 (2017). We note
the two options proposed by the Secretary-General in
his report for more extensive and comprehensive United
Nations support to the Joint Force, using assessed
contributions to ensure sustainable and predictable
long-term financing and support. We hope the Council
will seriously consider them and make an appropriate
decision in due course.

The development of a compliance framework, in
consultation with the G-5 Sahel States and the relevant
United Nations offices and departments, designed
to prevent and address possible adverse effects of
the Joint Force's operations on local communities,
is also encouraging. We welcome the memorandum
of understanding signed between the G-5 Sahel and
the African Union Commission for the provision of
equipment, as well as technical and financial support,
towards the operationalization of the Joint Force.
We also welcome the decision last month by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to extend
the deployment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force for an
additional 12 months.

The complex and difficult challenges facing the
Sahel region cannot be effectively addressed without
tackling the root causes of instability. That is why we
agree with the Secretary-General that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force is only one part of the broader response.
Implementing a comprehensive and holistic strategy
on the basis of ownership and partnership with the
countries of the Sahel region is the best way forward.
In that connection, we note the work that is being done
to recalibrate the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and welcome the appointment of a
special adviser for the Sahel. We also note the strategic
consultative meeting on the Sahel recently organized
by the African Union in Nouakchott with the aim of
aligning the efforts of the African Union, the United
Nations and other international partners in support of
the security and development efforts of countries in the
region. The region certainly needs the enhanced and
sustained engagement of the international community,
and it will continue to be crucial to ensure greater
synergy and coherence in the efforts of the African
Union, the United Nations and other international
partners in support of the countries of the region.

It is now all the more apparent that the security and
development of the Sahel has broader implications for
global stability, and we hope the Council will continue
to support the efforts of the countries of the region to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime.

