Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the United Arab
Emirates, I have the honour to convey our warmest
congratulations to you, Sir. on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow us also to thank you, Mr. President, for having
responded to the call by the Non-Aligned Movement
for the convening of this important meeting in order to
take up the dimensions of the Iraqi issue and its grave
potential consequences, not only for the Gulf States,
but also for international peace and security as a whole.
Nor can I fail on this occasion to express my
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France, for his excellent leadership
of the Security Council last month.

The United Arab Emirates has very carefully
followed all the developments in the implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002) since its adoption
approximately three months ago, believes that this is a
major turning point in Iraq's implementation of its
commitment and obligation to fully disarm its weapons
of mass destruction and proscribed weapons, in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions.
The important and valuable information provided by
Mr. Blix, Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), and Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on 27
January 2003 clearly shows the progress and the extent
of cooperation on the part of the Iraqi Government in
facilitating the mission of the international inspectors.
The international community cannot deny these results,
and we consider them a positive and important step
towards a just and comprehensive settlement of the
issue of weapons of mass destruction disarmament in
Iraq.

The United Arab Emirates fully appreciates the
major efforts being made by Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei
and their fellow inspectors in verifying the various
proscribed weapons programmes in Iraq. It welcomes
the important steps taken by the Iraqi side in the past
few weeks, including the re-evaluation of its stockpiles
after the four years following the departure of the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) team.
Such steps also involve the infrastructure for
UNMOVIC offices in Baghdad, Mosul and Al Basrah;
unconditional assistance provided to the inspectors,
including the opening up of all sensitive sites and
official institutions, homes and public and private
properties; providing the necessary guarantees for
UNMOVIC aircraft; interviews conducted freely with
Iraqi scientists; and, ultimately, a presidential decree
on the prohibition of the production, importation and
stockpiling of all precursors for the manufacture of
proscribed chemical, biological, nuclear and ballistic
weapons. These are unprecedented, positive
developments in Iraqi cooperation, and we believe that
they ought to be developed and invested in, instead of
being aborted through the threat of waging war.

Like all other States in the region and of the
entire international community, the United Arab
Emirates has continuously called for the full
elimination of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction in
order to avoid all the destructive and grave
consequences they could have for the security, stability
and development of the region and its peoples.

In light of the current sensitive situation, we
believe that a firm foundation of mutual confidence is
needed, based on cooperation between Iraq and the
international inspectors, in order to expedite their
mission. We call on the international community to
continue bolstering the capabilities and performance of
the inspection regime in Iraq. We call on the
international community to give the international
inspectors the necessary time to complete their mission
with full objectivity and balance in such a way as to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.

In this regard, we wish to stress the following
needs. First, the responsibility and authority of United
Nations institutions - particularly the Security
Council, which is responsible for dealing with crises
and for building peace and security in the world -
must be fully respected. We believe this is the legal and
political reference point for the continuing action of the
international inspectors, in accordance with resolution
1441 (2002).

Secondly, action must be aimed at lifting the
inhuman suffering and sanctions imposed on the Iraqi
people, as set out in paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991). All unilateral, non-peaceful
options should be set aside. These may lead to a new
war with grave consequences - not only for the
people of Iraq, but also for the States and peoples of
the region . This is a region that has not yet finished
dealing with and containing all the consequences of the
series of wars we have faced in the last three decades.

Thirdly, the Iraqi Government must be called
upon to continue its immediate and full cooperation
with the inspection regime for the destruction of all its
proscribed weapons of mass destruction, in accordance
with resolution 1441 (2002) and all other relevant
international resolutions. Such cooperation includes
providing all written responses and evidence to the
international inspectors in order to fill the gaps and
answer all outstanding questions relating to biological,
chemical and ballistic programmes.

Fourthly, the Iraqi Government must immediately
implement all its other outstanding legal obligations,
which are a source of great tension in the region. This
should be done in accordance with resolutions of the
Security Council, and of the League of Arab States as
adopted at the last Beirut summit and relating to the
settling of the issue of Kuwaiti prisoners and third-
country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti property, in
full respect for the security, sovereignty and
independence of the State of Kuwait.

Fifthly, the international community must not
apply double standards. Paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) calls for comprehensive
implementation - not partial implementation - of all
the requirements for a regime to eliminate all weapons
of mass destruction, without exception from the Middle
East, including Israel, which occupies Palestinian and
Arab land and is alone in possession of lethal nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons.

In conclusion, as we stand at a very dangerous
crossroad between war and peace, we look forward to
these deliberations in support of the efforts of the
international community for a just, comprehensive and
peaceful settlement of the Iraq issue. We also stress the
need for all relevant parties to show the necessary
political will to eliminate the option of a military
confrontation and act within international legitimacy in
order to save millions of lives and to avoid the
economic, social and security consequences of war and
to meet the entire world's aspirations for peace and
security.

