Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to express to you my
warmest thanks and my appreciation for your presiding
over this very important meeting and we hope it will
contribute to speeding up the Council's examination of
African problems, beginning with its responsibility towards
the maintenance of international peace and security under
the United Nations Charter.

Our meeting coincides with the issuance of the
progress report of the Secretary-General (S/ 1999/ 1008) on
the implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/ 1998/318). What is of interest here is that the Secretary-
General presented a progress report which, like his earlier
report, contains entire chapters that do not fall within the
competence of the Security Council. However, the progress
report is addressed only to the Council, whereas the first
report was submitted to both the Council and the General
Assembly and was also considered by the Economic and
Social Council. We wonder why the same approach has not
been adopted in this particular case.

In this context, allow me to recall Egypt's ongoing
position that we must distinguish between the competence
of the Council and the competence of the other organs of
the United Nations under the Charter. We recall also the
need for the Council to take into account the delicate
balances between the decision-making bodies of the
Organization under the Charter, and above all the role of
the General Assembly, in studying the principles of
cooperation in alleviating human suffering, examining the
causes of conflict and strengthening durable peace and
sustainable development. This is not to mention the
competences of other United Nations bodies responsible for
these issues. We are pleased that the Council is studying
the problems of Africa and the means for finding solutions
to them, as these problems violate or threaten international
peace and security.

In the last few years, African countries have shown
more willingness and determination to confront the
challenges facing them at the dawn of the twenty-first
century, and their desire to assume their collective
responsibility for maintaining peace and security in the
continent and for playing the crucial role that they must
play in settling disputes in their own territory. This
willingness and determination were demonstrated at the
thirty-fifth OAU Summit in Algiers in July 1999 and in
the resolutions and declarations adopted there.

That OAU and the subregional organizations are
fulfilling a more important role in finding solutions to
African disputes does not relieve the United Nations and
the Security Council of their primary responsibilities:
those organizations cannot replace the United Nations or
the Security Council in the settlement of disputes. Hence,
the importance of a greater and more effective movement
by the Council towards translating these responsibilities
into practical measures to deal with the growing
impression among African heads of State, as reflected in
their statements to the General Assembly, that the United
Nations seems to attach greater importance to problems
that arise in other parts of the world, to the detriment of
Africa's conflict issues. We welcome the positive
measures adopted by the Council in its follow-up to the
Secretary-General's report on the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/l999/1008), and its
implementation of such recommendations as fall within its
competence.

We observe, nevertheless, that there is some
hesitation, even foot-dragging, by the Council in assuming
its responsibilities to take the necessary steps at the
proper time to avoid an escalation of these conflicts in
Africa, ensure the stability of States, achieve progress and
establish peace. These issues deserve greater attention
from the Council on strengthening the various frameworks
for settlements between parties in contention.

We cannot mention the situation in Africa without
expressing our deep concern and dismay at the
deteriorating situation in the Horn of Africa. The tragedy
that befell Somalia and its people over eight years ago
continues with no measure by or direction from the
Council to put an end to it. Whereas we stress that the
responsibility for finding a peaceful settlement to the
Somali crisis lies with the Somalis themselves, we do feel
that the Council should act more forcefully to find a
solution that would preserve Somalia' s territorial integrity,
maintain its sovereignty and achieve national
reconciliation so that it can take its place once more
within the community of nations.

 

The Council should not be content with pious
sentiments in support of the international and regional
efforts of the various States and organizations in the region
which are involved. In this connection, we hope that the
Secretary-General's report on Somalia of 16 August 1999
(S/l999/882), which many parties in Somalia have
welcomed, will contribute to motivating the Security
Council to fulfil its mandate within the context of the
Somali crisis, especially in respect of the embargo on arms
deliveries under its resolution 733 (1992).

At the same time, Egypt feels that the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, with its endless loss of life and
destruction of property, has lasted too long. We think it is
high time to put an end to this conflict, and we hope that
the Security Council will carry out its responsibility to help
resolve this conflict through the parties' implementing the
Agreement which they signed under OAU auspices.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is one of the most serious challenges that Africa faces on
the eve of the twenty-first century. This is a conflict where
the armies of six African countries are involved. It has led
to the displacement of more than 700,000 people. Despite
the many complex dimensions of this conflict, the countries
concerned have managed to come to a Ceasefire Agreement
to put an end to it. Although we welcome Security Council
resolution 1258 (1999) to send up to 90 liaison officers to
this region we urge the Council to adopt measures to
strengthen the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement
by mandating a military observer mission to be followed by
the establishment and deployment of a large-scale
peacekeeping operation.

With respect to the situation in Sierra Leone, the
Security Council should step up its efforts to help achieve
peace in this fraternal country.

We hope that the Council will keep in mind the
recommendation contained in the final report of the
Secretary-General for a broader peace operation in order to
implement the Lome Accord, which would restore the
credibility of the Council in resolving problems in that
region.

Egypt, like many other African countries, is committed
to assuming its responsibilities by contributing to the
resolution of conflicts in Africa. We participate by
contributing armed forces, military observers or police
officers to the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Sierra Leone, Western Sahara and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as in the Central African Republic,
where the Egyptian army forms the backbone of the
United Nations force in that country.

Egypt also takes part in operations outside Africa -
in Kosovo, Bosnia, East Timor and other regions of the
world. Our participation stems from the conviction that
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security is a collective responsibility, which
should not be left to a particular continent or a particular
geographic region, such as Africa, which would assume
the responsibilities for resolving their own conflicts.

As a result, we hope that the Council will have a
similar conviction and will adopt similar measures to
resolve conflicts in Africa, in keeping with the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

In this context, allow me finally to recall what the
Secretary-General told us in his report with respect to the
causes of conflict in Africa and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in that continent. He
said that today the international community must adopt
concrete measures, because declarations and pious wishes
are not enough to measure up to the actions that the
international community must take in Africa in order to
resolve its problems.

