Mr. Assaker (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Government of Lebanon, allow me to
extend to you, Mr. President, to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan and the members of the Council our deep
gratitude for the ongoing efforts to follow up on the
implications of the criminal assassination of the late
Prime Minister, the martyr Rafik Hariri. I would also
like to thank the Foreign Ministers for their kind words
of friendship with the people of Lebanon and their
confidence in the ability of the Lebanese people to
overcome the difficult obstacles that they face.

At this juncture, and in the light of the results that
the Council has reached, the Government of Lebanon
wishes to reaffirm its statement made at the Council's
5292nd meeting, last week. The Lebanese Government
considers that the main goal of the International
Independent Investigation Commission is to uncover
the whole truth about that heinous terrorist crime.
Reaffirming its appreciation for the serious and solid
work carried out by Mr. Mehlis and the Commission,
the Lebanese Government is convinced that identifying
and punishing the perpetrators of the crime and meting
out justice will contribute greatly to the consolidation
of Lebanon's national unity, as well as the security and
stability of the country and the region.

Lebanon has entered a new phase in its history,
charged with the ambition of its sons and daughters to
consolidate the country's political independence,
enhance its sovereignty and establish foreign relations
based on equality and reciprocity with friendly,
brotherly countries.

Lebanon, with the assistance of these countries,
seeks to develop its political system of centuries-old
democracy and reform its economic system, consistent
with social realities, the needs of the Lebanese people
and the demands of the current era.

My Government reiterates its call on all
concerned parties to cooperate sincerely and seriously
with the International Independent Investigation
Commission so that justice can take its proper course.

The late Prime Minister, the martyred Rafik
Hariri believed in the United Nations system. He
believed in its principles and its defence of the right to
uphold justice in order to protect Member States and
their peoples. He believed in Lebanon as a homeland
for co-existence, a democratic, independent Arab
country open to all cultures and civilizations. All
Lebanese share that belief and adhere to those
principles.

