Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Lithuanian presidency of the
Security Council for convening today's debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/34l).

Belgium fully endorses the statement just made by
the observer of the European Union.

There can be no lasting peace without lasting
institutions. It is therefore clear that the mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping missions should include
a rule-of-law component that is detailed and concise
and allows us to measure progress accomplished. In my
statement, I should like to address certain aspects of
that mandate that we think are essential if one day we
hope to achieve the rule of law in a country emerging
from conflict.

How can we build lasting institutions when former
combatants are still circulating with weapons in hand
and there are latent tensions that can at any time spiral
into acts of violence, thereby spoiling all the efforts
undertaken? Disarming former parties to a conflict,
their demobilization and reintegration into civil society
are essentail elements in building a State based on
the rule of law. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) undertaking should be part and
parcel of peacekeeping missions, while appropriate
human and material resources should be provided in
agreed-upon budgets.

Moreover, security sector reform (SSR) is another
indispensable condition for the success of rebuilding
efforts for the institutions of a country. That entails
re-establishing citizens' trust in the State and a feeling
of security for each individual, as well as by reforming
the military and establishing services in the areas of the
police, tribunals, prisons, border control mechanisms
and so on. Such services must work properly and be
subject to adequate oversight in line with rule-of-
law standards. Accomplishing those crucial tasks
undoubteldy requires strong political commitment
and national ownership on the part of the countries
concerned. Nevertheless, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should provide for specific and substantive
support for those crucial reforms.

At each stage, the principle of accountability for
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
should be applied. In the context of DDR and SSR
processes, there can be no amnesty provided for such
crimes, much less the reintegration of perpetrators into
law enforcement forces. National jurisdictions should
therefore be swiftly made capable of prosecuting
perpetrators.

The building of the rule of law and of democratic
institutions presupposes that animosity between former
fighters, and among the citizens themselves, should at
least have diminished somewhat since the end of the
conflict. To that end, and to avoid a return of violence,
United Nations peacekeeping operations should
endorse or even initiate all efforts that could bring
about a national reconciliation process. In that regard,
Belgium welcomes the project for the promotion of
dialogue and reconciliation between Muslim and
Christian communities in the Central African Republic
developed by the United Nations office responsible for
the responsibility to protect and prevent genocide.

It is nevertheless clear that peacekeeping operations
can hardly tackle those problems head-on nor work
alone. The optimal sequence of priorities in this area is
a true challenge. Moreover, in addition to peacekeeping
operations, many players work on the ground in
countries emerging from conflict in the areas of DDR,
SSR and institutional reform, be it a United Nations
country team or bilateral or multilateral donors.

The effectiveness ofUnited Nations activities on the
ground depends on the quality of coordination between
United Nations bodies and regional organizations
and countries concerned in bilateral efforts as well
as with the national authorities of the country. That
is a matter not only of preventing duplication, which
could be counter-productive, but primarily to guarantee
the most effective use of resources earmarked for the
establishment of institutions in line with the rule of law.

In that regard, Belgium believes it necessary, from
the very beginning of any international intervention,
for the United Nations to facilitate or guarantee
coordination of institution-rebuilding efforts backing
the State concerned, with the vision and national
ownership process of building the rule of law being
the end goal. We know that national ownership in the
context of a fragile State just coming out of conflict
could be a hollow concept ifthere is no genuine political
commitment from the local authorities in carrying out
this objective. Of course, such commitment should
be supported by the resources of the international
community but also progressively by the resources of
the national budget of the State concerned. Finally,
consulting with and bringing women to participate in
the institutional rebuilding process, as well as taking
into account their situations and particular needs, are
yet other guarantees of the lasting nature of the national
ownership process.

The end of a peacekeeping operation mandate
should not in principle mean the end of the international
community's support for the various processes of
credible institutional rebuilding in countries emerging
from conflict. Lasting transition strategies as well
as support strategies should be established that will
contribute to the efforts of the Government, other
United Nations bodies and bilateral and multilateral
donors. Furthermore, the Peacebuilding Commission,
which has been referred to many times today, is a
useful tool for following up the commitments of the
concerned State and those of its international partners
in re-establishing and upholding the soundness and
legitimacy of the institutions.

Finally, strengthening the rule of law is something
that every State must undertake. In September 2012,
during the General Assembly High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels, Belgium undertook seventeen specific
commitments; today most of them have been achieved.
For example, we established predeployment training
with training units on sexual violence and gender
mainstreaming. As well, together with the Kingdom
of the Netherlands and other countries, we brought
together a number of States from all continents for a
project for negotiating a multilateral treaty regarding
extradition and judiciary proceedings for the national
prosecution of the most serious international crimes, so
as to facilitate in practice judicial cooperation between
States undertaking investigations and the prosecution
of such crimes.

