Mr. Garang: Let me begin, Mr. President, by
expressing my appreciation for the initiative that you
took to bring the Security Council to Kenya. Let me
congratulate all the members of the Security Council
for the achievements they have just accomplished: the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
us and the Government of the Sudan, and the
unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution
1574 (2004).

The Council's trip to Kenya, as is clear now, was
not in vain. Achieving a comprehensive peace
agreement for the Sudan by the end of the year will
lead to greater peace for the Sudan, as many of us have
emphasized. The memorandum of understanding and
resolution 1574 (2004) anchor the Sudan peace process
in the Security Council. I heard earlier that a Council
member was its midwife, so now it is the Council's
baby.

This resolution will create the momentum for
peace in the Sudan - instead of momentum for war,
various resistance groups springing up here and there
in the Sudan, and, ultimately, national disintegration.
That will be averted by moving towards peace and
generating that momentum, so that, instead of
splintering, we will have greater unity.

Resolution 1574 (2004) sends a message to the
Sudanese people, who have suffered for so long - the
people of southern Sudan, the people of the Nuba
mountains, of the southern Blue Nile, of Abyei, of
Darfur, of eastern Sudan and of the Sudan in general.
Their long suffering is at last coming to an end, so that
they can put the pieces of their lives back together and
so that we can once again hear the happy singing of
children on their way to school.

As concerns the resolution that the Council has
just adopted, we, the parties, may not fully realize at
this time that it represents a much stronger action than,
say, sanctions on which the Council might not have
achieved consensus. But there is a consensus on this,
and I say that it is much more serious because it is a
commitment by the parties to reach a political
settlement by 31 December. That implies that, if the
parties do not adhere to their commitments, there could
be much more serious consequences than sanctions
would entail. That is my meaning.

In that regard, I wish to express to the Council
the full commitment of the SPLM. to do its best not to
disappoint the Council, the Sudanese people, the region
or the world community. Peace in the Sudan is good
for southern Sudan, it is good for the new Sudan, it is
good for the Nuba mountains, it is good for the
southern Blue Nile and Abyei, it is good for the Sudan
as a whole, it is good for Darfur, it is good for the
region, it is good for Africa, and it is good for the
world community.

We will, as I say, do our best to fulfil our
commitments. We also appeal to the Council to do its
best also to fulfil its commitments. We will need a
great deal of assistance, as the Sudan has been
fractured for a long time. This is the twenty-second
year of the war, and before that we were at war for
17 years. That is 39 years out of the 48 years of our
independence. There must be very serious issues at
stake for any community to subject itself to generations
of war. We will do our best to sort out these difficulties
and to put our country back together, so that we can
join the community of nations in peace, development
and prosperity.

We will need assistance in the implementation of
the agreements that we have signed. We have signed
the one that is in front of the Council, on security
arrangements. The security arrangements encompass a
broad range of issues: the building of the army;
demobilization, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR); taking care of ex-combatants, so
that they can go back to normal civilian life - a
productive life that befits the sacrifices that they have
made. We have signed an agreement on wealth-sharing,
where, again, we will need considerable assistance, as
we will in implementing the agreements on power-
sharing, on the two areas of the Nuba Mountains and
the Blue Nile, on Abyei, and on the issue of the right of
self-determination at the end of the interim period.

These agreements are reflective of the diversity
of the Sudan, which we try to accommodate in these
agreements, because failure to manage diversity is
what led to those generations of war and generations of
suffering. In order for us to maintain the unity and
territorial integrity of our country - a country that is
characterized by diversity - we must implement the
six protocols that we have signed, and those six
protocols must lead to greater peace for our country, so
that there is peace in Darfur, there is peace in eastern
Sudan, there is peace all over our country.

Peace will be meaningless unless it leads to
tangible benefits for individuals and society as a
whole. The issue of the reconstruction and
development of all areas of the Sudan, especially the
war-affected areas of southern Sudan, the Nuba
Mountains, the Blue Nile, Abyei, Darfur and other
areas, is of paramount importance, and we will need -
and we expect - the Council's assistance in that
regard.

In that connection, I want to express my
appreciation for the role played by Norway as it
prepares for the donors conference. We appeal to you,
who represent countries and regions, to generously
contribute and to generously pledge at the donors
conference. However, pledging is one thing, and
releasing funds is another. I want you to pledge and
also to release funds, otherwise, as Mr. Danforth said
earlier, these would be empty promises. Those are your
commitments - the commitments of the international
community - to help the Sudan regroup and move
towards reconstruction and development, so that the
people of the Sudan, who have suffered for so long,
can find tangible benefits in peace.

Peace, to me, is what it means to each individual.
It is not what it means to the Security Council, or to the
SPLM, or to the Government of the Sudan, but what it
means to individuals as they put their lives back
together, and what tangible benefits they reap as a
result of peace. We will do our best to act as catalysts
for people to realize their aspirations.

I wish to impress on the Security Council and on
its members, as representatives of their respective
countries and regions, that the Sudan offers great
opportunities. We have vast resources, including far-
reaching ideas, that will be unlocked by the
comprehensive peace agreement which we have just
pledged to reach by the end of the year.

On behalf of the SPLM/SPLA and the people of
the Sudan, we welcome the participation of the
members of this world body, the Security Council, in
this great Sudanese project, which involves a paradigm
shift in politics, in the economy and in society, as we
chart a course towards a new Sudan of peace, justice,
stability and prosperity for all. That is the only way we
can keep the Sudan glued together in all its diversity.

Again, Mr. President, I congratulate you. I
congratulate the members of the Security Council,
General Sumbeiywo and the IGAD envoys and leaders,
the Troika, and the African Union and thank them for
all the contributions they have made to get us this far.
It has been a tortuous journey since we started in 2002
at Machakos, coming to Naivasha. We have been faced
with hill after hill. Every time we conclude a peace
agreement, we think we have reached the summit, but
then we realize that there is another hill in front of us.
We hope that, by signing a comprehensive peace
agreement, we shall have surmounted the last hill, and
we hope that the flat ground ahead of us will contain
no minefields, so that we can proceed with the task of
development for our people.

Again, we assure the Council of our commitment
to the memorandum of understanding that we have just
signed and of our appreciation of the resolution that the
Council has adopted. As I have said, it is now our
common baby, as a product of the Security Council.

Finally, I wish the best to all the Sudanese
people. I wish them the gift of peace as we approach
Christmas and the end of the year. I also wish the best
to the people of the region. I appreciate the
interventions of the President of Kenya and of
President Museveni, both of whom took the time to
address these important meetings.

