Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Given the lateness
of the hour, please allow me to quickly but warmly
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council, and to say that the Council is in very good
hands this month. Like the delegation of the United
States, we are delighted to see a powerful constellation
of Tunisian diplomats in this Chamber today.

I should also like to warmly welcome President
Joseph Kabila and thank him for his statement. I should
also like to thank him and you, Mr. President, as well
as all of our other colleagues, for the warm
compliments they paid to Singapore for its presidency
last month.

I should also like to convey my deepest
condolences to President Kabila for the tragic death of
the late President Laurent-Desire Kabila.

Clearly, the issue of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo remains one of the most complex and
challenging crises facing the international community,
and we have not heard much good news on this front.

The bad news is contained in my text. I will not
read it out, but I do want to say that, despite all these
setbacks, we believe that we now have a window of
opportunity to relaunch the peace process. We hope
that today's dialogue with President Kabila, under the
presidency of Tunisia, will mark the start of a new
process to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to bring peace to the region. Later this
month, the Security Council will have another occasion
to meet with the members of the Political Committee
and to resume the useful and productive dialogue
initiated last June under the presidency of France.

We are therefore encouraged to hear President
Joseph Kabila say that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will extend its full
cooperation to the United Nations. The United Nations,
in turn, stands also ready to extend its full cooperation
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But for this
cooperation to take place, it is essential for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to take several concrete steps.

Here again, the steps are spelled out in my text. I
will not read them out, but I would like to emphasize
the fifth point, in which we encourage President Kabila
and his Government to cooperate fully with the neutral
Facilitator in the inter-Congolese dialogue. The
dialogue is a key element of the Lusaka Agreement, as
indeed has been emphasized by so many speakers this
afternoon, and we believe that, if successfully carried
out, it can significantly change the political climate in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

At the same time, the push for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be part of a
collective effort. MONUC's deployment remains
contingent on the disengagement of all foreign troops.
All the parties must adhere fully to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, as well as to the Kampala,
Maputo and Harare disengagement sub-plans. We urge
swift implementation of all Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1304 (2000) and 1332 (2000).
There can be no peace as long as foreign forces remain
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and we
therefore strongly support the call made here a few
minutes ago by the Secretary-General for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

The search for peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is also part of a wider goal - the search
for peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. We
would therefore encourage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, under the
stewardship of President Kabila, to continue the
process of rapprochement with the Government of
Burundi initiated by the late President Laurent Kabila
at Libreville. Clearly, the future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is linked to the peace and
stability ofthe entire region.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo stands at a critical crossroads today. Let us not
underestimate the enormous challenges that lie ahead.
President Kabila not only has to contend with crippling
colonial and cold-war legacies, but he must now also
confront a complex political and military equation. He
has undertaken the responsibility of leading the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards national reconciliation,
peace, stability and development. We assure him of our
full support in working towards a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. The risks are great, but so are the
rewards.

