Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I will
speak in my national capacity, but I would like to
evoke the general nature of the European Union's
interest in the situation in East Timor. My statement on
this issue will of course take into account the positions
taken by the European Union in this matter.

We are very happy to see here at this table once
again the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Vieira de Mello. We would like to repeat
here how truly impressed we are by the work done by
the Special Representative and by all the civilian and
military staff of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). Despite the
difficulties encountered in areas such as the
reconstruction and the administration of justice -
difficulties described just now by Mr. Vieira de
Mello- the progress made during the last year is
significant and should be very warmly welcomed.

We were quite interested to read the report of the
Security Council mission to East Timor and Indonesia,
which was led by Ambassador Andjaba. We consider
the mission's recommendations excellent, and we call
on all the parties involved to implement these
recommendations immediately.

As regards the implementation of resolution 1272
(1999), we endorse the comments made by the Council
mission on the need to continue and speed up the
Timorization of the administration - a point that was
made just now by Mr. Vieira de Mello. We welcome
the establishment of the National Council made up
exclusively of Timorese people. With a View in
particular to the independence planned for next year,
we think that policy of strengthening the national
capacities must proceed systematically so as to
facilitate the transition.

The Timorese people's assuming control of their
own affairs must be accompanied by a restructuring of
UNTAET, and some reflection on the economic,
financial, technical and security assistance that should
be provided to East Timor by the international
community following independence. Like the Council
mission, we believe the Secretariat, the United Nations
Development Programme and other competent bodies
should begin to plan for the United Nations presence
after UNTAET leaves.
We would like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for
all the information he has provided about the schedule
of political events that the East Timorese expect to
undertake next year. These events are the organizing of
a constituent assembly, drafting a constitution and
ensuring a smooth transition, as Mr. Vieira de Mello
put it, to independence. We fully endorse the comments
by the Council mission to the effect that UNTAET
needs to help the Timorese establish an operational
judicial system to meet their needs. The international
community should support this objective.

We also totally endorse the concrete and practical
recommendations made by the Council mission to
implement the various provisions of resolution 1319
(2000). In particular it is essential that the refugees
from West Timor be rapidly repatriated and resettled in
such a way that their security and freedom of choice
are effectively guaranteed. In this regard we were
pleased to see that on 21 November former Indonesian
Army auxiliary soldiers were successfully repatriated
to East Timor. We hope that such an operation can be
repeated.

We are encouraged by the initial steps that the
Indonesian authorities have taken to disarm and
dissolve the militias. These militias continue to be
responsible for too many acts of violence, intimidation
and disinformation in both West and East Timor. We
thus urge the Indonesian Government to continue all
the necessary efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for crimes against the local peoples or
against international personnel. The recent arrest of six
people believed involved in the Atambua tragedy was
encouraging.

Like the Council mission, we believe that the
establishment of relations of trust and good
neighbourliness between East Timor and Indonesia is
indispensable. We welcome the first steps taken by
UNTAET and the Indonesian Government to this end,
and we hope that the very next meeting of the Joint
Border Commission - which Mr. Vieira de Mello said
was to be held on Thursday - will be held in a
positive atmosphere. We also welcome the Indonesian
Government's acceptance of the coming of a United
Nations security team to West Timor. All of these
measures are indispensable if the international
community and the humanitarian agencies can return to
West Timor to help in the repatriation and resettlement
of refugees.

In conclusion, I would just like to confirm my
country's - as well as the European Union's
unwavering support - for the leaders of the people of
East Timor. The next donors' meeting, which is to be
held in Brussels in early December, will be an
opportunity for us to confirm our commitment. We call
on other donor countries and entities to participate
actively in the Brussels conference alongside our
European Union partners.

I would like to ask the Special Representative one
rather technical question. In his introductory statement
he talked about easing the administrative and financial
procedures, in particular, with regard to using resources
from UNTAET's budget for infrastructure expenses. As
we understand it, this is a priority for the Special
Representative, and it should be taken up as soon as
possible by the Fifth Committee. To help our
representatives in the Fifth Committee, we would like
to know whether Mr. Vieira de Mello is at present able
to tell us the amount involved and whether he thinks
this is just a redeployment of the current UNTAET
budget.

