Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
With today's vote we acknowledge an important
milestone. By 30 June Iraq will reassert its sovereignty,
a step forward on the path towards a democratically
elected Government.

The unanimous passage of resolution 1546 (2004)
is a vivid demonstration of broad international support
for - and I quote from the text - "a federal,
democratic, pluralist and unified Iraq, in which there is
full respect for political and human rights".

Yesterday in this Chamber, Special Envoy
Lakhdar Brahimi briefed the Council on the formation
of Iraq's interim Government. The interim Government
will pave the way for national elections for a
transitional national assembly, to be held no later than
January 2005.

Resolution 1546 (2004) defines the key political
tasks in which the United Nations will play a leading
and vital role to support Iraqi efforts. This resolution
makes clear that Iraq's sovereignty will be undiluted
and that the Government of Iraq will have the
sovereign authority to request and to decline assistance,
including in the security sector. The Government of
Iraq will have the final say on the presence of the
multinational force.

The resolution also addresses the current security
reality and affirms the security structures and
mechanisms warranted at this time. The annexed letters
from Prime Minister Alawi and Secretary Powell
describe the security partnership that is being put into
place between the sovereign Government of Iraq and
the multinational force.

The international community now has a renewed
opportunity to help the people of Iraq and their
sovereign Government. Undeterred by Saddam
Hussein's legacy of many years of oppression and war,
the Iraqi people are determined to create a new reality.
International assistance can and should enhance their
prospects for success. The resolution calls on the
international community to join those already helping
the talented people of Iraq. Member States should not
delay in matching advice with concrete assistance. As
President Bush has said, "Free Iraq deserves the full
support of the international community."

The constructive dialogue through which this text
was developed and which led to the Council's
unanimous vote today, should mark strengthened
international resolve to work together for a democratic,
secure and prosperous Iraq and for the lasting and
permanent benefit of its people.

