Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): It is great to see you, Madam President, presiding over the Security Council. I congratulate Belgium on its presidency of the Council and thank your delegation for organizing this very important meeting today. My delegation fully associates itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European Union. We would also like to thank Ms. Bachelet and the other briefers for their insightful thoughts and contributions. It has been said repeatedly that transitional justice initiatives need to be tailor-made and address the specific circumstances of each situation. For that reason, we are convinced that considerations on transitional justice have to become an integral part of Security Council deliberations on country-specific situations. Only such an approach can yield tangible outcomes, unlike the general discussions we sometimes have. The broader concept of transitional justice represents an important part of peace operations' mandates, especially in the form of measures relating to accountability, the rule of law and a functioningsecurity sector that serves people, including the most vulnerable. Those efforts must focus in particular on women's rights and on ensuring the adoption of a child-sensitive approach. I am proud that Slovak police officers participated, for example, in the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, which completed its mandate in October. The Mission had been mandated, inter alia, to assist the Government of Haiti in strengthening its rule-of-law and justice institutions. Of course, as we know, that particular work continues with the further political mission on the ground. I now wish to address two specific issues, namely, accountability and security sector reform. First, accountability has to be an integral part of the transition process in a post-conflict situation or when there is political change. There are various methods and ways to ensure accountability, such as criminal prosecution. However, it would not be appropriate to equate criminal justice with transitional justice. Transitional justice is a much broader concept that encompasses a broad range of elements, including criminal justice. We are convinced that bringing perpetrators of crimes, especially crimes under international law, to justice is a basic requirement for the solution of any conflict and for subsequent reconciliation efforts. That conviction may also have led the Security Council to establish the international criminal tribunals and various special courts. In line with the principles of State sovereignty and complementarity, national authorities have the primary responsibility to prosecute crimes and adjudicate on innocence and guilt. However, if national authorities are not in a position to conduct investigations, recourse to the International Criminal Court (ICC), especially through a self-referral or a Security Council referral, may be sought. The ICC, with its unique institutional set-up, which grants a strong voice to the victims, is ideally placed to contribute to transitional justice. Bearing in mind the special institutional links between the Security Council and the ICC, Slovakia encourages Security Council referrals when war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide are being committed and the national authorities bearing the primary responsibility for the prosecution of those crimes are not in a position to do so. Turning to my second point, as an _ integral component of any political settlement, any transitional justice process must create synergies with other relevant processes, such as security sector reform and governance, which has supported nationally led efforts to build resilient security institutions and prevent relapse into conflict, in line with resolution 2151 (2014). We must call for more people-centred approaches to security sector reform and governance, as well as aim for political solutions to conflict, the prevention of conflict or relapse into violence. As a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, Slovakia recently convened a high- level panel and discussion on security sector reform on the occasion of the launch of an important publication on the United Nations and security sector reform, in policy and practice. Over the past decade, significant progress has been made in the development of United Nations norms and principles on this important issue. However, gaps remain between the normative and operational dimensions in United Nations security sector reform support. We therefore need to strengthen the implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), including with regard to linkages and synergies between security sector reform and transitional justice. As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Slovakia is also ready to promote partnerships and synergies with other transitions processes in the peacebuilding context. Our PBC priorities can be summed up in just a few short elements - participation, partnerships and people and coherence, coordination and complementarity. In conclusion, global peace and security can be achieved only if sustainable solutions are found for current conflicts. Transitional justice is certainly a pivotal element in those aspirations. I once again thank the Belgian presidency for convening today's Security Council meeting on this very pertinent issue.
