Mr. Bellingham (United Kingdom): I am grateful
for the opportunity to discuss Somalia at such an
important time. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Special Representative of the
African Union (AU) Diarra and Prime Minister
Mohamed Abdullahi-Farmaajo for their excellent
contributions to this debate.

The United Kingdom Government regards
Somalia as a key priority. That is why I am here today.
I convey great thanks to you, Mr. President, for
facilitating this debate. Listening to the debate so far, I
am struck by our common desire to end 20 years of
instability, which have brought conflict and
humanitarian disaster to the people of Somalia and
threatened the people of the region and beyond with
piracy and terrorism. I am glad the Secretary-General
mentioned piracy and the need for urgent action; I do
believe the Jack Lang report is very welcome
(S/2011/30, annex).

In recent weeks, we have seen just how
challenging the situation in Somalia is. I would like to
commend the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for what it is doing on our behalf and in
particular on behalf of the Somali people. I join others
in paying tribute to the brave soldiers of AMISOM. and
the professionalism and dedication they have shown in
their successful actions against the corrupt and brutal
tyranny of Al-Shabaab. In particular, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi for the commitment they have shown and
also pass on my sincere condolences to the families of
those who have lost their lives in the recent fighting.
The bravery of AMISOM. troops in making their
territorial gains reminds us that AMISOM. needs our
support and guidance.

As the Secretary-General pointed out, the gains
are indeed fragile. This is not solely about defeating
insurgent attacks, but also about protecting civilians as
best as possible, in line with international humanitarian
law. The force headquarters have recently taken steps
to improve AMISOM's capacity to protect civilians.
We welcome this, but more is needed to ensure that
AMISOM. is sufficiently resourced and continues to
make gains. Incidentally, I also welcome the gains that
have been made in the south of the country.
I am pleased to announce that the United
Kingdom will shortly make a $3-million uncaveated
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM. I call on other donor countries to make
similar uncaveated contributions.

It is clear that there is no simple solution to
Somalia's instability. Military efforts alone are not
going to bring about lasting peace. We need a political
process that is legitimate and inclusive, allowing all
those Somalis who oppose violence to play a positive
role in their country's future. We encourage the United
Nations and the AU to continue to work together to
develop a coordinated political and military strategy
that delivers real benefit to the Somali people.

In under six months' time, in August 2011, the
transitional period is due to come to an end. We cannot
allow a political vacuum to develop, but nor can we
simply continue with business as usual. Recent efforts
to extend the transitional period unilaterally without
meaningful reform or consultation have not brought
consensus. Indeed, they have served only to damage
the legitimacy and credibility of the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs). It is troubling to me to hear
about yet another reshuffle of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), as this suggests that political in-
fighting is a higher priority of the TFG than
reconciliation and the delivery of services to the
Somali people.

The United Kingdom believes there should be no
extension of the Transitional Federal Institutions
without reforms to make them more representative,
legitimate and accountable to the Somali people. There
needs to be broad consultation within Somalia and with
the international community on what should follow the
current arrangements. I was encouraged when His
Excellency Prime Minister Abdullahi-Farmaajo
outlined various service improvements, but these need
to be built on. I therefore encourage all of us, under
Special Representative Mahiga's leadership, to work
more effectively, both with the TFIs and with regional
and local administrations to bring about a new and
more inclusive political arrangement.

The United Kingdom fully supports Augustine
Mahiga in his efforts to negotiate a way forward. I am
delighted that he is going to participate in and is
listening to this debate.

The dire humanitarian situation in Somalia,
worsened by drought, underlines the need for concerted
action to ensure a more stable future for the Somali
people. I commend the United Nations Humanitarian
Relief Coordinator's work and encourage greater
support for United Nations and bilateral humanitarian
efforts in Somalia.

The year 2011 marks 20 years since the collapse
of the Somali State. For many Somalis, the situation
remains desperate, and many have been forced to flee
their homes and families. A generation of Somali
children has grown up without knowing peace, without
going to school, without the simplest opportunities that
many of us just take for granted.

But there are encouraging signs. At the local level,
Somalis are working together to establish areas of
stability and to reject acts of extremism, terrorism and
piracy. We have an opportunity to help Somalis build
on these initiatives. I believe that Somalia is literally at
a crossroads. If recent military and political progress is
maintained and the counter-piracy initiatives
succeed - and I believe they can - then the future is
bright. The alternative scenario is incredible depressing
and grim. We must prevent it. That will require us to
work together. I believe that we all have a
responsibility to act and the United Kingdom will play
its part.

