Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on children in armed conflict, with a particular
emphasis on child victims of armed non-State actors,
and thank today's briefers for their presentations.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, but let me underline
some aspects of particular significance to my country.

The harmful and widespread impact of armed
conflict on children and its long-term consequences
for durable peace, security and development are
undeniable. Children, because of their vulnerability,
not only suffer directly the consequences of armed
conflict and of the collapse of the social fabric, but
are deliberately targeted and subjected to forced
recruitment, sexual violence, displacement, killing,
maiming and abduction, among other appalling
brutalities. The situation has been exacerbated by the
actions of extremist non-State armed groups, as recent
events that have shocked the world's conscience have
proved, such as the abduction of more than 200 school
girls by Boko Haram, the deliberate attacks perpetrated
against a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, or the barbaric
acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other extremist groups.

Protecting children from the ravages of war is a
moral imperative and an issue of international peace
and security. Since 1996, when Mrs. Graca Machel
presented her study (A/51/306) on the impact of armed
conflict on children, much has been done, and for
several years the Council has developed a normative
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict and for the promotion and protection
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
However, despite the significant progress achieved and
the establishment of a strong normative framework
through the adoption of several resolutions, enormous
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflict.

Portugal believes that the Council must continue to
seek the best way to promote the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and to better respond to the
magnitude and extent of the challenges posed by the
tremendous brutality of the acts of violence committed
by non-State armed groups. In that regard, action plans
are an outstanding tool to engage with armed forces
and non-State armed groups, and can play a positive
role in ending violations against children. We welcome
the ongoing coordination efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
but believe that further efforts are necessary to engage
with non-State armed groups, and to that end the
cooperation of concerned Governments is crucial. I
wish to make a few points.

First, we believe that the Council should consider
expanding the list of triggers for listing perpetrators
in the Secretary-General's annual report, to include
abduction. Abduction has become a warfare tactic used
by extremist non-State actors to terrorize and control
specific ethnic or religious communities and it is a first
sign of alert for further human rights abuses. Children
are being abducted to serve as combatants or to be
used as bombers, sexual slaves and other unspeakable
abuses.

Secondly, we must address the issue of impunity.
Most of the persistent perpetrators listed in the annual
report of the Secretary-General are non-State armed
groups. Portugal believes that the International Criminal
Court continues to play a fundamental deterrent role,
complementary to the roles of tribunals at the national
and international levels, by holding perpetrators
accountable and by investigating and prosecuting those
responsible for committing atrocities against children.

On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child protection advisers
in mandates, as well as mandatory training on the
protection of children, to ensure that the situation of
children affected by armed conflict is adequately
addressed in peace missions by promoting advocacy,
mainstreaming, training, monitoring and reporting. We
must ensure adequate predeployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers and effective screening
of peacekeepers to ensure that individuals who have
committed grave violations against children do not
serve with the United Nations.

Lastly, we remain severely concerned with the
ongoing pattern of attacks on schools and with their
use for military purposes. Schools and education
facilities are being systematically used as barracks,
firing positions, detention centres and torture chambers
both by regular armed forces and by armed non-State
opposition groups, endangering children and rendering
them vulnerable to attack. Portugal endorses the Lucens
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict as concrete
guidelines to protect educational infrastructures from
use by armed groups for military purposes and to
minimize the negative impact that armed conflict has
on education.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
and the first anniversary of the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign, launched last year by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, whom I wish to congratulate, and
UNICEF, which Portugal fully supports.

It is time to end the suffering of child victims of
armed conflict and violence. Children should attend
school, play and be able to enjoy their childhood without
suffering from the effects of war or armed conflict. It is
our collective duty to do our outmost to further improve
their lives by intensifying the use of the instruments at
the disposal of the Security Council.

