Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her comprehensive
briefing and for her leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Japan welcomes the most recent report (S/20l6/225)
of the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH, which
gives evidence of positive signs of progress and
developments in Haiti with regard to the elections, the
security situation and the strengthened capacity of the
municipal authorities.

The long-overdue elections in Haiti were held in
a generally calm atmosphere last year in August and
October. We note that, during the electoral process,
MINUSTAH was called upon to intervene only in
a few cases. That attests to the increased capacity of
the Haitian National Police, which is the result of the
tireless work of MINUSTAH. Japan commends the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and the international
community, which have worked and are working
together for the success of the elections. However, the
final round of voting has been postponed several times
and is still pending.

The elections will mark an important milestone
along the path towards stabilization and social and
economic development in Haiti. With that conviction,
Japan contributed $5.5 million to the electoral process
last year. Japan sincerely hopes that the final round will
be carried out in a fair, inclusive and smooth manner, as
scheduled, on 24 April.

I listened carefully to the cautious vision with regard
to the still uncertain political schedule ahead expressed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. Japan calls on all the relevant actors in Haiti
to fully cooperate in the formation of a provisional
Government so that the Provisional Electoral Council
can be relaunched officially. That is essential for the
successful completion of the elections as scheduled.

In the 12 years since the establishment of
MINUSTAH, the situation in Haiti has shown some
positive changes. The country's institutions have
better capacity than before. However, much remains
to be done. As many members mentioned, Haiti now
needs assistance in strengthening the rule of law, the
protection of human rights, further institution-building
and development.

We believe that, when significant progress is
made by an United Nations mission, the mission size
should be reduced and eventually the mission should be
withdrawn in a successful manner. In that regard, Japan
appreciates that MINUSTAH and the United Nations
country team are working on a joint transition plan to
transfer the Mission's functions to the Government of
Haiti or its partners.

Haiti is a very fragile country and still faces
numerous challenges. The gains achieved by the
Government, MINUSTAH and other partners must
be maintained and further enhanced. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honore
stressed, the international community and the United
Nations system should continue to support Haiti.

We look forward to discussing the future United
Nations presence in Haiti, based on recommendations
of the strategic assessment to be carried out by the
Secretary-General at the most appropriate time.

Japan has contributed more than $200 million
towards the reconstruction and nation-building of
Haiti after the January 2010 earthquake. We have also
deployed 2,200 personnel of our Self-Defence Forces
to MINUSTAH.

In conclusion, I would like to express Japan's firm
commitment to remain actively engaged in supporting
the efforts of Haiti towards nation-building.

