Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis, has just
provided a succinct briefing to update us on the
situation in Iraq and the latest developments there. We
thank him for his briefing and excellent work in Iraq as
Head of UNAMI. Likewise, we congratulate the entire
UNAMI team.

As the report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/42) highlights, on
9 December last year the Government of Iraq declared
victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). This turn of events put an end to several years
of indescribable indignity committed against the Iraqi
population by this terrorist group, which during its
occupation starting in 2015 came to control two thirds
of the territory of Iraq, committing atrocities of every
stripe, with thousands of deaths, millions of internally
displaced persons, the massive levelling of all types
of infrastructure and the destruction of the economic
fabric of the country.
As this is the first time I have taken the floor on the
situation in Iraq, I would like, on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on the one hand, to express
our congratulations to the Iraqi Government and the
coalition of forces of the international community
that made the defeat of ISIL and the total liberation
of Iraqi territory possible, and, on the other hand, to
demonstrate to the Government and the people of Iraq
the solidarity of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
the face of the enormous loss of human life and for all
the atrocities and suffering that group inflicted on the
Iraqi population as a whole. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea also commends the unity of the Iraqi people,
which has greatly contributed to this victory.

Furthermore, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the convening in Kuwait of the International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq a few days
ago, with the aim of obtaining the necessary funds to
undertake the reconstruction of the country. In this
regard, we commend Kuwait for its support and the
decisive role it has played in holding this conference,
at which donors pledged to disburse some $30 billion
for the commencement of this reconstruction work. To
this end, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
international community to show great solidarity with
the Government of Iraq by supporting it in the arduous
task of completely rebuilding the country.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends and
greatly appreciates the two-year initiative launched
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres at the donor
conference - the Iraq Recovery and Resilience
Programme - to address the country's many
challenges. One of these challenges is the persistent
tension between the central Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government, as well as the
constant risk that ISIL may continue to launch attacks
such as the one that took place in northern Baghdad
on 13 January. Faced with these situations, we appeal
to the Government and the people of Iraq to remain
united, overcome their differences and remain vigilant,
so that the victory achieved over ISIL is irreversible.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the greatest challenges now facing the Government and
the Iraqi people are the holding of the parliamentary
elections on 12 May and the resolution of the very
worrying humanitarian situation in the country and
the human rights situation, as expressed by Ms. Agnes
Callamard following her Visit to Iraq in November
last year and by Ms. Liz Throssell, spokesperson for
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights during the presentation of her report on
15 December 2017.

I conclude by expressing the hope that the
international community in general and the United
Nations in particular will resolutely support the
Government and the people of Iraq in overcoming
all the foregoing challenges, in order to completely
normalize the situation in the country, so that the next
legislative elections can be held in an atmosphere of
peace and unity for all Iraqis.

