Ms. Bachelet: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to update the Security Council on the
human rights situation in Haiti. It is an opportunity to
mark the progress made on human rights to date and to
also highlight how the Council can continue supporting
Haiti's commitments to human rights and prevention.

Haiti today is a very different country from what it
was in 2004, when United Nations peacekeeping troops
were deployed. Yet while the scale of human rights
violations recorded then does not compare with the
current situation, serious structural challenges persist.

Social grievances, corruption and weak institutions
constitute major obstacles to the realization of human
rights in Haiti. With about 59 per cent of the population
estimated to live below the poverty line, the country
remains the poorest in the Americas and faces
considerable economic and social difficulties, including
limited employment opportunities, particularly for
the youth. Basic services such as health care, water,
electricity and education are out of the reach of many.
This is exacerbated by Haiti's vulnerability to natural
disasters, with every earthquake and hurricane further
impeding development and intensifying the already
precarious living conditions of many.

Poverty creates a fertile environment for criminal
activity to thrive, especially in the most underprivileged
areas of the capital, where heavily armed gangs
take advantage of the limited presence of the State.
Competition between rival gangs has resulted in deaths,
sexual violence against women and girls, and the
destruction and looting of houses. As tensions persist,
the protection of the population must be addressed
urgently, including by law-enforcement entities.

These long-standing issues have contributed to
triggering increasingly violent unrest across Haiti
since last July. Since July 2018 at least 60 people have
been killed, including members of the Haitian National
Police, and many more injured. From 7 to 15 February,
the longest and most violent protest in years almost
entirely paralysed the country. Hospitals and conditions
in prisons were affected by the unrest, with food, water
and medicine less accessible.

While verification during and after the protests
showed that some members of the Haitian National
Police were the perpetrators of human rights violations,
overall the police demonstrated a greater adherence to
human rights norms compared with previous protests.
The Haitian authorities responded by announcing
measures to curb high prices, raise wages, attack
corruption and act on the PetroCaribe case. We support
and commend these important efforts. In addition,
ensuring accountability for violence while fostering a
constructive and inclusive dialogue among the various
actors of Haitian society will also be essential to
stability and sustainable development.

Despite significant improvements in the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police, incidents
of serious human rights violations, including cases of
summary executions, continue to be reported, with
limited accountability. The National Police conducts
administrative investigations into the majority of
allegations; yet judicial proceedings are rarely initiated
against the alleged perpetrators. In 2018, only 12 per
cent of cases of confirmed human rights violations
were prosecuted, and no judicial measures were
taken in the most emblematic cases. Perpetrators are
consequently emboldened, and silenced victims may
develop grievances.

The weakness of the judicial system also has a
negative impact on the penitentiary system. More than
75 per cent of inmates are estimated to be in pre-trial
detention - on average for 1,100 days - well over the
limit set by national law. Prolonged pre-trial detention
contributes to extreme overcrowding and practices
amounting to degrading and inhumane treatment.
Prisons lack basic sanitary conditions, and few
detainees have access to legal counsel. Accountability
should be considered as an effective measure to build
trust in institutions. Strengthening the bedrock of the
rule of law is a means to prevent further human rights
violations and enable the advent of a sustainable peace.

The delegate Minister for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty - appointed in
September 2018 - will contribute to re-energizing
the Government's engagement on human rights and
to restarting key actions that had been pending since
2014. I encourage the Haitian authorities to seize
the opportunity of this important appointment to
ensure that the needed leadership is provided to the
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights. The
Committee has recently made strides towards the
development of a national action plan on human rights.
I encourage authorities to bring this to fruition so as
to offer a comprehensive and realistic road map to
strengthening human rights in Haiti.

Haiti'snationalhumanrightsinstitution-theOffice
of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson - has
been acknowledged since 2013 as independent and
functional, reflecting the highest status of compliance
with the Paris Principles endorsed by the General
Assembly. I welcome the significant increase in the
Ombudsperson's budget, recently announced by the
executive, and the efforts of the Ombudsperson to
consolidate the Office's presence across Haiti.

I am encouraged by the engagement of civil society
for the promotion and protection of human rights and
in accompanying victims of human rights violations.
Yet it has not been able to fully assume a monitoring
and advocacy role. Some civil-society organizations
continue to be targeted by acts of intimidation.
I encourage all stakeholders to work together to
strengthen the human rights protection system.

Haiti's return to constitutional order following the
presidential, legislative and local elections in 2017 was
a significant achievement. Today, as Haiti stands at the
crossroads between peacekeeping and development,
we must recognize the progress accomplished. We
must also continue building on it, or risk losing it. I
encourage the Council to provide the people of Haiti
with the support necessary to strengthen institutions,
fight against impunity and promote and protect human
rights as a foundation for stability and development.

My Office intends to pursue its work in Haiti
through a possible follow-on United Nations mission
and, eventually - something on which we are working
jointly with the Government - a stand-alone presence,
with the support of the Security Council and Member
States. We want to remain engaged and to support
Haiti's commitment to achieving democratic and
economic development so that the rights of all people
in Haiti are upheld.

