Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to present the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2019/229), which covers the period
from 1 September 2018 to 28 February 2019.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the recent
positive developments in the region, in particular the
holding of peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and the reaching of the peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and 14
armed groups, facilitated by the African Union (AU),
as well as the ongoing efforts to consolidate those
gains. Moreover, I would like to take stock of some
important initiatives that my Office has pursued during
the reporting period, in collaboration with the other
guarantors of the Cooperation Framework, namely, the

African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern African
Development Community.

(spoke in English)

First, as a follow-up to the decision of the eighth
summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in
October 2017 in Brazzaville, the protracted presence
of disarmed Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR) combatants located in transit camps in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was decisively
addressed and resolved. As a result of efforts of the
Joint Follow-up Mechanism, facilitated by my Office,
98 former combatants of the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda and their dependants were
voluntarily repatriated from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to Rwanda, as well as 80 ex-Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) elements and their dependants from
the camps in Uganda and one former M-23 member
from Rwanda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Moreover, building on the momentum created by the
Follow-up Mechanism, in November 2108 all FDLR
camps in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were closed by the Congolese authorities and
1,634 disarmed FDLR elements and their dependants
were successfully repatriated to Rwanda through
bilateral arrangements.

That shows that progress can be made even
on the most protracted issues when political will
is displayed by the leaders of the region. I seize
this opportunity to commend the three countries
concerned - the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and Rwanda - for their commitment and
cooperation. I encourage them to sustain that positive
momentum to conclude the repatriation of the remaining
former M-23 members in camps in Rwanda and Uganda.
It will also be important to monitor and support the
effective reintegration of the former combatants into
civilian life.

Secondly, during the ninth Regional Oversight
Mechanism summit, held in Kampala, leaders of the
region stressed the need to strengthen existing security
and confidence-building mechanisms and explore
avenues to further strengthen the bonds of friendship
and cooperation among the core counties of the region.
Accordingly, we have been working assiduously with
the ICGLR to suppor the operationalization of those
mechanisms, notably the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
on the Allied Democratic Forces and the Expanded
Joint Verification Mechanism, as important platforms
to exchange information and enhance regional
cooperation on the neutralization of negative forces. l
have also been encouraging leaders, including during
my most recent meetings with President Sassou
Nguesso of the Republic of Congo, President Museveni
of Uganda, President Lourenco of Angola and AU
Commission Chairperson Faki Mahamat, to assist in
defusing current tensions between some core countries
of the region. In that regard, I welcome the recent
initiatives taken by some leaders.

Thirdly, in extended consultations with all
stakeholders, we have been highlighting the urgency of
addressing the protracted refugee crisis in the region
and promoting a common regional approach on that
important issue. Those efforts culminated inthe holding,
on 7 March, of a ministerial meeting on the refugee
situation in the Great Lakes region, which I co-chaired
together with the Prime Minister of Uganda and the
Executive Secretary of the ICGLR. The Ministers
stressed the importance of addressing the drivers and
root causes of forced displacement, while noting that
over 4 million out of the 6.3 million refugees on the
African continent originated from countries in the
Great Lakes region. They reviewed options for durable
solutions, including local integration of refugees in
host communities. The ICGLR was further requested
to develop a regional strategy and an action plan for
durable solutions for the region.

As this will be my last briefing as Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes region, allow me to use this
opportunity to take stock of progress and challenges
encountered during my tenure.

The region made important steps towards durable
peace and stability since the 19905 and early 2000s.
Despite persisting insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, the region today is largely
peaceful. Where cross-border clashes frequently
occurred, differences between Member States are now
mostly addressed through dialogue, albeit not always
conclusively. Serious efforts have been initiated to
promote regional cooperation and socioeconomic
integration, which need to be vigorously sustained and
supported by international partners.

That progress notwithstanding, the continued
presence of negative forces in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo perpetuates
insecurity and mistrust between some countries.
Allegations of support by Governments of the region,
or their proxies, to such groups and cross-border
interference continue to threaten cordial relations and
stability. They are compounded by the continuing
illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources.
The re-emergence of tensions between some countries
of the region have further hampered efforts to yield the
full potential of cooperation.

Those issues require our sustained attention.
Greater regional cooperation will be necessary to
effectively neutralize the negative forces operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and transform natural resources into vehicles of
shared prosperity. In addition to strengthening existing
confidence-building mechanisms, there is a continued
need to create opportunities for dialogue among the
countries concerned to address differences, where
they exist, and strengthen the trust and cooperation
among them.

Politically, significant opportunities for consolidating
regional peace and stability have emerged, including
with the recent developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. In that regard, I welcome the
recent visits by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to the
countries of the region in an effort to strengthen ties
with his country.

That progress, however, remains fragile. We
need to capitalize on the opportunities and not waver
in our support to the respective parties to live up to
their responsibilities. Sustained efforts are required in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that
differences across political parties are addressed and
consensus is promoted on ways to achieve peace and
development throughout the country.

On Burundi, we need to provide continued support
to the East African Community to promote effective
decisions on next steps in the facilitation process
to ensure a peaceful and inclusive political process
towards elections in 2020, in full respect of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.

In recognizing those continuing challenges, and in
line with the road map that I developed after assuming
the functions of Special Envoy, which the Council
endorsed, I have focused my engagement on key
priority areas to support the signatory countries in the

implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework in the following ways.

First, there is the matter of strengthening regional
ownership and the implementation process. Upon
assuming my functions, I realized that the summit
meetings of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held
regularly on the margins of the AU summit and the
General Assembly, were facing diminishing interest
and participation by leaders of the signatory countries.
In efforts to reinvigorate the Mechanism as a forum for
a regular exchange among leaders and the main vehicle
to govern the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, I recommended that the
summit be held in the region and be convened and
chaired by one of the signatory countries on a rotating
basis. Since the endorsement of that reform initiative
by the Heads of State in 2016, the chairmanship of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism has been held by the
Heads of State of Angola, the Republic of the Congo
and Uganda successively. The next summit of the
Mechanism is scheduled to be hosted in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo in October, followed by Zambia in
2020. The reform was successful in promoting renewed
interest and ownership on the part of the signatory
countries in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework implementation process. The annually
rotating responsibility affords the respective Chairs
an opportunity to provide leadership in addressing key
outstanding issues related to the regional commitments
under the Framework.

Secondly, there is the issue of maintaining regional
and international focus on the need to strengthen
cooperation on countering the negative forces and
building confidence among all countries. On every
occasion, I have encouraged creating opportunities
for dialogue among the leaders concerned to address
differences where they exist and promote cooperation,
most notably on the neutralization of negative forces.
That is particularly important in the light of persisting
mistrust and tensions among some countries of the
region. As a result of those commitments, in October
2018 in Kampala the ninth summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism reviewed in a closed-door session
the issues that contributed to mistrust among some of
the leaders and reflected on ways to resolve them. At
the summit, President Sassou Nguesso and President
Museveni were asked to take initiatives in that regard.
I am encouraged by ongoing efforts by leaders of
the region to help address the causes of tensions and
promote dialogue in the region. International partners
should stand ready to support those commitments in a
concerted manner.

Thirdly, on the matter of promoting regional
cohesion and international attention with regard to the
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi, recognizing the importance of political
stability at the national level for regional stability, and
in line with my mandate, support for peaceful, credible
and inclusive political and dialogue processes has been
one of my key priorities and a major area of political
engagement. I was given an opportunity from April
to June 2015 to promote a promising dialogue process
between the parties in Burundi, which, had it been
effectively supported by all, could have provided the
Burundian stakeholders with a better forum to address
their differences. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I was initially requested to explore avenues for
the United Nations to facilitate dialogue in that country.
In addition to frequent visits to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi to encourage commitment
to dialogue and compromise, l promoted a concerted
regional and international approach to the situations
in those countries. I also facilitated joint action by the
guarantor institutions, which resulted in the holding
of six ministerial-level meetings, as well as working
visits to Kinshasa in May 2017 to engage national
stakeholders on the need for inclusive dialogue. The
role of the Special Envoy, working in collaboration with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, will
continue to be crucial in highlighting the importance of
peaceful and inclusive political processes in the region
and promoting sustained concerted support for the
countries concerned.

Fourthly, with regard to putting women's
participation in peace and political processes at the
centre of advocacy efforts, I am pleased with the
momentum we have achieved in promoting women's
participation in political and peace processes in the
region through strengthened advocacy with the support
of the Advisory Board of the Women's Platform for the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Effective
follow-up is now required to the joint United Nations-
AU-ICGLR solidarity missions to Burundi, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan, including the implementation
of the decisions of the gender ministers' meeting held
in Uganda in November 2018. I call on the Council to
support the region in efforts to achieve a minimal quota
of 30 per cent women's representation in political and
peace processes by 2020, in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).

Fifthly, there is the issue of encouraging a political
conversation on ways to transform natural resources
into vehicles of shared prosperity. In view of the lack of
tangible progress in curbing the illicit exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources, addressing their role in
fuelling insecurity and building on the efforts by the
ICGLR, signatory countries agreed to our proposal to
initiate a political dialogue on ways to transform the
exploitation of natural resources into a driver of peace
and shared prosperity. Consultations to that effect have
been initiated with the countries concerned.

Lastly, there is the matter of promoting the rule
of law and respect for human rights. Recognizing the
centrality of respect for human rights, I am pleased
with the operationalization of the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network, which supports collaboration
between prosecutors and judicial authorities in the
region on cross-border crimes and serious human
rights violations. In efforts to further foster political
commitment and advance the fight against impunity,
I am also pleased to announce that my Office,
together with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the ICGLR, is
organizing a high-level conference on justice and good
governance in May in Nairobi. The support of the
Council for that initiative would be much appreciated.

(spoke in French)

Let me conclude by thanking the Council for the
support extended to me during my tenure. I sincerely
hope that the regional and international partners will
continue to work closely together for the establishment
of lasting peace and shared prosperity in the Great
Lakes region.

