Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Over the past two years,
I have had the honour of chairing the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518
(2003). I would like to use this special occasion to
reflect both on my role as Chair of these Committees
over the course of the past two years and the work
accomplished in that time.

Before assuming our chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), we were expecting the
ongoing battle against terrorism to be a long one. We also
expected that in the following stage we might witness
intensified terrorist attacks by Da'esh and others that
would send the message that terrorism exists, is effective
and can distract attention away from efforts aimed at
achieving development and prosperity. Accordingly,
there was a dire need for the international community
to act swiftly and robustly, using a comprehensive,
coordinated and consistent approach. In this context,
we have intended for our tenure as the Chair ofthe CTC
to be creative, pragmatic and action-oriented as it could
be. As the Chair of the CTC, our main objective was to
ensure the full implementation of the core mandate of
the CTC in monitoring, facilitating and promoting the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).

Against this backdrop and over the past two
years, the Committee has conducted 22 assessment
visits to Member States in all five regional groups
of the United Nations. These visits have enabled the
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) to engage in direct
dialogue and interaction with Member States on their
counter-terrorism implementation efforts and identify
progress, shortfalls, technical-assistance needs, good
experiences and effective practices.

Two further useful tools for understanding
Member State progress and needs are the detailed
implementation survey and the overview of
implementation assessment prepared by CTED experts.
Over the past two years, the Committee has approved
over 30 overviews of implementation assessment and
detailed implementation surveys on Member States'
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).

As the main policymaking body within the
Security Council with regard to counter-terrorism,
the CTC, in Egypt's View, needed to have a serious
and in-depth discussion of some of the most important
and top-priority aspects in relation to coumtering
terrorism efforts. In this regard, the CTC, with the full
support of CTED, held in 2016 and 2017, 21 special
meetings, open briefings and technical-assistance
meetings, in addition to 24 plenary meetings. These
meetings covered a wide range of issues, including
preventing the use of information and communication
technologies for terrorist purposes, terrorism financing
and the role of financial institutions and other entities
in preventing terrorism financing, aviation security,
international judicial and law-enforcement cooperation
in counter-terrorism matters, preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons, implementation of resolution
2178 (2014) by States most affected by the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, legal challenges related
to the treatment and prosecution of returning foreign
terrorist fighters, developing national and regional
comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorist
strategies, and denying safe haven to those who finance,
plan, support or commit terrorist acts.

The technical guidance of CTED assists with the
implementation by Member States of relevant Security
Council resolutions, and I encourage Member States
to make the best possible use of that guidance as an
important reference tool. That includes the technical
assistance follow-up in Iraq, technical assistance
identification in Afghanistan, challenges of countering
terrorism in Libya and in West Africa, as well as
integrating human rights, the rule of law and gender as
cross-cutting issues. It also includes the comprehensive
international framework to counter terrorist narratives
and meeting with academic institutions and think tanks.

In order to ensure transparency and the full
participation of all stakeholders, Egypt has been
keen to have most of the CTC's meetings open for
the participation of the wider membership, relevant
organizations and other partners. We urge the
incoming Chair and Security Council members to
continue to follow that approach. We believe that open
meetings and events provide an excellent platform for
interactions between members of the Committee and
the wider membership, and help to strengthen dialogue
between United Nations entities and international and
regional organizations, as well as external partners,
through the analysis and discussion of emerging
issues, trends and developments relating to resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014), as well as
subsequent resolutions.

Speaking of Council resolutions, over the past
two years the Council has adopted nine resolutions
on counter-terrorism. Those resolutions cover several
thematic areas, including promoting international
law enforcement and judicial cooperation in matters
relating to counter-terrorism, the use of biometrics, the
downgrading of intelligence, trafficking in persons for
terrorist purposes, protecting critical infrastructure,
countering terrorist narratives and welcoming the
comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives, the use of data and battlefield
evidence, new border control measures, including
application programme interfaces and biometrics, the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons, and the links between
human trafficking and the financing of terrorism.
Those resolutions clearly reflect the commitment of
the international community to combating terrorism.
The CTC and CTED are mandated with a number of
tasks pursuant to those resolutions. In that regard,
I would like to draw the attention of the Council to
the necessity of providing CTED with the necessary
financial and human resources to make it capable of
untertaking and fulfilling its core mandate, as well as
its new and evolving task mandate, in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions.

As the Council is aware, the creation ofthe Office of
Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) represented a significant
evolution in the counter-terrorism architecture of the
United Nations. The Counter-Terrorism Committee,
CTED and UNOCT should continue to take steps to
strengthen their coordination with a view to enhancing
the impact of our counter-terrorism technical assistance
programmes and activities. The three subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council - the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) - continue to share
common objectives within their respective mandates.
I recommend that the three committees continue to
explore ways to further strengthen their cooperation.
I have chaired a meeting with my peers to discuss
areas of cooperation among those three bodies and
their experts.

I would like to make four general observations.

First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee, with the
support of CTED, plays a unique role and convening
power in monitoring, facilitating and promoting the
implementation efforts of Member States. In that
regard, I would like to thank CTED, as well as all
Security Council members from the 2016-2017 term,
for their full support to the Egyptian chairmanship of
the CTC. We really appreciate the support.

Secondly, with the recent reform of the counter-
terrorism architecture of the United Nations, United
Nations entities have a new opportunity to work in a
coordinated, coherent and effective manner and to
avoid the duplication of efforts and competition.

Thirdly, Member States must continue to take
steps to fulfil their obligations pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions on terrorism. The
United Nations has an obligation to assist Member
States in that regard, including by mobilizing the
necessary resources.

Fourthly, contemporary terrorist threats are
enormous and exceptional. Our actions should be at
least on the same wavelength.

Let me now turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) on Iraq. Although the
Committee did not hold any meetings over the course
of the past two years, there was a flurry of delisting
during that period. No individuals or entities had
been delisted since December 2011, but since August
2016 the Committee has delisted a total of 39 entities,
pursuant to delisting requests that the Government of
Iraq submitted.

Regarding the Committee pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, I started out my service as the Committee's
Chair with a clear motivation. Like many of my
colleagues here today, I wanted to move the file
forward in order to demonstrate that over the course
of two years, it would be possible to make progress.
That was particularly important for my country, Egypt,
which, as an African State, has a keen interest in peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes Region.

Throughout our work, we have been convinced
that the success of the sanctions regime in attaining
its ultimate goal would depend on the cooperation of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and regional States. Therefore, their continued
engagement with the Committee's work and their
understanding of the Committee's role and objectives
have been at the forefront of our priorities. To that end,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
States have been regularly invited to meetings of the
Committee. Their views have been integrated into the
Committee's deliberations on several subjects that
ranged from regional support and the neutralization of
armed groups to combating illicit trafficking in natural
resources and discussions about the reports of the
Group of Experts. Those meetings, together with the
two visits that I conducted to the region in 2016 and
earlier this year, have helped to maintain a constructive
dialogue, which promoted a better understanding of the
implementation of sanctions.

Moreover, we firmly believe that many of the
challenges that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
faces can be effectively addressed only through a
holistic approach involving a wide range of regional
and international partners. In that light, we have been
eager to broaden the Committee's engagement with
all relevant partners, including those in the United
Nations system. Therefore, the Committee regularly
has received briefings and held focused thematic
discussions with all relevant United Nations offices and
seniors officials.
In addition, the Committee has broadened its
engagement with the region to include important
subregional organizations and frameworks, in addition
to regular interactions with regional States. Committee
members have had two opportunities to interact with
the secretariat of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region on regional efforts to address
illicit trafficking and natural resources. During my
most recent visit to the region, I had the opportunity
to observe the ministerial meeting of signatory States
and guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, which took place on 17 October
in Brazzaville.

The Committee has also also keen to promote
synergy between its work and that of other relevant
regional and international stakeholders. For example,
in the area of natural resources, the Committee held
its first open briefing , which was available to all
Member States. The meeting ended up facilitating
a better understanding of the challenges related to
the effective management of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also promoted
collaboration among regional and international actors
and the Committee in reducing the illegal exploitation
of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

During the two visits that I undertook to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
I was able to hold focused discussions with local
authorities, civil society organizations and United
Nations representatives in the capitals of the countries
that I visited. Based on those interactions, I believe
that I acquired a clear vision of the manner in which
the effective implementation of sanctions can help
facilitate building a space for peace.

More than ever, I am certain that the work that
we do here in New York has an impact on the ground.
The sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo affects armed groups in a number of ways.
The arms embargo reduces the potential of armed
groups to obtain weapons and ammunition. In addition,
the possibility of being included on the Committee's
sanctions list serves as a deterrent from engaging in
destabilizing activities. That could possibly lead to
being the subject of investigations and prosecution by
Governments of the region. Therefore, the sanctions
can serve not only as a preventive tool, but also as a
tool to combat the rampant impunity of armed groups
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I note the importance of supporting
the work of the Group of Experts that supports the
1533 Committee. During my tenure as Chair of the
Committee, the Group of Experts has provided the
Committee with a considerable amount of information
concerning the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The experts went to great lengths to
obtain credible information with a view to improving
the situation and bringing peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that context, members of
the Committee continue to mourn the loss of Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan and continue to expect that
their killers will be brought tojustice in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I therefore urge all Member
States and stakeholders, in particular within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to work towards
providing full support and collaboration with the Group
of Experts as well as the Senior Officer and his team
of four technical experts appointed by the Secretary-
General to assist the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, I should like to take the opportunity
today to convey my sincere thanks and appreciation
to all who have worked well and supported us during
the implementation of our mandate, notable our fellow
members of the Committee I had chaired and our
colleagues in the Sanctions Secretariat.

