Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this very serious issue on
our agenda. Allow me to express my appreciation to
Mr. Jenca and Mr. Grandi for their excellent briefings.

Today, I will focus on three issues: first, the current
situation in Myanmar; secondly, how to ensure the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of the Rohingya; and
thirdly, the humanitarian challenges in the camps in
Cox's Bazar.

Regarding my first point, on the current situation
in Myanmar, every week that passes, we hear more
stories of atrocities perpetrated against the Rohingya
people following the events of last August - stories of
mass graves in the village of Inn Din, a coastal village
whence the entire Rohingya population of 6,000 people
fled; stories ofyoung girls who are the victims of sexual
violence; stories of children who saw their parents and
siblings killed and had to find their own way to safety
in Bangladesh; and stories of almost 700,000 people
who had to flee from their homes.

It is often journalists who bring us such stories. In
that respect, as others have done, let me mention the
plight of the Reuters journalists Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe
00. Both were detained two months ago while working
on a report on the mass graves in Inn Din. We call on the
Government of Myanmar to respect their rights. They
should be released now. Furthermore, the Government
should allow journalists to work independently and
without undue interference, as stated in resolution
2222 (2015). Fundamental human rights are at stake, as
Mr. Jenea said earlier.

The recent testimonies of the situation in Myanmar
are shocking. They press upon us the need to address
the mass atrocities and to find a durable and just
resolution to the dreadful plight of the Rohingya.
The crisis continues to affect the security not only
of Myanmar but also of its neighbours. The situation
therefore warrants the close and continued attention of
the Security Council.

That brings me to my second point - the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of the refugees. We
welcome the steps undertaken by the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh to build a framework for
eventual return. We emphasize the right of return of
all refugees to Myanmar. However, it is clear that the
conditions in Rakhine state are not yet sufficient to
start that process. Returns can take place only if they
are voluntary, safe and dignified. The independent
monitoring of that process is essential to ensuring that
it meets international standards.

Myanmar should allow the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to play a role
in the repatriation process. Access for United Nations
and other humanitarian aid organizations into Rakhine
state is key to establishing if it is safe enough to return.
The voices of the Rohingya themselves also need to be
heard. The large majority of Rohingya do not want to
go back yet. They fear a repetition of the abuses that
forced them to flee.

It is primarily up to the Myanmar authorities to
ensure the safety of their own population. They have
the primary responsibility to protect their own people.
The many reports of grave violations and abuses of
human rights, including by the military, need to be
thoroughly investigated and to be prosecuted. We need
accountability. That is crucial to ensure the long-term
stability of Myanmar. We call on Myanmar to allow
access for the fact-finding mission. We encourage
Myanmar to accept the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court through accession or self-referral.

The return of the Rohingya must be dignified
and sustainable. The root causes of the current
crisis therefore need to be addressed. We call on
Myanmar to establish a concrete action plan for the
full implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Kofi Annan. Living conditions need to be improved
and decades of discrimination must be brought to an
end. Returnees need access to appropriate shelter, not
in camps, but in the villages that they fled from, and
victims require proper rehabilitation. These are steps
that should be taken right now.

This brings me to my third point: humanitarian
challenges and especially the humanitarian situation in
the camps in Cox's Bazar. We commend the generous
efforts of Bangladesh to welcome and shelter the refugees
on its soil. We are aware of the tremendous challenges
the situation creates for the host communities. The
international community will continue to depend on
Bangladesh, as long as safe, voluntary and dignified
returns remain impossible. The rainy season will only
increase the challenges in the Bangladeshi camps. We
should all stand ready to help Bangladesh overcome
these challenges, and we encourage Bangladesh to work
with United Nations agencies, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
to meet them.

In conclusion, for the Rohingya to be able to
return to their homes and to continue their lives
peacefully and sustainably in Myanmar, we call on
all parties to work on the following: first, a long-term
political solution that respects the rights of minorities;
secondly, accountability for perpetrators of violators of
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
thirdly, meeting the preconditions for a safe, dignified
and voluntary return of Rohingya refugees; and
fourthly, in the meantime, supporting the Bangladeshi
efforts to shelter the Rohingya on their soil.

The situation is so serious that we should keep this
issue high on the agenda of the Council.

