The Deputy Secretary-General: When people
think about the United Nations, they often think of the
Security Council. On it rests a heavy responsibility: to
maintain international peace and security in a troubled,
complex and interconnected world. The expectations of
the Council and the United Nations as a whole are high
around the world, and that is why a debate about its
working methods is evidently of interest to many.

Let us recognize that the Council has adapted its
working methods considerably over the years, from
introducing Council missions to the field to informal
interactive dialogues and open thematic debates, to
name but a few examples.

The Secretariat has always been and will remain
a vital partner of the Council. We provide detailed
and, hopefully, actionable information on a wide range
of issues on the Council's agenda. We translate the
mandates of the Security Council into peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, sanctions-
monitoring groups and bodies such as the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) and the subsequent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/682) provide
recommendations on how such operations could
be developed and improved. I want in particular to
underline the proposals related to prevention and post-
conflict measures, not least in the area ofpeacebuilding
and development. Let us also recall that "peaceful
societies" is a goal for the new 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Since the Secretariat facilitates the day-to-day
deliberations of the Council, we must have a strong
grasp of its working methods and working practice.
While the Council, of course, decides on its own
procedures, the Secretariat stands ready to provide
institutional memory and advice to the rotating Council
presidencies and to its other members.

An important interface between the Council and
the Secretariat remains the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The Working Group has given more transparency to
the Council's work through its crafting of notes, which
are subsequently issued by the President, documenting
trends of relevance to the wider United Nations
membership, including troop- and police-contributing
countries.

Let me mention some decisions of the Council on
its working methods and the actions that the Secretariat
has taken to implement them.
The Council has indicated that members of the
Council and the Secretariat can continue to use the "any
other business" agenda item to raise issues of concern.
The Secretariat considers that to be a valuable practice.
We have brought important matters to the Council's
attention more than 20 times in the past two years.

In addition, the Department of Political Affairs
has instituted a monthly practice of briefing Council
members on situations that could become threats
to international peace and security. Early-warning
signals could, and in my view should, play an even
more important role in preventing situations from
deteriorating or spiralling out of control, as we have so
often seen in recent years.

The Secretariat has also actively supported
proposals to arrange briefings via secure video-
teleconferences from United Nations offices around
the world. The number of such video-teleconferences
increased from one in 2009 to 41 in 2013, and to 101 in
2014. I have been part of that trend myself, and I think
that it is a great innovation.

Furthermore, in response to calls from Council
members and the wider membership, the Council
website now offers a historical record of Council
activities and information, for instance on reporting
requirements and mandate renewals. The website also
presents vital information on sanctioned individuals
and entities in formats that are deemed useful to and by
Member States.

The Council has also encouraged the early
appointment of Chairs of its subsidiary bodies. It is
important that the new Chairs be able to hit the ground
running, with solid knowledge of the work of their
Committees or Working Groups. Here, the Secretariat
assists the outgoing Chairs in preparing documentation
for the incoming Chairs. Following the election of five
new Security Council members last week, that process
will soon start again.

I should add that the Secretariat provides support
to 16 sanctions Committees and 71 experts serving on
12 sanctions-monitoring panels. Identifying experts
continues to be a time-consuming process. In response
to calls from Member States to ensure geographical and
other diversity, we have gradually expanded our roster
of experts. In addition, the Secretariat is improving
cooperation on sanctions through the Inter-agency
Working Group on United Nations Sanctions, which
brings together 24 United Nations entities.

As the Council, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of
the Charter, intensifies its cooperation with regional
organizations, the Secretariat is working in parallel
to support the Council in those endeavours, not least
vis-a-vis the African Union.

In closing, there is always room for improving any
organization's working methods. The Secretariat looks
forward to hearing the views of the other principal
organs, Council members and the wider United
Nations membership. We appreciate the transparency
demonstrated by today's initiative. The work of the
Security Council affects all Member States and people
everywhere in a world where peace, development, and
human rights are increasingly interrelated.

