Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Lithuania for organizing
this meeting. My thanks also go to the Secretary-
General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
Mr. Diakite for their briefings.

The current international security situation is
complex and volatile. Terrorism is spreading and
organized crime is on the rise. The dangers created by
the illicit trade in and excessive stockpiling of small
and light weapons have become more prominent and
severe. Globalization and the revolution in technologies,
including information technology, have added many
new features to that trade. The fight against illicit
trafficking in small and light weapons has become
increasingly complicated and difficult. The Security
Council should continue to play a positive role in
strengthening international efforts to combat the illicit
trade in such weapons and to prevent the damaging
humanitarian consequences of their proliferation. We
would like to make the following points.

First, we should take a multifaceted approach in
order to address the problem in an integrated manner.
The international community should learn from the
lessons of history. Political and diplomatic means
should be used to settle disputes in order to maintain
international and regional peace and stability and
eliminate the motives behind the illicit trade in small
arms. Meanwhile, we should intensify our efforts in the
areas of peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction
in order to provide solid assistance to the countries
concerned in achieving economic development and
social stability and to halt the abuse of such weapons
where it begins.

Secondly, the United Nations should play a major,
leading role in combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. Every country should continue to
fully implement the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects in order to enhance the multilateral process
in combating that trade. We hope the soon-to-be-held
second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental Experts
under the Programme of Action will bring progress
on efforts to combat the illicit trade at the national,
regional and international levels to new heights.

Thirdly, control at the source should be
strengthened in order to break the chain of supply.
National Governments have the primary responsibility
in fighting the illicit trade, and all countries should
comply strictly with Security Council resolutions on
arms embargoes, adopting responsible policies towards
the arms trade and undertaking not to transfer arms
to non-State actors. Meanwhile, domestic controls
should be tightened in order to prevent small arms
and light weapons from flowing into illegal channels.
The international community should take measures
to strengthen institutions and build capacities for
combating the illicit trade.

Fourthly, international cooperation should be
strengthened and assistance increased. All law
enforcement agencies should improve their cooperation
and coordination and their relations with INTERPOL
and other multilateral institutions so as to strengthen
the exchange of information and practical cooperation
through bilateral and multilateral channels, thus
preventing the flow of small arms and light weapons
into the hands of terrorists and transnational organized
criminal groups. Developed countries should increase
their aid to developing nations in order to improve
their capacity for stockpile management, combating
smuggling and confiscating and destroying illegal
firearms.

The Chinese Government has always opposed the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, and takes
a responsible and prudent approach to the export of
such weapons, abiding strictly by the principles of not
undermining regional peace and stability or interfering
in internal affairs of recipient countries. We do not
transfer arms to countries or regions that are under
Security Council arms embargoes or to non-State actors
and individuals. The Chinese Government has put in
place a comprehensive export control system, including
end-use certificates and export licences, among other
things. In recent years we have vigorously supported
and taken an active part in international and regional
cooperation in the fight against the illicit trade in
firearms. Meanwhile, we have also dedicated ourselves
to continuing to strengthen domestic legislation and
enforcement.

Efforts to stop the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons are of great importance to maintaining
regional peace and stability. They are the guarantee
of national stability and development by building an
arms-free world of peace and stability, providing for
the protection of women and children and ensuring
their safety and security, which is a common dream
of all countries. China is ready to join the rest of the
international community in an unremitting effort to
promote the elimination of the illicit trade, resolve the
problem of excessive stockpiles and stop the abuse of
such weapons.

