Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to express to you
on behalf of the Arab Group, whose chairmanship we
hold for this month, our thanks and appreciation for
your prompt response in convening this emergency
meeting. It is being held in tragic circumstances that
cause sentiments of sorrow, bewilderment and
condemnation, due to the continued deterioration of the
situation in the Palestinian territories and the Israeli
Government's insistence on betting on the logic of war
and weaponry rather than drawing on the logic of peace
and dialogue on the basis of the United Nations
resolutions, which are the foundation of the peace
process.

We are dismayed by the total disregard of
Sharon's Government for the relevant United Nations
resolutions, especially those recently adopted by the
Security Council. We are dismayed by the Israeli
military machine's persistent use of brutal force in the
occupied Palestinian territories, with open recklessness
and disregard for the will of the international
community and an open contempt for the series of
appeals made by the peace-loving parties.

We have expressed our great appreciation for the
international community's progress in addressing the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. That progress came in the form of the
Council's adoption of resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002), which call for the
establishment of a Palestinian State within secure and
internationally recognized borders and for the
immediate Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Palestinian territories. We also welcomed the call made
by the President of the United States, Mr. George Bush,
for the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the
Palestinian cities that had been reoccupied, for a freeze
on all settlement activities and for the withdrawal from
the Palestinian territories, in conformity with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We also
welcomed with high expectations the news of the
peaceful mission to the region of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Colin Powell, for which we
have high hopes.

However, the Israeli occupying Power, in flagrant
defiance of all the aforementioned resolutions, has
refused and persisted with adamant stubbornness in its
all-out, ferocious war in the Palestinian cities, villages
and refugee camps, allowing itself to kill countless
numbers of unarmed Palestinian civilians in flagrant
violation of the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law, in an unmistakable
attempt to present the international community with a
fait accompli, so that Israel could later disavow its
obligations under the relevant United Nations
resolutions. The Ambassador of the United Kingdom,
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, said that what Israel is doing
constitutes self-condemnation and that the Council
must therefore underline and officially affirm this
condemnation in its resolutions.

What is at stake today is the credibility of the
Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. In these extremely
tragic circumstances, we cannot stand idly by in the
face of the appalling Israeli conduct, as if we were
declaring the international community unable to force
Israel to comply with the Security Council's
resolutions and to put an end to the dangerous spiral of
its practices, which constitute a clear threat to
international peace and security.

Tunisia reaffirms its full solidarity with the
fraternal Palestinian people and its legitimate
leadership headed by President Arafat, in order to
restore all the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, foremost among which is the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
Jerusalem as its capital.

While we demand immediate implementation of
Council resolutions, especially the most recent one,
resolution 1403 (2002), and the immediate withdrawal
of Israeli forces from the occupied Palestinian
territories, we underscore the need for mustering all
efforts of the international community, especially the
major international players, such as the "quartet", in
order to ensure urgent international protection for the
Palestinian people and to prevent any further
deterioration of the situation.

We must also stress the need for immediate and
effective action to end the siege imposed on the great
national fighter and leader of the Palestinian people's
national march, President Arafat. All obstacles placed
on the Palestinian Authority's infrastructure must be
removed immediately with a view to laying the
groundwork for the resumption of the peace process
and the revival of the inescapable and indispensable
Israeli-Palestinian negotiating track, especially in the
aftermath of the Beirut Arab Summit, which made it
abundantly clear that peace is the strategic option
chosen by all Arab States.

