President Medvedev (spoke in Russian): I expect
that the current meeting of the Security Council,
convened on the initiative of United States President
Barack Obama, will help address many problems
facing the international community, first and foremost
in the sphere of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament.

I think that today it is obvious to everyone that
the issues of security are indivisible and global.
Security is affected not only by conflict situations in
certain regions of the world, but also by instability in
individual countries. And if we want the collective
efforts of the international community to be built on
objective forecasts and to be effective, we must learn
more about each other and openly discuss the
accumulated problems, comprehensively analysing
them and jointly developing well thought-out
decisions.

That is precisely the goal of the Security Council
resolution we have just adopted. The measures it
contains are a realistic programme of action for the
international community to respond effectively to
common threats in the nuclear sphere.

Russia has always been a reliable and predictable
partner in the area of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. In the sphere of strategic arms limitation,
Russia and the United States of America have carried
out unprecedented reductions of strategic nuclear
arsenals within the framework of the Treaty on the
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms.
In doing so, we have repeatedly stated and reiterated
our readiness to move forward to reduce the number of
delivery vehicles of strategic offensive arms more than
threefold. Our proposals have been put forward at
negotiations that we are holding with the United States,
and we are prepared, as has been agreed with the
President, to continue working to meet the challenges
of missile proliferation; we hope that all interested
parties will join us in this endeavour.

Today's meeting is ushering in a time of large-
scale and serious work i work that I am convinced
will dramatically improve the situation in the world. I
am referring to the nuclear security summit and the
Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference scheduled
for next year, along with the signing of a new legally
binding Russian-American treaty on the reduction and
limitation of strategic offensive arms. We are doing our
utmost to have it signed by December.

Our main shared goal is to untangle the
problematic knots in the field of non-proliferation and
disarmament. Naturally, that is extremely complicated,
since the level of mistrust among nations remains too
high; nonetheless, it must be done.

I would like to emphasize that the situation in the
sphere of non-proliferation is changing less quickly
than we would like. The old, traditional threats persist
and new ones are emerging. One of the most dangerous
threats, just referred to by certain heads of States, is
that of nuclear components falling into the hands of
terrorists. I believe that all present would agree that the
existing back-up system needs to be modernized. We
must consider together how to make it more up-to-date
and more efficient.

The issue of peaceful nuclear energy requires
serious attention. New nuclear power plants doubtless
hold great promise for resolving many problems, in
particular those of developing countries, stimulating
the economic growth of entire regions and raising the
living standards of millions of people on the planet.
However, States that carry out such programmes must
strictly abide by non-proliferation agreements. I place
special emphasis on that here in the Security Council.

What, in our view, are the priorities for
international cooperation in this crucial area? There are
a few.

First, it is essential to improve, update and
strengthen the global non-proliferation and
disarmament regime. The tried and tested international
mechanisms ~ above all, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons - continue to
play a pivotal role in this area. We must also promote
and universalize the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

Secondly, we need to encourage leading countries
to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty as soon as possible in order to ensure its
ultimate entry into force. That is very important.

Thirdly, we should make more active use of the
new non-proliferation mechanisms, above all
resolution 1540 (2004), sponsored by Russia and the
United States of America, on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction; the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism; and others.

It is obvious that an effective resolution of many
of the aforementioned problems will depend on the
interested and constructive engagement of all parties.
We expect that the Russian-American efforts in this
area will be backed by all nuclear-weapon States. The
non-nuclear-weapon States should also honour their
obligations in this area, which would help to create a
climate favourable to genuine non-proliferation.
Finally, I should like to emphasize that Russia is
ready to continue working actively for peace on Earth
and for the future of civilization.

