Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow us first of all to convey
our high regard and appreciation to Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop, your Foreign Minister, for her direct
and useful engagement through the Council over the
past three days; it is unprecedented for a Foreign
Minister to show such interest and presence. We wish
her a safe journey back home.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important debate, not only because it
pertains to our region but also because, according to the
Security Council's own attestation, we are dealing with
a disease that poses a threat to international peace and
security. For that reason, we wish to thank Mr. David
Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury and Mr. Thomas
Mauget for their very useful briefings. We also thank
the ambassadors of Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Mali for their presence. We welcome Ambassador
Power back from her trip to our region.

We have received sobering reports from high
officials of the United Nations today who have been
charged with the responsibility for leading the global
response in the fight against the Ebola outbreak.
Vigilance, perseverance and flexibility was the
message that was conveyed by Mr. Nabarro; we have
to pay heed to that message. The lack of capabilities,
the requisite infrastructures and trained personnel and
inadequate logistical means continue to militate against
the successful campaign to defeat this complex and
deadly virus, as it was characterized by Mr. Banbury.

Stock-taking of this nature, as we are engaging in
right now, is essential to effectively assess the progress
of our collective response to what has been described
as the worst single Ebola outbreak in history. We take
positive note of reports indicating that the epidemic
may be levelling off. According to the World Health
Organization (WHO), the case incidence by week,
currently placed at 1,000, is unlikely to exceed present
levels. We find this encouraging. More, however, needs
to be done to achieve our ultimate goal of the complete
eradication of the Ebola virus. The support of the
international community remains crucial in the fight
against the disease.

In this regard, we would like to acknowledge the

importance of such subregional initiatives. The States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) have made significant financial
contributions to enhance the response capacity of the
most affected States in the subregion and bolster the
multisectoral regional architecture to defeat the disease.
We also acknowledge the efforts of Member States
and international organizations, including the African
Union and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
that have made financial donations and sent medical
teams and military personnel to support the fight
against Ebola. We note in particular the pledge made
by European Union members of more than €l billion, in
addition to expertise and other support on the ground in
the affected countries. We pay tribute to the Red Cross,
Medecins Sans Frontieres and other non-governmental
organizations working on the front lines, often at great
risk to their personnel.

On our part, in addition to the $3.5 million
contributed by the Federal Government of Nigeria
to the ECOWAS Regional Solidarity Fund, a further
$1 million has been pledged. Nigeria will also send 500
health volunteers to the affected ECOWAS countries.

Nigeria was declared Ebola-free by WHO on
20 October 2014 following 42 days of no reported new
cases. Health officials were able to eradicate Ebola
from Nigeria by adhering to the guiding principles of
disease control, which involve identifying and tracking
down those who might have been in contact with Ebola
patients. That effort took them to 26,000 households in
one instance alone.

Community engagement and a sense of duty on the
part of the citizens were instrumental to the success
of the process. This demonstrates that the fight against
Ebola can indeed be won. We will nevertheless remain
vigilant and strengthen screening at our ports of entry
in order to consolidate the success we have achieved in
eradicating Ebola.

The Ebola outbreak has undermined the foundations
of economic prosperity, security and social stability
in the countries affected in our subregion. Countries
emerging from conflict and those in the phase of post-
conflict reconstruction are particularly vulnerable to the
effects of the disease, which has the potential to reverse
the modest progress recorded thus far. Mechanisms
need to be put in place to foster any further outbreak
of the epidemic and mitigate its impacts. Isolation or
the imposition of restrictive measures on the affected
countries or the region as a whole is not the right way
to go about meeting the challenge. What the affected
countries need is sustained and targeted assistance to
contain and eradicate Ebola rather than being unfairly
isolated or stigmatized.

The Secretary-General's five-point approach is
therefore the right way to go. Support for the mission
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response is also crucial. The protocols approved by
the World Health Organization do not advocate border
closures, travel restrictions or the stigmatization of any
individual on the basis of his or her nationality. We
therefore urge Member States to refrain from taking
any action that could exacerbate what is already a
difficult situation.

As Mr. Banbury had warned, there is a long battle
ahead of us, and plenty of hard work confronting us.
Finally, I wish to say that Nigeria remains firmly
committed to the fight against Ebola and that we shall
not relent until this insidious disease is completely
eradicated in our region.

