Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I would like to
begin by thanking Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and Head of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia for his briefing and introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General, as contained in document
S/2009/590. I also welcome the participation of His
Excellency, Ambassador Duale of Somalia in the
Council's meeting today.

Viet Nam remains deeply concerned about piracy
off the coast of Somalia. There has been no significant
change in the number of incidents along the East
African coastline, and more dangerously, there has
been a recent surge of alleged attempts and attacks in
the Western Indian Ocean, in which more sophisticated
methods and techniques have been employed.

Against this backdrop, enhanced coordination
among the international stakeholders, regional
organizations and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) is crucial so as to prevent and suppress piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. We
find it encouraging that Member States operating in the
territorial waters and high seas off the coast of Somalia
have developed complex and comprehensive military
naval operations and the necessary coordination
mechanisms.

We believe the Contact Group for Piracy Off the
Coast of Somalia with its four supporting working
groups is an effective international cooperation
mechanism and a common point of contact between
and among States, regional and international
organizations on all aspects of the fight against piracy.
Recent coordination efforts between the Contact Group
and the International Contact Group on Somalia have
produced tangible results. Such coordination should be
encouraged and enhanced.

At the regional level, we welcome the adoption of
the Djibouti Code of Conduct on the Repression of
Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in the
Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden, and we
are convinced that full implementation of the Djibouti
Code of Conduct will enable States in the region to
develop appropriate regulatory and legislative
frameworks to combat piracy, enhance their capacity to
patrol the waters of the region, intercept suspected
vessels and prosecute suspected pirates.

We welcome, in this connection, the
establishment of the International Trust Fund
Supporting Initiatives of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia and the International Maritime
Organization Djibouti Code trust fund.

Anti-piracy activities by the TFG continue to face
numerous challenges, most notable of which is a lack
of the capacity to thwart, curb or investigate piracy in
areas under the control of the Government. We call
upon the international community and regional
organizations to provide technical and financial
assistance to Somalia, at the request of the TFG and
with notification to the Secretary-General, so as to
strengthen its security institutions and its capacity to
address lawlessness at sea and bring to justice, in
compliance with the international law and relevant
United Nations Security Council resolutions, those
who are using Somali territory to plan, facilitate or
undertake criminal acts of piracy and armed robbery at
sea.

We commend the efforts of the European Union
Naval Force Operation Atalanta and States, acting in
their national capacities, in cooperation with the TFG
and each other, to suppress piracy and to protect
vulnerable ships transiting through the waters off the
coast of Somalia, including those transporting
humanitarian supplies to Somalia and United Nations
supplies to AMISOM.

We commend the significant efforts undertaken
by the Government of Kenya to prosecute suspected
pirates captured by the international community in its
national courts. We also urge all States, especially
those directly harmed by piracy, to provide the Kenyan
Government with the logistical and financial support to
address the challenges of prosecuting suspected pirates.
Finally, we thank the United States delegation for
having prepared the draft resolution on piracy. My
delegation will continue to constructively engage in the
efforts to achieve consensus on this important
document.

