Mr. Matsumoto (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English interpretation provided by the delegation): At
the outset, I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
The Right Honourable William Hague for convening
this ministerial meeting in his capacity as President of
the Security Council for the month of November. It is
indeed timely for the Security Council to discuss the
issue of the Sudan at this very critical juncture for the
country. I would also like to welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General, United Nations staff and
peacekeepers, His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairman of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for Sudan, the African Union
(AU) and the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) to achieve peace and security in the
Sudan. We listened to their statements concerning the
very faithful implementation of the CPA and the
organization of the referendum scheduled for January
2011, and I highly commend their commitment in that
regard.

The Sudan has endured the longest civil war in
the recent history of Africa, and the situation represents
one of the most urgent challenges facing the
international community. The Sudan is also a unique
case in which the United Nations and the AU are
closely collaborating in peacekeeping. Achieving peace
in the Sudan is thus an indispensable element in
achieving peace and stability in the whole of Africa.

If peace is to be achieved between the South and
the North, it will be first and foremost necessary for
the parties to advance the implementation of the CPA.
The most important task at this time is for the
referendums to be conducted as scheduled on 9 January
2011 in a free and fair manner. The Security Council
and the international community must diligently and

attentively see this process through. In this context, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, which is
supporting the implementation of the Agreement, will
play an important role.

It is essential that all interested parties accept the
results of the referendums, regardless of their outcome.
In addition, the parties must be encouraged to make
further progress in the dialogue between them. If
progress is to be made in the dialogue, the continued
assistance of the African Union, through the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan, led
by Chairman Mbeki, and the Intergovernmental
Authority of Development (IGAD) is critical. In this
context, I had the opportunity to meet with
Mr. Mahboub Maalim, Executive Secretary of IGAD,
on the occasion of his recent visit to Japan. In the
months to come, it will also be necessary to give
further consideration to the modalities of United
Nations engagement in the Sudan.

Peace cannot be achieved in the Sudan without
stability in Darfur. We therefore strongly urge all
parties to the conflict in Darfur to join the peace
process. At the same time, it is important that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur be enabled to pursue its mission.

The international community must continue to
actively support the Sudan in its efforts to build peace.
Since the signing of the CPA, Japan has extended
assistance to the Sudan in the amount of approximately
$440 million. For the referendums scheduled for early
next year, we have disbursed approximately $8.17
million in aid to support the procurement of voting
materials and voter education programmes, and are
currently preparing to dispatch an observation team to
monitor the Southern Sudan referendum. Japan will
spare no effort in providing cooperation aimed at the
achievement of peace and stability in the Sudan.

The Security Council's unanimous message
issued today at the ministerial level is of high
importance. Japan will continue to appeal to the
Sudanese parties to recognize that only though efforts
to build mutual trust through a spirit of cooperation
and partnership will the true foundation for lasting
peace and a bright future for the Sudan be built.

I would like to conclude by reiterating once again
Japan's determination, as a long-standing and true
friend of Africa, to continue its active support and
engagement in the pursuit of peace and stability in the
Sudan.

