Mr. Kakanur (India): We thank the delegation
of Indonesia for organizing this open debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their remarks.

It is our impression that there is no dearth of
intent to better the protection of civilians in armed
conflict situations. However, it is obvious that the
implementation of this concept does not match the
expectations. We need to translate the concept into
feasible actions and operational responses.
The well-established norms to limit the effects of
conflict include respecting international humanitarian
law and other relevant human rights laws by all parties
to a conflict and ensuring safe and unhindered access
for medical and humanitarian agencies to assist
people. Today's challenges are not the result of the
absence of norms, but of the inability to abide by the
established norms.

The protection of civilians is a vast subject. In
view of the time constraints, I would like to limit my
remarks to the application of this concept in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping missions mandated by
the Security Council.

It is our experience that peacekeepers often rise to
the occasion when required. Let me recall the example
of Captain Salaria, who led an Indian infantry brigade
group as part of United Nations Operation in the Congo
in November 1961. That mission, whose objective was
to restore peace and unity in the Congo and protect the
lives ofthe civilian population in Elizabethville, resulted
in the highest number of casualties suffered by India
in any United Nations operation - 39 personnel laid
down their lives. That was at a time when the protection
of civilians was not part of peacekeeping mandates.

The protection of civilians in the context of United
Nations peacekeeping operations has been a complex
undertaking because of the vastly different nature
of armed conflicts, possible contradictions with the
long-standing agreed principles of United Nations
peacekeeping, limitations of the mandates, and the
serious inadequacy of the resources made available for
peacekeeping missions. While the issue continues to
be debated in the Security Council, which has already
adopted several resolutions and other documents
focused on the concept, those efforts have, however, not
really helped in addressing the main challenges.

The difficulties involved in achieving the aims of
the protection of civilians are well known. The general
tendency is to assume - wrongly - that the protection
of civilians is the responsibility of the parties to
the conflict, or of peacekeepers and humanitarian
organizations. However, the responsibility primarily
rests with the national Governments. Yet very little
is done in terms of strengthening national or societal
capacities for protection. Outside agencies can only
supplement, and not supplant, the responsibility of
national Governments.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2019/373)
clearly identifies that mandating certain peacekeeping
missions to participate in, or conduct, military operations
against armed groups, or otherwise conduct joint
operations with non-United Nations forces in specific
contexts, has generated important challenges for the
performance of other mandated activities, including
the protection of civilians. That also jeopardizes the
credibility and the image of the United Nations neutral
presence in armed conflict situations. While eight of
the current 14 United Nations peacekeeping missions
include the protection of civilians as one of their
mandates, that aspect is only one of the many other
mandated components, which number at least 10 on
average, that each of those missions is individually
expected to fulfil. It is clear that the expectations that
United Nations peacekeepers can effectively ensure the
protection of civilians in the absence of clear mandates
are not realistic.

Conflicts where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are inherently messy, complex and difficult.
However, those factors should not be taken as an
excuse to accept the devastating impact of conflict on
civilians. A number of courses of action, mechanisms
and processes are available to address the operational
issues. It is up to the Council to harness them in a
collaborative effort. The commitments under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative provide a foundation
to tackle some of the challenges and further strengthen
the protective role of peacekeepers. That requires a
collective endeavour, including Member States and the
Secretariat, to adapt to changing environments.

It is also useful to consider developing a normative
architecture for the protection of civilians as part
of a broader endeavour within a framework that is
politically attuned, but not politicized or seen as being
instrumentalized. It is only then will we be able to
move forward with cohesion to address issues that have
exacted a heavy price in civilian lives.

