Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/530), which covers the period from 27 March
to 26 June. I also thank the members of the Security
Council for their valuable and constructive visit to
Colombia last week.

For Colombia, the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia plays a major role in the process
of implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
through forward-looking reforms for its implementation
based on consensus and institutional mechanisms,
which is part of the mandate that the Colombian
people conferred upon President Ivan Duque Marquez
to provide all Colombians peace with legality and
legality with security. For this reason, the President
has requested the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to extend the mandate of the Mission for
another year.

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General
acknowledges in his report the commitment of the
national Government to the implementation of the
Final Agreement through actions and the adoption of
concrete measures, some of which go beyond the initial

obligations in the strictest sense and have enabled us to
achieve the significant progress described in the report
in all areas ofthe Mission's mandate. We also appreciate
the acknowledgement that these efforts have gone
beyond the implementation of the Final Agreement and
are now part of a broader Government agenda aimed
at the positive transformation of territories and the
living conditions and opportunities of their inhabitants
as embodied by the national development plan, entitled
"Pact for Colombia, pact for equity".

Legality, the strengthening of institutions and the
full application of the rule of law in Colombia are one
of the pillars on which the national development plan
has been drafted. These same principles guide the
Government's position on the institutions established in
the Final Agreement, including, of course, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the importance of which has
been acknowledged and reiterated at every turn.

The objections raised by the President of the
Republic to the draft statutory law on the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, motivated by a legitimate
concern shared by a large number of citizens, were
dealt with through the procedure provided for in the
Constitution, with the involvement of the Congress
of the Republic and the Constitutional Court, in the
full exercise of their powers. Once this procedure
was completed, this law was enacted on 6 June and is
already in force, which shows that the institutional path
was a safe and properly planned path, as the Council
was informed on several occasions.

We will continue to support the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
in order to fulfil the lofty purposes for which it
was established and to meet the expectations of all
Colombians, in particular the victims. For the same
reasons and through institutional channels, we will also
continue to promote the changes and reforms we consider
appropriate so as to ensure peace without impunity,
such as the initiative that establishes that, in future,
sexual crimes against children will be adjudicated
within the ordinary justice system. In this regard, the
constitutional reform set forth in Legislative Act 02
of 2019, approved by a large majority of Colombia's
Congress and promulgated on 15 July, should be
understood to provide that neither kidnapping nor drug
trafficking can be considered political or related crimes
and therefore cannot be amnestied or pardoned. These
are some of the reforms that have been planned and will
be planned in future.

Let me turn now to a key aspect of the Mission's
mandate: the reintegration of members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP). As the Secretary-General's report
highlights, my country's Government will continue
with complete determination to honour its commitment
to ensuring the successful reintegration of more than
10,500 ex-combatants who continue to participate in the
process and genuinely remain on the right side of the
law. We are pleased to see that, like the Government,
the vast majority of ex-combatants comply with what
has been agreed, and we remain optimistic about their
future civilian life.

However, I must mention an event that occurred
subsequent to the publication of the report before us
today, which is causing enormous consternation to the
Government and in broad sectors of Colombian society,
namely, the decision by one of the leaders of the FARC-
EP, Seuxis Paucias Hernandez Solarte, also known as
Jesus Santrich, to abandon his protection scheme on
30 June, when he was in a territorial area for training
and reintegration close to the border with Venezuela. By
taking such a decision, Santrich sought to evade justice,
as he was due to appear before the Supreme Court of
Justice on 9 June in a preliminary investigation into his
alleged involvement in drug-trafficking crimes after
the signing of the Final Agreement, not to mention the
breach of his obligations under the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. We deplore the fact that a person in a
leadership position within his organization - to such
an extent that on 11 June he took office as a Member
of Congress, as the report points out - evades
justice, shirks his obligations to the victims and takes
advantage of the good faith of all Colombians. We are
also concerned about the fact that various FARC-EP
leaders do not honour their commitments, which is
why non-compliance cases should be opened. Several
names should be mentioned here but, for the purposes
of today's meeting, I will simply say that 16 per cent
of the leadership of the former guerrilla group have
not disclosed the truth or attended hearings, show
very little interest in reparations to victims and have
not made a genuine commitment to the guarantees
for non-repetition, as their current whereabouts
are unknown.

We welcome the fact that the political party Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) has
rejected Santrich's behaviour and distanced itself from
statements and actions that imply non-compliance
with the responsibilities under the Final Agreement.
The conduct of Mr. Hernandez Solarte and some of his
associates, such as Luciano Marin Arango, also known
as Ivan Marquez, Hernan Velasquez Saldarriaga, also
known as El Paisa, and Henry Castellanos Garzon,
also known as Romafia, deserves the repudiation of
all of society, but in particular, of the FARC political
party, as a sign of its commitment to complying with
the obligations that the Final Agreement imposes
on each of the parties. One of these obligations,
which the Government continues to make progress
in fulfilling, is to strengthen security conditions
for FARC political party candidates ahead of the
regional and local elections to be held in October, as
a further step towards the political reintegration of
former combatants. On 8 July, President Ivan Duque
Marquez presented a transparency and security plan for
territorial elections, which includes specific measures
for the FARC political party, in terms of institutional
support, security and protection, in addition to the
general measures adopted for all candidates in the
national electoral-guarantees plan.

Progress has also been made in the socioeconomic
reintegration of ex-combatants. The report gives an
account of 24 approved productive collective projects.
Another five are being evaluated. Some 216 individual
productive projects have also been approved. In total,
2,181 ex-combatants have benefited directly through
the projects, which also has a positive impact on their
families and, naturally, on their surroundings. Work is
also being done in this area to regulate access to land
for reintegration purposes, and progress has been made
in employing ex-combatants, in the public and private
sectors alike, thereby enabling 1,380 ex-combatants to
gain access to formal employment in various sectors of
the economy.

The national Government's commitment to the
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants has
been translated into concrete actions, to ensure the
efficiency and sustainability of the economy. The
institutional offer to guarantee attention in this area
is maintained and strengthened both for the more than
3,000 ex-combatants in the territorial areas for training
and reintegration and for the more than 8,000 who
preferred to reintegrate into civil life outside those
areas. I would like to reiterate that, although the term
for the territorial areas for training and reintegration
will expire in August, the national Government will
not abandon to their fate those who are in them. As the
report acknowledges, the Government is committed to
the orderly management of the transition of those areas,
which from the beginning, were meant to be temporary.

I would now like to address the second main
component of the Mission's mandate: security
guarantees. In his report, the Secretary-General
expresses concern about the assassinations of former
FARC-EP members since the signing of the Final
Agreement - a concern shared by the national
Government. The Colombian State and society
have emphatically expressed their rejection of such
developments, and the President of Colombia himself
has ordered the adoption of measures to improve the
safety of ex-combatants by ensuring their protection
in a comprehensive manner. Similarly, the competent
authorities work with the utmost diligence to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for the crimes, while
focusing their efforts on the regions with the highest
incidence of threats to the lives of ex-combatants, so as
to ensure that perpetrators do not go unpunished.

As a result of all of the foregoing actions, according
to reports from the elite corps of the police, the
number of murders of ex-combatants decreased from
32 in the first half of 2018 to 17 in the same period
of 2019. In addition, the effectiveness of the measures
adopted by the State is reflected in the fact that no
murders of ex-combatants who are being reintegrated
in the territorial areas for training and reintegration
or who have requested protection from the State have
been recorded. The greatest challenge in this area is
the security situation of the former combatants who
are proceeding with the reintegration process outside
the territorial areas. They are dispersed throughout the
national territory, and many of them are in areas where
the presence of various criminal economies stimulates
the activity of organized illegal armed groups.

For that reason, in addition to the specific measures
adopted to protect former combatants, military and
police operations are being deployed to contain the
threats posed by organized illegal armed groups,
and efforts are being stepped up to impede criminal
economies. Currently, those two elements jointly
constitute the main challenge of implementing the Final
Agreement and the efforts to stabilize and consolidate a
peaceful coexistence in Colombia - as expressly stated
in the report on the Verification Mission. They are also
the main source of threats to the security of former
combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders.
The measures that have been adopted to protect the
latter have led to a reduction in the number of killings
since May 2019. These results, while positive, are
far from satisfactory. The national Government will
not be satisfied until better security conditions are in
place for social leaders, communicators and human
rights defenders to carry out their work and continue
to positively contribute to the institutional, economic
and social life of their communities. In this regard, I
must mention that the Special Investigation Unit of the
country's Attorney General has stated that it has solved
the crimes in more than half the reported cases and in
60 per cent of the killings of social leaders, which is
testament to the progress the corresponding authorities
have been making on that front.

On the other hand, it is important to note - since
it was mentioned - the mechanisms to fight the
world drug problem, especially in relation to areas
where illicit crops are cultivated. President of Duque
Marquez's Government's policy is to avail itself of the
whole gamut of potential mechanisms to respond to this
challenge. President Duque Marquez's Government
received some 206,000 hectares of illicit crops. With
great effort, these numbers are beginning to decrease,
which is why President Duque Marquez's Government's
actions are aimed at making as many tools as possible
available, including forced eradication, voluntary
eradication, agreements with communities, and low-
altitude spraying with all required safety and security
measures, which is an opportunity that has arisen from
a decision taken by the constitutional court yesterday.
This court decision will make it possible to eliminate
all the potential risks and make progress in that area
as one of the necessary mechanisms to respond to the
world drug problem in Colombia. It is very important
that the Council be crystal clear in understanding that
the task of peacebuilding in the country will be much
more difficult with coca, which is why fighting it
constitutes effective action for guaranteeing peace and
security in Colombia.

I would like to thank the Verification Mission for
its support for the Government's efforts to implement
the Final Agreement with forward-looking reforms
through consensus and institutional mechanisms. Its
work is also essential in the promotion and verification
of compliance with the obligations of the FARC-EP,
under the Agreement, in areas to which its contribution
is key in the achievement of tangible progress, such
as demining, the delivery of goods as reparations for
victims, and the effective reintegration of formerly
recruited children and adolescents.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating the gratitude
of my Government and my compatriots to all the
members of the Council for its recent visit to Colombia,
during which its members were able to experience first-
hand the results of President Ivan Duque Marquez's
Government's commitment to this process, as well as
the magnitude of the challenges that we face. Rather
than trying to evade those challenges, we are taking
them on in a committed and responsible manner. We are
encouraged by our conviction that peace with legality
is not only desirable but possible and necessary. We
espouse the concerns of all Colombians: those of former
combatants who are committed to legality, victims
who are concerned about truth and just reparation, a
society that calls for non-repetition, individuals that
have legitimate expectations for the implementation
process, and people who call for greater consensus so
that the process has more legitimacy and better serves
the purpose that inspires it.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
