Mr. Annabi: I am pleased to provide an update
on developments in Kosovo since Council members
were last briefed, on 25 February.

This month has been a busy one for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), with progress made on the priority issues
outlined to the Council during the last briefing. The
most notable achievements were the formation of a
Government after several months of deadlock and the
transfer to Kosovo yesterday of the remaining known
Kosovo Albanian prisoners held in Serbian jails.

UNMIK's efforts to foster political agreement
between the three major Kosovo Albanian parties
culminated on 28 February in an agreement to form a
coalition Government headed by Mr. Bajram Rexhepi
of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK). The same
agreement put forward Mr. Ibrahim Rugova of the
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) as President and
assigned four ministries to the LDK and two each to
the PDK and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo
(AAK).

Council members will recall that, in addition to
this division of ministries under the coalition
agreement, the Constitutional Framework reserves one
ministry to the Kosovo Serbs and one ministry to
another minority community. This latter ministry has
been filled by a member of the Bosniac/Gorani VATAN
coalition, which has four seats in the Assembly.

Unfortunately, however, the Kosovo Serb Return
Coalition (Povratak) has not thus far put forward a
ministerial candidate. Nevertheless, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, hopes that this can happen shortly. He
welcomed the fact that on 28 February, when the
agreement on the coalition Government was reached,
Mr. Covie - whom we are happy to see with us
today - in an interview with the Serbian media, stated
that he was encouraged by the agreement, which
guaranteed an equal approach to all communities in
Kosovo, and that Povratak expected at least one post in
the future Government of Kosovo.

The coalition agreement was endorsed on 4
March by more than a two-thirds majority of the
Kosovo Assembly. Kosovo Serb Assembly members
participated in the vote, although they voted to abstain.
The approval ofthe agreement voted in the President of
Kosovo, the Prime Minister and the Ministers
nominated by the parties. Two remaining Assembly
presidency members put forward by the PDK were
endorsed by a separate vote, bringing the full
complement ofthat body to nine members.

Shortly before the Assembly meeting, allegations
of a serious nature were made against Prime Minister-
designate Rexhepi. These allegations were investigated
by UNMIK police and by KFOR, and were found to be
not substantiated.

These accusations were not considered helpful in
building inter-communal trust and a workable
relationship between all communities in the provisional
institutions of self-government.

Following the Assembly's endorsement of the
President and the Government, both President Rugova
and Prime Minister Rexhepi made statements to the
press on several issues, including the issue of
independence. Mr. Steiner spoke with both Mr. Rugova
and Mr. Rexhepi shortly after the statements were
made, underlined to them that such remarks were not
helpful and emphasized that Kosovo's provisional
institutions of self-government must concentrate on
those areas transferred to them by the Constitutional
Framework.

As I mentioned, the Return Coalition has not yet
nominated a candidate for its reserved Ministry - the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural
Development. It has, in fact, now conditioned its
participation in the Government on the allocation of
one extra ministry to the Kosovo Serbs - the Ministry
of Returns, an area that is reserved for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General under the
Constitutional Framework. Mr. Steiner has sought to
accommodate the wishes of the Kosovo Serbs and to
encourage their constructive engagement through
creative alternatives to the establishment of an actual
ministry.

He met with the Return Coalition on 19 March
and offered a package that includes the creation of the
position of Assistant Minister for the Coordination of
Returns and Community Affairs within the Office of
the Prime Minister. Mr. Steiner also offered the
creation of an advisory post for the Kosovo Serbs in
UNMIK's Office of Returns and Communities. The
Return Coalition was encouraged by Mr. Steiner to
appoint a qualified Kosovo Serb to their designated
Ministry and not to overlook the opportunity for
participation in the civil service, where hundreds of
posts for qualified Kosovo Serbs remain to be filled.
We very much hope that the Return Coalition will
resolve their internal difficulties and take Mr. Steiner
up on the offer he has made to them. It would indeed
be a great shame if, after all the efforts that have been
made on all sides, the Kosovo Serbs were to deny
themselves the opportunity of participating in the
Government.

Mr. Steiner again met with the Return Coalition
yesterday, 26 March, to continue the discussion on
Kosovo Serb participation in the Government. In
response to the Coalition's insistence on creating an
extra-institutional ministerial portfolio on returns, Mr.
Steiner explained that this was contrary to the
Constitutional Framework. Not only is there no legal
basis for a ministry to be created outside the
provisional Government, the issue of return is a special
responsibility of the international community and falls
under the reserved powers of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and therefore
it cannot be delegated to the institutions of self-
government. The Special Representative intends
actively to continue his efforts to engage the Kosovo
Serbs in the Government institutions and to find a
solution within the Constitutional Framework. Mr.
Steiner would, of course, welcome the Council's
support in this regard.

Now that a Government has been formed, the
transfer of authority has begun. The transitional
departments have been transformed into ministries, and
the provisional institutions of self-government must
now get down to the actual business of governing. The
Government first met on 15 March and again on 22
March and was urged by Prime Minister Rexhepi to
work together for all of Kosovo's communities. The
discussion focused on the priorities of each Ministry,
with the aim of drawing up a Government plan.
Ministries are currently working on establishing their
offices and on recruiting members of the civil service,
including members of minority communities. Mr.
Rexhepi and some of his Ministers have already met
with representatives of international financial
institutions and with donors to urge continued support
for Kosovo.

On 20 March Mr. Steiner and the Commander of
KFOR, General Valentin, had lunch with the President
of Kosovo, the Prime Minister and the President of the
Assembly. It was agreed that this format, which has
been dubbed the "2+3", will be used on a regular basis
to address policy issues and to solve problems in an
informal manner.

Members of the Kosovo Assembly are being
trained through the Assembly Support Initiative, set up
by the institution-building pillar of UNMIK, to provide
training in areas such as legislative ethics and oversight
of the executive. UNMIK is also encouraging the
strong interest shown by members of Kosovo's civil
society in starting a dialogue with the provisional
institutions of self-government. On 7 March key non-
governmental organization (NGO) leaders agreed to
work with the institution-building pillar to establish an
advisory board of NGO leaders to strengthen the NGO
role in the legislative and policy-making process.

A key priority in the economic sector is the
creation of jobs. The high level of unemployment,
particularly among young people - it still stands at 50
per cent - constitutes a potential threat to the stability
of Kosovo. Privatization is seen as an important means
of generating economic development, and UNMIK is
working hard to establish a favourable environment in
which this can go forward.

The overall security situation has improved over
the last month, and the murder rate is declining.
Between l January and ll March of this year, there
were 16 murders in Kosovo. If that rate - although it
is still high - continues, UNMIK police expect the
number of murders this year to be lower than in the last
two years, when, in comparison, we had, unfortunately,
250 murders in 2000 and 136 in 2001.

Attacks on minority communities continued,
however, although less frequently in some regions than
in previous months. A heavy police presence, curfews
in trouble spots and several arrests have had an impact
on the crime situation. Overall, UNMIK considers that
freedom of movement has improved, particularly in the
anilane area, where there appeared to be more
independent movement of Kosovo Serbs throughout the
region.

The new UNMIK Police Commissioner, Mr.
Stefan Feller from Germany, took up his duties on 15
March. Mr. Feller, as members of the Council may
know, is no newcomer to the Mission - he served as
Deputy Police Commissioner until May of last year.
We welcome the continuity of experience that his
appointment will bring to the Mission.

An important initiative under way at the moment
is the second weapons amnesty, which began on 15
March and will continue until 15 April. This is the
second weapons amnesty that KFOR and UNMIK
police have run. The Council may recall that the first
was last June, just before Regulation 2001/7, on the
Authorization of Possession of Weapons in Kosovo,
entered into force. This second amnesty coincides with
the formation of the Government, which, in its first
official meeting on 15 March, lent its full support to
the effort to reduce the number of weapons in
circulation in Kosovo.

Progress has been made in the fight against
organized crime through the promulgation on 18 March
of Regulation 2002/6, on Covert and Technical
Measures of Surveillance and Investigation. This
regulation is designed to enhance the investigative and
prosecutorial capacity with regard to organized crime
cases by enabling the police and prosecutors to use
various types of covert activity. Another important step
forward was the establishment at the end of February
of a unit within the Department of Justice to deal with
sensitive information and operations. One of the
important functions of this unit will be to transform
intelligence into evidence that can be used in a court of
law.

On returns, UNMIK's Office of Returns and
Communities is currently planning returns to 25
different locations throughout Kosovo. Local and
regional working groups are meeting regularly
throughout Kosovo to develop consensus among all
stakeholders - including the majority Kosovo
Albanian community - regarding returns, and to plan
specific projects. A comprehensive damage assessment
of 66 potential return locations has now been
completed. Damage to property and related
infrastructure was found to be severe and will require
considerable financial assistance for reconstruction
efforts.

An important part of the planning process for
returns is, of course, confidence-building measures
aimed at promoting reconciliation and a climate
conducive to return. Several reconciliation projects are
under way in mixed municipalities, such as Kamenica,
where a multi-ethnic youth project has been launched,
and in Strpce. The institution-building pillar of
UNMIK has also brought together Kosovo Albanian
civil society representatives and non-governmental
organizations from Serbia to develop civic dialogue
and build trust. A similar exercise was carried out by
bringing Kosovo Albanian journalists to visit Belgrade
media outlets with a view to promoting understanding
and cooperation.

A comprehensive returns package includes not
only preparing the ground for returns, but creating
effective mechanisms to allow the concerned
communities to participate in the process. Mr. Steiner
hopes that this inclusive approach that he has offered
the Kosovo Serbs will be accepted, as the active
participation of all communities is key to a successful
returns process.

The Special Representative has stressed that
cooperation with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will continue to be defined by the Common Document
through the High-Ranking Working Group. The past
month has seen a great deal of activity in the two sub-
groups of the High-Ranking Working Group dealing
with police and judicial cooperation respectively.

Lengthy negotiations between UNMIK and Mr.
Covic' culminated, happily, yesterday, in the transfer to
Kosovo of 146 Kosovo Albanian detainees from
Serbia. The initial figure stated was 153, but during the
process of preparing the transfer it was learned that 7
of them had previously been released. Mr. Steiner is
very satisfied that all known Albanian detainees who
wanted to return to Kosovo have now been able to do
so. The transfer was preceded by the handing over by
the Serbian authorities of the court files relating to the
majority ofthe remaining detainees.

Those files were reviewed by officials in
UNMIK's Department of Justice, including by
international judges. The judicial review determined
that a significant number of detainees had convictions
that were legally invalid, and this information was
communicated to the Serbian authorities. Accordingly,
the majority of the prisoners, most of whom had
convictions relating to activities during the Kosovo
conflict, were released within 24 hours of their return
to Kosovo. A smaller number of detainees were found
to have valid convictions, and they will serve out their
sentences in Kosovo. The case files for the remaining
detainees were incomplete, and those detainees will
continue to be held until their records are located or
until a determination can be made that their records
cannot be found.

A further step forward in cooperation was the
first joint visit - on 13 March - to an alleged illegal
detention centre in Kosovo, pursuant to the Protocol on
Joint Verification Teams on Hidden Prisons. The visit
confirmed that the site was, in fact, a mental institute
administered by the Department of Health.

Turning to relations with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Steiner met with President
Trajkovski in Skopje on 18 March. The visit yielded
two important agreements. The first related to the
establishment of a joint expert committee to address
the practical situation on the ground resulting from the
border demarcation Agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. The Government of Kosovo
has lent its full support to Mr. Steiner's efforts to
reduce tensions in the border area by addressing these
practical problems, and expressed a willingness to
participate in the plannedjoint expert committee.

Secondly, agreement was reached on the need to
initiate police cooperation with the objective of
establishing a memorandum of understanding to deal
with overall crime prevention and the fight against
organized crime.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, as Council
members can see, the six weeks since Mr. Steiner
arrived in Kosovo on 14 February have been rather
busy. His familiarization with the mission and the main
local actors on the ground has led him to conclude that,
in order for the nascent Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to focus on the tasks ahead and for
UNMIK to have a clear road-map for itself, a joint set
of benchmarks is needed to act as a set of target
objectives in key areas. Work is under way to identify
what realistic benchmarks can be set, and we will keep
the Council informed of progress.

I am sure that the Council will join UNMIK in
welcoming in particular the news that the Kosovo
Albanian detainees have now been transferred to
Kosovo. This has been an emotionally charged issue
that has been an obstacle to reconciliation since
UNMIK was established in Kosovo. We hope that the
resolution of this matter in a way that upholds the rule
of law, together with UNMIK's continued commitment
to determining the fate of the missing persons, will
boost inter-communal cooperation as Kosovo's
Government gets down to the hard work of provisional
self-government.

