Mr. Kolby (Norway): My delegation joins others
in welcoming the Foreign Minister of Angola to this
meeting. We also thank Ambassador Ryan for his
presentation.

Norway commends the Monitoring Mechanism
for its thorough work and welcomes its report and
recommendations on improving adherence to the
sanctions regime against UNITA. The report is a vital
follow-up to the adoption of resolution 1295 (2000).
We welcome this opportunity to discuss the report in an
open meeting, thus publicly focusing on the issues of
arms and diamonds as they relate to the conflict in
Angola. Before I go into specifics, allow me to make
some general comments.

In Angola, every effort must be made to bring the
peace process back on track. This includes supporting
the Government's initiatives to implement the Lusaka
Protocol, such as the amnesty law and the efforts to
reintegrate former UNITA soldiers into Angolan
society. Equally important is support for the various
peace initiatives recently taken by the Angolan
churches and civil society.

In the past, Jonas Savimbi and UNITA have
demonstrated their ability to rebuild their forces. The
Monitoring Mechanism describes how Savimbi set up
his diamond activities to pay for rearmament. It further
describes the importance to UNITA of petroleum and
petroleum products and the significance of UNITA's
representation abroad in relation to continued warfare.
In light ofthe report's conclusion that the sanctions are
hurting UNITA's ability to wage war, the need for
continued sanctions is obvious. Obvious, too, is the
need for improved implementation of the sanctions
regime.

As we see it, finding a solution to the protracted
conflict in Angola, as well as in the neighbouring
Democratic Republic of the Congo, represents two of
the most important challenges facing the Security
Council at present. In this connection, Norway
encourages the Government of Angola to play a
constructive part in the ongoing and revitalized process
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

We have carefully studied the recommendations
included in the report of the Monitoring Mechanism.
First, let me stress the importance of the general
responsibility of Member States to implement the
obligations laid down in the Security Council
resolutions establishing sanctions. It is unfortunate that
the United Nations sanctions measures are not fully
followed up, as is evident from the present report and
the earlier report of the Panel of Experts. Strict
compliance with the sanctions by all Member States is
needed in order to demonstrate to UNITA that it must
fully comply with the Lusaka Protocol.

The illicit trade in arms, drugs or diamonds
nurtures devastating conflicts in many parts of the
world. The Monitoring Mechanism's report describes
serious cases of illicit trade in diamonds and arms,
contrary to the sanctions regime against UNITA. The
report provides useful suggestions about how each
State may further improve its implementation of the
sanctions. These suggestions should be thoroughly
considered.

The Government of Angola and other state
authorities have taken important steps to gain control
of the flux of illicit diamonds. However, more efforts
are needed in order to provide increased transparency
and accountability in the control of the trade in
diamonds. As we recently said during the Council's
open debate on sanctions related to Sierra Leone,
Norway supports the idea of establishing a
standardized global certification scheme for diamonds
as soon as possible and we co-sponsored the General
Assembly resolution ofl December 2000 on the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict.

Much remains to be done in order to strengthen
the control systems in connection with the export and
import of arms. The use of end-user certificates is
essential in this regard. It is also important to ensure
that documents are of such a quality that they cannot
easily be misused or falsified. Close cooperation
between Governments is necessary in order to allow for
the effective exchange of information needed for
verifying the validity of end-user certificates and other
documents. A general improvement with regard to the
circulation of small arms would help improve the
security situation for both the civilian population -
including a huge number of internally displaced
persons - and humanitarian workers in Angola.

We welcome suggestions from the Southern
African Development Community sectoral committees
on how to control the movement of petroleum and
petroleum products in the region. Specifically, the
report has already made a positive contribution by
encouraging African countries to comply with the
sanctions regime regarding travel and representation by
UNITA members.

Norway shares the concern of the Monitoring
Mechanism that the Security Council resolutions on
sanctions against UNITA are being broken with
impunity. Through its recommendations, the report
raises the question of imposing secondary sanctions. I
will use this opportunity to make some general
comments on the issue of secondary sanctions. We
believe that we should exert caution with regard to this
important but difficult issue. The need for thorough
documentation before introducing secondary sanctions
would entail complex assessments. Norway is of the
opinion that secondary sanctions may only be imposed
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
on the grounds that non-compliance with the sanctions
regime, either in itself or as part of a State or an
entity's conduct, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security.

In order to make existing and future sanctions
more effective, we find that the recommendation
regarding the establishment of a general mechanism for
monitoring the implementation of sanctions deserves
serious consideration.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of a concrete follow-up ofthe report and its
recommendations. Norway will fully cooperate to this
end. In this connection we are also glad that the
Mechanism's mandate has been extended, and we are
looking forward to seeing the results of the continued
work.

