Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
your country on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and wish it every
success. I also thank you, Sir, for having convened
today's open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of your friendly
country for being here and for presiding over some of
today's meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing at the start of the meeting. I would also like
to congratulate all of the countries with a seat on the
Council this year and wish them every success in their
work.

Allow me to thank the Council for its honourable
position in firmly condemning the barbaric aggression
perpetrated on the Embassy of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia in Tehran and its Consulate in Mashhad. We
hope that the Council will ask the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to respect its legal international
obligations in protecting diplomatic missions and
prosecute all those responsible for such attacks,
including those who incited, planned and carried them
out. It is not enough to just make apologetic statements
on behalf of the Iranian authorities.

My delegation would like to state that the Palestinian
cause has always been and remains at the very heart of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's interests. Regardless of
the challenges or the difficulties that are ravaging our
part of the world, none of this will deter us or prevent us
from standing side by side with the Palestinian people
in their ongoing resilient defence of their territory and
sacred heritage against the Israeli occupation and its
colonial practices and its violations of international
legitimacy.

We have come to the Security Council, as we have
done repeatedly in the past, to ask that it condemn
the official organized terrorism carried out by Israel
as well as the crimes committed by its colonial army
and terrorist settlers, starting with the systematic
assassinations, the construction of settlements, the
Judaization and the ethnic cleansing, all of which are
war crimes or crimes against humanity. All of this has
been documented in the United Nations reports. All
of this is taking place without Israel worrying about
anything or anyone - and being accountable to no one.
As a result, Israel continues the use of deadly force
against Palestinians, exploits and tortures Palestinians,
including women and children and adolescents. The
Israeli war machine continues to deport Palestinians,
seize and confiscate their lands and pursues settlement
policies, while ignoring any of the legal consequences,
without being accountable to anyone and without
fearing anything. The Israeli authorities continue to
Judaize Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the historic Islamic and
Christian sites and attempt to erase the Arab identity
and change the historic situation of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and its esplanade, without being accountable to anyone.

Israel continues to defy the will of the international
community. It continues to build the wall of separation.
It also continues to exploit the resources of the
occupied Arab Golan and engage in the illegal trade
of Israeli settlers' goods and produce coming from
occupied Palestinian and Arab lands, in brazen and
fearless violation of the International Court of Justice
and various United Nations resolutions. The unfair
blockade imposed by Israel, the occupying Power,
over the Gaza Strip continues from year to year. That
is compounded by Israel's arbitrary practices in the
West Bank, which have led to a deterioration in terms
of poverty and the absence of any possibility for a
decent life for Palestinians - all of this without being
accountable to anyone or fearing anything.

We will always remind the Security Council of its
responsibility and its duty to hold Israel responsible
for what it does and asking it to account for the war
crimes it has always carried out. We ask the Council
again to set up an international protection regime for
the occupied Palestinian State, including Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention
and the resolutions of international legitimacy.

We also call upon the Council to take the immediate
steps needed to safeguard genuine opportunities for
peace and the two-State solution. We call upon Israel
to cease its settlement policies and the confiscation of
Palestinian lands. We also call upon Israel to implement
all political, security and economic agreements that
have been signed but never implemented. We also ask
the Council to back efforts aimed at setting up a timeline
for Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian lands, the
remaining part of Lebanese lands under occupation
and the Syrian Arab Golan, and to withdraw to the
borders of 4 June 1967 until a lasting and just peace
is achieved pursuant to resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to
ensure that the Palestinian people will be able to enjoy
their independence and build their sovereign State.
In the past five years, the Security Council has
not been able to discharge its duty when it comes
to the protection of the Syrian people against the
killing, terrorism and genocide carried out by the
Syrian authorities against their people, which have
claimed over 300,000 victims, led to the displacement
of 12 million Syrians and destroyed the country. We
regret that the Security Council has not been able,
despite its repeated relevant resolutions, to lift the siege
of Madaya and the other cities that are currently being
besieged to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches
inaccessible regions, leaving over 400,000 individuals
under the threat of famine. This brings us back to a
situation that could rightly have occurred in the Middle
Ages.

We have seen with our own eyes what has happened
in Madaya and how human beings have become living
skeletons. Those images should lead to increased
humanity in us; they need to move us to action. We
have seen how efforts undertaken to exert pressure on
the Syrian regime have led to an opening of partial
access to humanitarian assistance to certain besieged
regions. I believe that it is simply unacceptable that the
international community is forced to exert pressure
on the Syrian authorities to meet the nutritional and
medical needs of its own citizens. What the Syrian
authorities are doing in that regard is inhuman. It is
tantamount to a war crime.

We affirm our condemnation of all types of siege
or blockade that plunge the population into hunger.
It matters little that the authorities are behind these
crimes, but we remind the Council that 12 of the 14
besieged cities are under the control of the Syrian
Government, their Hizbullah allies and criminal
gangs. We would like to state clearly that the volume
of humanitarian assistance is simply insufficient and is
not an alternative to forcing the Syrian authorities and
their allies to immediately lift the sieges on all cities
and villages in Syria.

We see no path forward in resolving this humanitarian
disaster other than through a political solution based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
the two Vienna declarations. We would therefore like
to reiterate our support for the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and for
his mandate pursuant to the resolution which calls for
the total and complete implementation of the Geneva
communique and a launch of official negotiations for a
political transition phase (resolution 2254 (2015)). We
also back efforts aimed at implementing a ceasefire
pursuant to that resolution, in parallel with political
efforts, and to take steps towards the implementation
of the ceasefire following the implementation of the
first stages of the political transition process under
the auspices of the United Nations on the basis of the
Geneva communique.

We are also going to continue our work through the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to ensure a
political transition pursuant to the Geneva communique
and Vienna declarations. The position mandated by the
ISSG has attempted to bring together a broader ranger
of the opposition to select their representatives in the
negotiations and fix their positions without foreign
interference.

The various factions and groups of the Syrian
opposition attending the conference in Riyadh were
able to unify their positions, which was a very important
step on the path to identifying a political solution to the
Syrian crisis. We pay tribute to the efforts undertaken
by the Syrian opposition, and we will unconditionally
maintain our absolute support for the Syrian people in
fulfilling their needs and aspirations, while preserving
the unity and sovereignty of Syria, regardless of sect
or origin.

