Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): It is my honour to
present to the Council the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), for the
period from 1 July to 31 December 2011.

Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council, in July 2011 (see S/PV.6577), the situation in
West Africa has seen positive developments. During
the reporting period, the subregion witnessed no
recurrence of open conflict, and tensions related to
internal institutional or political crises decreased in
both number and intensity. In addition, a number of
countries of the subregion held elections that were
judged credible by the international community,
thereby averting potential electoral crises and any
resulting destabilization.

I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the countries of West Africa; to their
organization, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS); and to all other
stakeholders, including civil society and women in
particular, for their efforts to consolidate stability in
the subregion. I also welcome the role of the United
Nations and the contribution - which is most
appreciated - that it has made through its various
2
offices in the subregion in supporting the efforts of the
West African countries.

Nevertheless, the situation continues to call for
caution, as the progress made remains tenuous. As
recent events in Guinea-Bissau have shown, the
countries of the subregion are not immune from
incidents that could jeopardize the progress made in
peacebuilding, democracy and stability. Likewise,
worrisome developments are possible, including an
upswing in the activities of the Boko Haram group in
Nigeria, which would pose a grave threat to peace and
security in that country, which is of pivotal importance
to Africa. We must hope that Nigeria will
independently manage to find the resources necessary
to tackle the challenges facing it at both the security
and political levels. It is also important for the
international community to demonstrate its support and
solidarity vis-a-vis that country, which has contributed
so much to regional and international peace and
security.

In that context of tenuous progress, the successful
conclusion of the current processes of political
dialogue and national reconciliation in the countries of
the subregion, particularly in Togo, Guinea and Cote
d'Ivoire, will be decisive in ensuring that the progress
made by West Africa in the area of peace and
democracy is lasting.

It is encouraging to note the launching of a
process of dialogue between the principal political
stakeholders in Guinea on 27 December last, after the
Government agreed to temporarily suspend the
activities of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, as requested by the opposition. It is
important that national protagonists, including the
opposition, demonstrate flexibility so as to swiftly
reach agreement on arrangements that would allow for
the holding of legislative elections as soon as possible.

While the countries of West Africa were spared
Violent conflicts and crises during the recent period,
they have nevertheless had to tackle a re-emergence of
transborder threats. The significant increase in the
number of acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea during
the reporting period poses a fresh threat to the security
and development of the States of the region.

The Secretary-General sent an inter-agency
mission to the subregion from 7 to 24 November with a
View to determining the scope of the threat and to
identifying actions that the United Nations and other
12-20721
partners could undertake so as to support the countries
facing that scourge. During that Visit, it became clear
to mission participants that regional cooperation should
be facilitated through the participation of ECOWAS,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and the support of the
United Nations and the international community. Here
I should like to stress the imperative need to strengthen
cooperation on the part of various institutions at the
national level so as to maximize the impact of their
efforts to combat the growing threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea.

The humanitarian and security consequences of
the Libyan crisis remain a major source of concern, as
they have aggravated chronic instability in the
subregion, particularly in the countries of the Sahel.
The leaders whom I met during a visit I undertook to
the Sahel region in October 2011, in particular the
Presidents of Mali and of the Niger, underscored the
fact that their countries - which were already facing
significant challenges, including cyclical drought, food
insecurity, youth unemployment and insecurity in the
northern parts of their countries - are today having to
shoulder a new burden of socio-economic and security
problems resulting from the Libyan crisis. They
expressed the hope that the United Nations would
provide additional support to them in facing those
challenges, particularly in terms of the reintegration of
returnees. It is in that context that the Secretary-
General dispatched an inter-agency assessment mission
to the region from 7 to 23 December, with a View to
recording the concerns of the region in the wake of the
Libyan crisis and to recommending measures aimed at
bolstering United Nations support and assistance to
those countries.

All of the efforts made to consolidate subregional
security and stability could come to nought if the
scourge of drug trafficking and organized crime, which
is undermining State institutions and already fragile
societies in West Africa, is not combated with
sustained determination. In that respect, increased
political mobilization and strengthened, whole-hearted
cooperation are imperative at the level of production,
transit and destination countries. The United Nations
will remain committed, along with ECOWAS and the
countries of the subregion, to promote an effective
response to illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse in West Africa.
12-20721

Instability arising from elections is another major
challenge to the countries of the subregion. Priority
attention should continue to be given to the electoral
processes in the subregion and their political
implications for elections taking place in 2012 and
2013. In that regard, in addition to the legislative
elections that should complete the transition process in
Guinea, I am thinking in particular of the presidential
elections scheduled to take place in Ghana, Guinea-
Bissau, Mali, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

I am gratified by the ownership assumed, in
particular by civil society, of the recommendations
contained in the Declaration on Elections and Stability
in West Africa adopted at the end of the regional
conference organized in Praia, Cape Verde, by the
United Nations Office for West Africa in May 2011.
The Bamako Declaration and its strategic framework,
adopted on 4 December 2011 at the regional
conference on impunity, justice and human rights,
provide a new framework for strengthening good
governance and the rule of law in the countries of the
subregion, in support of the implementation of the
ECOWAS Supplementary Protocol on Democracy and
Good Governance and the efforts of the ECOWAS
Court of Justice.

Building on the success of the Praia and Bamako
conferences, the United Nations Office for West Africa
intends to organize, whenever necessary and in close
cooperation with ECOWAS, the United Nations system
and other partners, regional conferences on cross-
cutting themes in order to make the best use of the
experiences and good practices of West African States,
thereby contributing to the development of policy
norms. Such conferences would dynamically and
constructively promote the efforts of the countries of
the subregion towards peacebuilding, democracy and
conflict prevention, and foster synergy between the
operational work of the actors on the ground and
policymaking in the various realms of intervention.

In conclusion, I would stress that, in the coming
months, the United Nations Office for West Africa will
continue to mobilize the United Nations system and to
strengthen its partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations - in particular ECOWAS,
the Mano River Union, the African Union and civil
society, especially women - so as to better
consolidate the achievements that have been made in
West Africa and prevent conflicts and crises that could
3
slow the subregion's decisive progress towards peace,
democracy and development.

