Mr. Olgul'n Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Martin Kobler, Mrs. Mary Robinson and
Mr. Joao Goncalves Lourenco, Minister of Defence of
Angola, for their briefings. We would like to welcome
Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz and commend
him for his outstanding and dedicated work. We also
commend the staff of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the country team for their
work.

We wish every success to Mrs. Mary Robinson
in her new role, and we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Said Djinnit, which coincides with a crucial stage
marked by the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). That defeat must be used to foster inclusive
dialogue, ensure funding for the country team's electoral
tasks and mobilize political, governmental and regional
backing to support the sustainable implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
including the participation of women and civil society.

MONUSCO must use all its capabilities to carry out
the effective disarmament of the Forces Democratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda in line with the Nairobi
plan, to close the gap between demobilization and
reintegration, and to neutralize the Allied Democratic
Forces and other groups, in order to make progress
in the implementation of the third disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan and the action
plan to prevent child recruitment.

The number of internally displaced persons has
decreased to 2.6 million, but we are concerned about the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
in Katanga province as a result of the attacks of the
Bakata Katanga, among others. That is why we must
examine and geographically refocus the humanitarian
and financial efforts to address the special needs of
women and girls, including survivors of sexual violence,
a struggle to which President Kabila is committed.

Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made gradual progress in complying with the
six national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, signed more than a year
ago, key reforms in areas such as justice and security
have been slow. In that regard, we value the reform
and training of the police sector, but we reiterate our
concern over the delays in the deployment of the army
battalions that are to make up the rapid-reaction force.

MONUSCO and the country team must continue
to support structural reforms and decentralization,
including in the mining sector, which requires the
implementation of mechanisms to regulate and
supervise the supply chain, to prevent and avoid the
illicit trafficking of minerals, which finances armed
groups, many of which recruit and use children.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
protecting the civilian population and of continuing to
fight against impunity. In recognizing the sovereignty
of national institutions, we share the Secretary-
General's disappointment over the verdicts delivered in
the trials for the killings and mass rapes in Minova, and
we hope that they will serve as an impetus to carry out
reforms to ensure the independence of the judiciary and
the court of appeals.

