Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, and to congratulate him on
the major progress that has been made under his
leadership towards the consolidation of democracy in
his country. I should also like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her detailed and clear
briefing on recent developments in that country. We
underscore her dedication and commitment, as well as
that demonstrated by all the staff of UNMIT. I should
like to reiterate our support for her efforts to promote
peace, stability and development in Timor-Leste.

My delegation would like to highlight the
important progress that has been made towards
political consolidation, improved security and stability
in Timor-Leste. We also commend the commitment
shown by the authorities, civil society, the security
forces and the United Nations to foster national
dialogue and promote broad participation in democratic
processes.

We wish to highlight the significant progress
made in preparing for the 2012 elections, particularly
the approval by the National Electoral Commission of
subsidiary electoral legislation, the outcome of the
voter registration process and the initiatives aimed at
encouraging greater participation by women and young
people in the electoral process. The holding of free,
transparent and peaceful elections would be a
milestone for Timor-Leste and would also represent a
major test for the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and its capacity to respond to security
problems.

We believe that UNMIT police should continue to
provide the necessary operational support during and
after the electoral period. We agree with you,
Mr. President, that with more than 20 political parties,
this is not an easy process to manage.
With regard to the logistical capacity-building of
the Timor-Leste police, we would highlight the
commitment made by the Prime Minister in the
parliamentary debate held on the 2012 State budget.
Nevertheless, we believe that in order to ensure a
sufficiency of funds, the necessary resources must be
made be available in a timely manner, so as to ensure
that the national police has a necessary and adequate
logistical capacity before UNMIT's withdrawal.

We believe that the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth
and Friendship will contribute to the consolidation of
peace and stability in Timor-Leste. We recommend that
there should be a prompt resumption of the
parliamentary debate on draft laws on indemnification
and the establishment of the institutions that will take
over from the two Commissions.

My delegation is pleased to see the progress
achieved by the Government in terms of economic
growth, in particular with respect to poverty reduction
and improved human development indicators. But
efforts still need to be made to promote inclusive, fair
and sustainable growth. It is essential that the
necessary resources be allocated to sectors such as
rural development, health, nutrition, education and job
creation.

We would also highlight the activities carried out
by the Government of Timor-Leste to enhance the
effectiveness and institutional capacities of the
Anti-Corruption Commission and the Civil Service
Commission. We welcome the adoption of a law on
preventing and combating money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. We believe that Timor-Leste
should have the legislation, institutions, machinery and
standards necessary to ensure the stability,
transparency and effectiveness of the public
administration in the longer term.

The effective implementation of the Joint
Transition Plan must be a major priority for the
Government and all stakeholders. Periodic reviews
must be undertaken that ensure the operational capacity
and response of UNMIT on the ground. As the
Secretary-General states in his report (S/2012/43),
achieving the Plan's objectives will influence the size,
composition and nature of the United Nations
participation in Timor-Leste following the withdrawal
of UNMIT.
Given that in the coming months UNMIT's
support will continue to be necessary for institutional
development and the building of the operational
capacities of the national police, and with respect to
assistance with the elections, Colombia recommends
that the mandate of UNMIT be extended until
31 December 2012.

