Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam, for having organized this meeting on
security sector reform (SSR). I also thank Mr. Titov,
Ms. Bangura and Ms. Nakamitsu for their briefings.

I shall limit myself to making three observations.
First, as many speakers before me have said, SSR is
more of a political exercise than a technical one. It is
decisive in post-crisis stabilization and consolidation,
and requires significant work in the area of support to
the host country. In post-conflict situations, security
institutions must be established that are transparent,
effective and fair and strive, within a system of good
governance, to uphold democratic principles and
human rights. Yet the national ownership of the host
country, political will, ongoing and inclusive dialogue
between those responsible for SSR, civil society and
Governments are all essential if the process is to
succeed.

The United Nations encounters difficulties when
local authorities do not commit as firmly to SSR as
called for in the relevant resolutions. We must never
forget that, as I said, security sector reform is as much
a political as a technical process. Its goals of rebuilding
the national armed forces and internal security forces,
as well as the judiciary and penal systems, are linked
to the fundamental sovereign functioning of the State
and the end game of reinstating a national system and a
chain of command that restore security, belonging and
confidence in the State by enshrining the protection of
civilians and the upholding of human rights, all in line
with fundamental democratic requirements.

This work is important in the context of the United
Nations efforts to resolve disputes and establish
lasting peace. It is often key to the exit strategies of
peacekeeping or special political missions, as it allows
for a transfer of operational responsibility for security
to the host country. On the other hand, we know that
incomplete or unsuccessful SSR can be a factor for
tension or even relapse into Violence. In undertaking
these activities, United Nations missions need adequate
resources adapted to every stage of a crisis. The
Council tries to reflect that need in its approach to
mandates. As we have just said, SSR is a delicate and
often lengthy process. The United Nations has a role to
play in improving the expertise of its missions and its
access to local stakeholders. That, I believe, raises the
question of the language spoken by the experts.

The United Nations can also enjoy close
cooperation with other players on the ground, as in the
case of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the European Union
Training Mission in Mali. I stress that the adapted
deployment of significant SSR resources is not always
immediately necessary in peacekeeping operations.
Such operations do not always need to play a direct
operational role; instead, they may act as technical
advisers, motivators and coordinators. Moreover, they
cannot substitute for the role of local authorities, who
must conduct a thorough analysis of needs and define
the requirements of outside support.

Priorities and sequencing need therefore to be
established. Among generally urgent measures,
rehabilitating the police and gendarmerie services and
restarting an integrated corrections chain of command
are absolutely essential, as the Council noted in the
Central African Republic. The Council can also
identify certain priorities, as for example when it talks
about the need for a rapid reaction military force in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is for those
reasons that France feels that peacekeeping efforts
regarding SSR have to be sequenced and adapted to the
phase of the crisis, as well as focused on several initial
priorities that involve experts in sufficient numbers
and qualifications, adjusted to the needs and capacities
of the host country, in close cooperation with the
numerous international actors, including the European
Union, bilateral partners and other donors.

By way of conclusion, the Council must have at its
disposal precise elements regarding the implementation
of SSR programmes. In resolution 2151 (2014), we
called for such coordination and for an increased role
for the Council. Unfortunately, the Security Council is
not always regularly or sufficiently well informed of
progress in that field. I therefore reiterate our call for
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to
provide better details on those processes during their
various briefings to the Council or in meetings of the
Council with troop- and police- contributing countries.
They must insist on an implementation strategy
and, if necessary, on its linkage with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration measures by ensuring
the effective of coordination with other United Nations
organs and agencies, or even on the potential difficulties
that they might encounter with the authorities of the
host country. In that way, the Council should have at its
disposal a regular analysis of results and improvements
to be made. Successful SSR is a factor for stability
and development for concerned countries, and thus a
guarantee of success for the United Nations.

