The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1997/888, letter
dated 13 November 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/1997/883, letter dated 13 November 1997 from the
Executive Chairman of the Special Commission established
by the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the strongest
terms the unacceptable decision of the Government of
Iraq in expelling personnel of the Special Commission
of a specified nationality and thereby imposing
conditions on the Special Commission in
contravention of relevant Security Council resolutions
which constitute the governing standard of Iraqi
compliance.

"The Security Council demands the immediate
and unequivocal revocation of this action, which has
prevented the Special Commission from discharging
its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions.
The Council recalls the statement of its President of
29 October 1997 in which the Council warned of the
serious consequences of Iraq's failure to comply
immediately and fully and without conditions or
restrictions with its obligations under the relevant
resolutions. The Council further demands, in
accordance with its resolution 1137 (1997), that Iraq
comply immediately and fully with its obligations
under the relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and stresses the
importance of their ensuring the implementation of
all aspects of their mandates, including their vital
work in monitoring and verification in Iraq, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Council.

"The Security Council stresses that the
Government of Iraq has full responsibility for
ensuring the safety and security of the personnel and
equipment of the Special Commission and the IAEA
and their inspection teams."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/51.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.55 pm.
