Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2431 (2018), renewing the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which has been playing an indispensable
role in support of peace and reconciliation in Somalia.
We thank the United Kingdom for its efforts as penholder
in facilitating the negotiation of the resolution and all
Council members for demonstrating flexibility and
compromise in achieving the necessary consensus. Let
me highlight a couple of points that were very critical
for us in the negotiation of the resolution.

It is very important that the resolution we adopted
today acknowledges the important contribution of
AMISOM. in support of the Somali political process.
In spite of the political and security gains made in
recent years, a lot remains to be done in terms of post-
conflict recovery and peacebuilding. In this regard,
AMISOM. can and should play a role in carrying out
civilian responsibilities complementary to the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia.
That is why the resolution stresses that AMISOM's
civilian component should be fully operational so as to
support AMISOM'S military and police tasks, and we
very much welcome this.

While the Somalia transition plan provides the
strategic direction for a conditions-based process by
which a gradual handover of security responsibility
from AMISOM. to Somali security institutions can
take place, detailed planning and implementation are
required to put all phases of the plan into motion.
Without coordination and mutual reinforcing support
among partners on the ground, we might risk a delay
in the implementation of the envisaged AMISOM
transition. Equally important is the need for cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia and AMISOM. and the Somali
National Security Forces at all levels, including
through improved consultation with AMISOM. in the
management of the logistics support package. The
resolution makes that point very clear.

Therefore, we are hopeful that during the
implementation of the new mandate, we will see
enhanced cooperation and coordination in providing
greater support to inclusive political processes, in line
with the comprehensive approach to security, leading
to the transfer of primary security responsibility from
AMISOM. to the Somali security forces and institutions.

Last but not least, the resolution just adopted
also recognizes the need for the continuous and
comprehensive assessment of AMISOM, working
jointly with the African Union and the Federal
Government of Somalia, in order to assess the process
and make recommendations on the conditions-based
graduate transition from AMISOM. to Somali security
responsibility, taking into account the need for an
objective evaluation of capacities. We believe that this is
absolutely important, and we hope that all decisions on
the course of transition in Somalia will be made based
on an informed decision through a closer examination
of the situation on the ground.

