Mr. Chambas: I am pleased to be here today to
brief the Security Council on the situation in West
Africa and the Sahel. Further to the first report
(S/2016/566) of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS), which is before Council members, I
would like to highlight a few issues and update them on
some of the most recent developments.

Please allow me once again, on behalf of my
colleagues, to thank Security Council members for
their Visit to Dakar and UNOWAS on 8 March and for
their continuous attention to West Africa and the Sahel.

A momentous decision anxiously awaited by many
was reached on 30 May. For the first time, a former
President was sentenced by an African court for crimes
committed during his reign. The sentence handed down
to the former President of Chad, Mr. Hissene Habre,
sent a strong signal against impunity, and I would
like to commend Senegal for offering to host and to
support this trial, which drew on the expertise of legal
luminaries from throughout Africa.

On another positive note, the credible and peaceful
elections held in the Niger, Benin and Cabo Verde
equally provided opportunities for their respective
citizens to express their preferences in a democratic
manner. In Benin and Cabo Verde, the unsuccessful
incumbents from ruling parties swiftly congratulated
the winners from opposition parties, allowing for peace
and smooth transitions in both countries.

Regarding the nexus between peace, governance
and development, it was indeed the desperation arising
from the perceived lack of opportunities, justice and
hope that contributed to the creation of a climate
conducive to the emergence of militant movements
that have since manifested themselves in the north of
Mali and north-eastern Nigeria, and which threaten to
destabilize West Africa and the Sahel region and the
Lake Chad Basin area. Instability and the existence of
terrorist networks in the Middle East and the Maghreb
have further fuelled the extremism and terrorist
activities in all these areas south of the Sahara.

Across the Sahel as we speak, 4.5 million people
are displaced and 6 million are in need of emergency
food assistance. Millions cannot farm their lands,
and millions of children do not receive the education
they need for a better future. Boko Haram continues
to change tactics and has twice overrun the city of
Bosso, in the Niger, on 3 and 16 June, killing dozens of
soldiers. As a result, its residents, as well as internally
displaced persons and refugees who had earlier
escaped Violence in Nigeria due to continuing attacks
by the group, have also fled and abandoned the town.
I visited the area on 22 June, together with Nigerien
authorities and international partners from the World
Bank and the International Organization for Migration,
as an expression of our solidarity with the people and
authorities of Diffa province in the Niger.

Terrorists have also struck further afield in West
Africa, notably in Ouagadougou on 15 January and in
Grand Bassam, Cote d'Ivoire, on 13 March. Traffickers,
criminals and their collaborators are seeking to
benefit from lawlessness and insecurity to expand
their networks. We must not allow this to continue or
to spread.

First, we need to further strengthen regional forces
mobilized under the Multinational Joint Task Force.
I wholeheartedly salute the commendable efforts
already undertaken by the countries of the region and
international partners, but capacities, particularly in
the area of intelligence gathering, need to be stepped
up. Secondly, we need to strengthen efforts to meet
the basic needs of innocent civilians trapped in this
tragedy. It is deeply troubling that only 11 per cent of
the United Nations appeal for $1.98 billion in 2016 has
been received so far. Thirdly and crucially, we need
to strengthen democratic governance and address root
causes as essential tasks in conflict-prevention efforts.

In the second half of this year, there will be
legislative elections in Cote d'Ivoire, presidential
elections in the Gambia, and legislative and presidential
elections in Ghana. In Guinea and Togo, citizens are
still waiting long-overdue local elections. In Ghana, we
are working assiduously with all stakeholders to help
them overcome their differences in order to maintain
the country's well-deserved reputation for peaceful
and well-managed polls. In the Gambia, I am deeply
concerned about the repression following peaceful
protests in April calling for electoral reforms, and the
ensuing allegations of torture and the death of detainees,
as well as inflammatory statements targeting certain
communities. We conducted a high-level joint mission
to the country, together with the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and will
continue our engagement in support of the people of
the Gambia throughout the electoral process.

At the same time, countries ofthe region are engaged
in reviews of their foundational laws. Commissions
put in place in Benin, Burkina Faso, cote d'Ivoire,
Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone are working on
recommendations to adapt their Constitutions to their
needs as modern nations. The referendum in Senegal,
notably, has endorsed a reduction of the presidential
term from seven to five years. After only six weeks,
the Commission in Benin has submitted pertinent
recommendations for political and constitutional
reforms. We are working with our partners to support
these processes, and are making the United Nations
collective expertise available to help strengthen
Burkina Faso's High Council for Reconciliation
and National Unity, among other efforts to assist the
country in consolidating the very successful transition.
In Mauritania and Togo, we are pursuing efforts,
with regional partners, to support dialogue among
stakeholders over critical national issues.

We have good hope that these West African and
Sahel countries will emerge from these reform efforts
more cohesive, better governed and with more women
taking part in decision-making. This would in turn
strengthen their resilience to withstand internal and
external shocks, such as the recent Ebola outbreak,
which has been eradicated. In spite of impressive strides
in the fight against corruption, the fall of oil prices has
undermined the efforts of Nigeria's new Government
to revamp the economy. At the same time, the country
is experiencing community tensions, disputes over
resources and renewed militant movements, not only
in the north-east but also in the Biafra area and the
Niger Delta. As the recent decision of the Central
Bank to unpeg the national currency from the United
States dollar will predictably lead to price increases
and socioeconomic hardship, Nigerian actors need
to deepen consultative and economic reforms as they
endeavour to reboot Africa's largest economy. The
examples of cote d'Ivoire, Senegal and other places
amply demonstrate the strength of policy-making to
develop more balanced and resilient economies.

At the same time, as the desert is expanding and
water resources are diminishing, we also need to come
together as international partners. We must not allow
fragility to turn into failure. In this vein, I urge the
Council to support - as it has always done - the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel as
our part of efforts to address the root causes of the
crisis. As Council members know, the subregion is
also increasingly threatened by violent extremism
and radicalization, often linked to wider regional
and global instability. In response to the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
UNOWAS organized a regional conference on 27 and
28 June in Dakar, with key United Nations and other
partners, to collectively identify drivers of extremism
and avenues to strengthen prevention in West Africa
and the Sahel. The conference emphasized the need for
greater dialogue with women and youth, as well as the
need for integrated security, development and human
rights approaches, local ownership and alternative
narratives to that presented by violent extremism. I
will continue to engage with national and regional
actors on this subject. I am also setting up a United
Nations regional task force on the prevention of violent
extremism in the region to facilitate the coordination
and complementarity of the United Nations work in
this area.

The Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission,
which I chair, continued the emplacement of pillars
for the definitive demarcation of the border and held
consultations in the capital cities of Yaounde and
Abuja during the reporting period. The Commission
remains a prime example of the benefits of foresight
and cooperation, and continues to make very good
progress, particularly based on the excellent bilateral
relations that now exist between the two countries,
Cameroon and Nigeria.

Looking at the underlying challenges in the
subregion and beyond, we also need to think harder
about how we can collectively improve international
conflict prevention efforts before crises escalate beyond
control. We owe it to the people of West Africa and the
Sahel, who have shown such remarkable resilience to
persisting multifaceted challenges. With its expanded
mandate following the merger, UNOWAS remains
fully committed to playing its role in the region, in
cooperation with partners, including the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.

