Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me first of all thank
the Chilean presidency for organizing today's debate
and for choosing such a timely topic for discussion.

In 2015, we will celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations and the
anniversaries of the adoptions of the Beijing Platform
for Action and resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, we will review the United Nations
peace operations, and we will of course shape the
post-2015 development agenda. Looking at all of those
different processes, it is important to understand the
synergies between them and the interdependence of the
three pillars of the United Nations: peace and security,
development and human rights.

Sustainable peace and security can be achieved only
if societies are inclusive, minorities are respected, the
rule of law is observed and poverty is effectively tackled.
Conflict, on the other hand, will undermine social and
economic development, social cohesion and respect and
therefore lead to more and deeper conflict and social
disruption. Inclusive and sustainable development
processes that pursue a human rights-based approach
and are guided by the rule of law are a precondition
for peace and stability. Development efforts must
focus on humans and should especially include the
most vulnerable and disadvantaged people and groups:
persons with disabilities, indigenous people, religious
or ethnic minorities and children. Human rights
principles, such as non-discrimination, the reduction
of inequality, participation and transparency can
contribute to strengthening sustainable development
processes and thus result in positive development
outcomes.

Let me provide an example. When we end
discrimination against women and include women in
development processes by protecting and fulfilling their
human rights, we are likely to achieve more effective
development outcomes. Gender equality is essential
for stable societies and sustainable development. Both
women and men alike need to shape the destiny of their
country. Against that backdrop, the empowerment of
women in all sectors is essential. The empowerment
of women in economic life, such as entrepreneurship
and professional education, will therefore be one of
the areas of focus during Germany's presidency of the
Group of Seven in 2015.

Sustainable peace and security also require effective
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Peacebuilding
efforts are aimed at preventing societies from relapsing
into conflict. The Security Council should be engaged
in peacebuilding as early as possible and should make
better use of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We expect the Peacebuilding Commission
to help identify peacebuilding contexts in which a
concrete need for international assistance arises. In
that regard, closer coordination between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is needed.

We should use the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, as well as the review ofpeace
operations, to further develop and strengthen the United
Nations prevention and peacebuilding instruments. We
need to look at conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in a holistic manner. This means also
including all stakeholders, especially women. We need
to integrate the goals of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, into all peacebuilding
efforts. The existing normative framework already
provides a sound basis for such links. On the fifteenth
anniversary of that landmark resolution, we need to
focus on its global implementation across the board
and identify gaps and challenges in order to ensure that
its provisions are included in all prevention measures,
peace processes and conflict-resolution efforts.

We applaud the Secretary-General for launching
his "Human Rights Up Front" campaign last year.
Increased human rights violations are often a first
indication of imminent conflict. The United Nations
system, including the Security Council, must act more
proactively in order to prevent future conflict. We
are looking forward to seeing more concrete results
of the Human Rights Up Front campaign and remain
committed to its goals.

The most effective tools for ensuring peace and
stability and preventing conflicts are always respect
for human rights, the rule of law in inclusive societies,
and economic and social development. In its capacity
as Chair of the Human Rights Council and beyond,
Germany will continue to support these essential
elements in the post-2015 development agenda. Only if
we achieve this will we create peaceful societies and
come a step closer to sustainable peace and security in
our world.

