Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's important
debate and for your helpful concept note (S/2014/238, annex). My delegation would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive
briefing.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the delegation of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Since the Security Council held its first open debate
on security sector reform (SSR) in 2007 (see S/PV.5632),
the subject, due to its fundamental importance for
international peace, security and development, has
been acquiring greater recognition. Considering that
countries affected by conflicts have different security
contexts, and that each will develop its own palette
of strategies on security, the justice system and law
enforcement suitable to its particular requirements, the
significance of national ownership for SSR approaches
cannot be emphasized enough.

We are therefore pleased that United Nations entities
have been increasingly making efforts to have an open
and inclusive dialogue with countries on addressing
their priorities and improving the United Nations
response on how best it can strengthen its support and
guidance. Because security-sector-related support in
conflicted affected regions must be accompanied by
robust support on broader peacemaking, peacebuilding
and development, the United Nations emphasis on a
comprehensive approach to SSR issues is also very
pertinent.

It is in that context that Indonesia welcomes
the first-ever stand-alone Council draft resolution
on security sector reform and the maintenance of
international peace and security, to be adopted today.
We hope that its implementation will lead to enhanced
support on SSR for countries that request it, as well
as to strengthened respect for human rights and the
rule of law, as essential elements of peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.

As a country that studiously overcame instability
and continues to deepen peace and development for its
people and the region, Indonesia knows at first hand the
challenges of realizing a sound SSR. The SSR process
in Indonesia was driven by our political reform towards
democracy back in 1998. We started with military
reform, which separated the role of the military from
politics. We also made a clear and formal distinction
between the Indonesian armed forces and the Indonesian
police, which increased capacities in both institutions
for carrying out their respective responsibilities.

Our process reaffirmed the imperative for national
ownership, as well as civil society consultation, also
because the development of such a sensitive part of
the State must meet the expectations of the citizens.
Indeed, successful SSR first and foremost serves and
protects the people of the country. In this context,
and in response to some of the questions posed in the
concept note (S/2014/238, annex), Indonesia would like
to highlight the following.

First, with regard to the United Nations approach
to the SSR agenda, SSR work should be focused on
post-conflict contexts. While there is a need to support
training and professionalization on various security-
related aspects in other contexts, it is essential that
any process for formulating related strategies in the
United Nations system should be carried out in an
intergovernmental setting, in close consultation with
Member States.

Secondly, in order to incorporate the concerns
and priorities of conflict-affected countries and to
build their national ownership, the Security Council
should more meaningfully involve the host States at
the earliest stage of creating mission mandates. My
delegation underscores the fact that providing security
to citizens and the governing security sector is the
primary responsibility of the State. Furthermore, we
reiterate that any United Nations support for SSR
through peacekeeping and other missions must be
based on the request of the host country and cater to its
particular needs.

Thirdly, the success of United Nations efforts
on SSR is also dependent on the level of its financial
resources, capacities to deliver, professional operations
both at Headquarters and in the field, as well as
coherence and cooperation among concerned United
Nations and Governmental actors. Supporting the "One
United Nations" system model, it is our view that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
can also play a role in increasing the United Nations
capacity to support SSR and ensure more predictable
and sustained funding for it.

Fourthly, Indonesia places high importance on
building partnerships and exchanging good practices
and lessons learned among countries and regional
organizations. As one of the members of the informal
United Nations Group of Friends of SSR, Indonesia
is actively using that platform to communicate and
enhance cooperation with other Member States in
dealing with the future challenges of SSR.

Fifthly, in order to advance conversations on
this issue in the South-East Asia region, Indonesia
has undertaken numerous consultations, including
by facilitating an international workshop in Jakarta
in 2010 with SSR as a major topic. We believe that
regional networks of like-minded countries are vital to
understanding the local culture, and can greatly enable
programmes to support SSR. Therefore, there needs
to be regular and more frequent interaction on SSR
issues between the United Nations system and regional
organizations.

Finally, we would point out that SSR is a long-term
process that should not be rushed. There is no magic
formula for implementing such reform. However, we are
sure that today's debate is enriching the perspectives on
SSR and on how the United Nations system can better
plan and respond in assisting concerned countries.
Indonesia will continue to engage actively with all
relevant actors on taking forward the discussion on
SSR, including by contributing to help develop the
United Nations civilian capacities initiative, which
offers to improve and expand the needed expertise in
countries emerging from conflict.

