Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first of all, Madam President, to express my
delegation's profound gratification at seeing you
preside over the Security Council this month. I should
also like to thank you for having promoted the
convening of this open debate, and to express the
Peruvian delegation's appreciation to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights, for
their comprehensive briefings on the topic that brings
us together today for this open debate in the Council.

For 11 years, the Security Council has been
seized of the matter of protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In that time, important progress has been
made, such as the establishment of the Security
Council group of experts on the protection of civilians,
whose contributions have been reflected in numerous
Council resolutions. We have also seen the adoption of
important resolutions and presidential statements that
have had an impact on matters of primary concern in
the realm of the protection of civilians in contemporary
conflicts.

While such progress is an important starting
point, its value is relative if it is not manifested in
tangible improvements in the protection of civilians on
the ground. We believe it important to continue to
strengthen the necessary interaction between the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Security Council. We also believe it essential to fully
implement resolutions 1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006),
which define the essence of this debate, which is the
responsibility of all Member States to protect civilian
populations in armed conflict.

Along these lines, we believe it necessary, based
on the Secretary-General's report A/63/677 on the
implementation of the responsibility to protect -
which recognizes the principal role of States in
protecting their populations from, among others, war
crimes - that we continue to focus on pillars one and
two: the responsibility to protect incumbent on States;
and international assistance and capacity-building.

Also, in its resolution 63/125, entitled "Status of
the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts", the General Assembly affirmed the need for
more effective implementation of international
humanitarian law. We hope that the discussions held in
the Sixth Committee at the sixty-fifth session of the
General Assembly will promote substantive progress
that ensures the full implementation of international
humanitarian law.

Peru firmly supports programmes and policies
that promote the prevention of violence, and in

particular those that protect women and girls from
gender-based violence, particularly rape and other
forms of sexual abuse, as well as other forms of
violence that arise in armed conflict. In this context,
we insist on the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) to ensure that serious cases of
rape and other sexual violence do not go unpunished.
We consider it a priority that States assume the
responsibility to ensure that justice is served and that
responsible parties are punished, as part of a central
focus on national reconciliation that all should
emphasize.

I would like to underline that Peru is party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which establishes in its articles 5 and 9 the Court's
jurisdiction to judge war crimes in international and
domestic armed conflicts. In that respect, Peru has
complied with the requirement to incorporate into its
domestic legislation measures for cooperation with the
Court in order to ensure that responsible parties are
effectively tried. I further wish to underscore that at the
Review Conference of the Rome Statute in Kampala,
Peru, together with the Netherlands, coordinated the
process of presenting pledges to strengthen States'
commitment to the fight against impunity and the
principles and purposes of the Rome Statute.

Peru reiterates its firm support for the promotion
of respect for international humanitarian law and
efforts to encourage compliance by all parties to armed
conflict, in particular non-State armed groups. We also
believe that civilian protection must be strengthened in
order to make peacekeeping operations and other
missions more effective. In this context, I would like to
highlight that my country is a party to the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War and to the Additional
Protocols on the protection of victims of international
and non-international conflicts, which together form
the cornerstone of international humanitarian law in the
area of protecting civilians. In that regard, we call on
all States that are not yet parties to these instruments to
accede to them as soon as possible.

Furthermore, at the Thirtieth International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, Peru
made a series of pledges relating to the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians in armed conflict and other
situations of armed violence. Allow me to note a
number of the efforts of the International Committee of
the Red Cross in its difficult task of disseminating
international humanitarian law and protecting civilian
populations in armed conflicts. These efforts include
such events as the annual seminar for officials
accredited by the United Nations, which is an
important tool in this undertaking.

Regarding access to humanitarian assistance in
armed conflict, my delegation is convinced that parties
to a conflict and third-party countries should strictly
comply with their obligations to allow and facilitate the
rapid and unhindered transit of shipments, equipment
and rescue personnel, and to encourage States to foster
respect for basic humanitarian principles. We are
convinced that concrete actions would give new
momentum to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts.

Finally, we must recognize that if we are to
strengthen the protection of civilians in post-conflict
situations, we must initiate resolute actions to rebuild
and then strengthen institutions and the rule of law in
affected countries, and stabilize economic conditions
through development strategies. Those would be
crucial steps towards consolidating any comprehensive
effort for peace and development that would serve to
effectively combat poverty and social exclusion -
problems that are often at the heart of the internal
armed conflicts that we strive to prevent. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission, my country has
been contributing to achieving that goal.

