Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French): I
am pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the Security
Council. We are sincerely grateful to you for initiative
in convening this debate on the situation in Somalia. I
also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Ms. Susana Malcorra
for their very thorough and authoritative briefings. I
pay tribute to their respective departments for their
activities and for their efforts with respect to Somalia.

Having just returned from African Union summit,
which on 3 July completed its work in Sirte, Libya, I
am duty-bound to describe some of the African Union's
recent action on Somalia as well as the related decision
adopted by African heads of State or Government.

Our thanks go to the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for his statement; through him, we express our
appreciation for the significant progress achieved by
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and his
Government. In that regard, I would mention the
rebuilding of State institutions, the restoration of
revenue collection mechanisms, the reorganization of
the security forces, capacity-building and efforts aimed
at bringing clan and religious leaders into the peace
process.

But, as we know, intensified attacks by insurgents
since the beginning of May have unfortunately
hampered and jeopardized those considerable
achievements. Clashes have led to heavy loss of
civilian lives and have resulted in an estimated 200,000
or more displacements, as Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe stated this morning. As all Council members
have noted, the situation remains extremely fragile.
However, thanks to the continued support of the
international community for the Government and the
people of Somalia, the Djibouti peace process has held.
Members will recall that, on 22 May 2009, in support
of the recommendations of the Council of Ministers of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
requested that the United Nations Security Council
impose sanctions against all foreign elements
providing support for armed groups responsible for
destabilization in Somalia. That request has the support
of the International Contact Group on Somalia and was
reiterated at the Sirte summit.

As noted by Under-Secretary-General Malcorra,
the present military force of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) in Mogadishu stands at 4,274
troops, comprising three battalions from Uganda and
two from Burundi. But AMISOM. still lacks four of the
nine battalions it needs, along with maritime and air
components. The present AMISOM. police force
consists of a team of six police officers and 89 trainers,
advisers and mentors for deployment to Mogadishu in
the coming weeks to begin the crucial task of training
10,000 members of all Somali police forces, in
accordance with the Djibouti Agreement.

As part of the troop-generation effort, the African
Union Commission has called upon Member States and
other partners to bring about the rapid deployment of a
battalion from Sierra Leone and one from Malawi.
Work is also under way to make it possible to deploy a
third battalion from Burundi and to begin the
relocation of AMISOM's civilian headquarters from
Nairobi to Mogadishu.

We are particularly grateful to the United Nations
for establishing a special trust fund; the first phase has
been approved by the General Assembly, amounting to
$71.6 million. A memorandum of understanding
defining the modalities for implementing the support
package is being finalized by the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission. However, in addition to
the special trust fund and to the African Peace Facility
established by the European Union and made available
to the African Union, in addition to all of these
considerable efforts, we believe that AMISOM, which
was duly authorized by the Security Council, deserves
continuous financing through regular contributions
from United Nations Member States.
(spoke in English)

In its decision adopted during its just-completed
13th session, the Assembly of the African Union
welcomed the significant progress made in the political
process in Somalia and urged all Somali stakeholders
yet to commit to the dialogue to do so and join the
peace process. The Assembly strongly condemned the
recent attacks on the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) of Somalia and the civilian population by armed
groups and foreign elements bent on undermining the
reconciliation process and regional stability, and
demanded that they put an end to such attacks, which
are tantamount to attempts at an unconstitutional
change of government.

The African Union (AU) Assembly further
expressed its full support for the TFG as the legitimate
authority in Somalia and urged the countries of the
region, other AU member States and the international
community as a whole to provide all the necessary
support to the TFG to enable it to face up to the
situation.

The AU Assembly appealed to AU member States
to provide the necessary military and police personnel
to enable AMISOM. to reach its authorized strength. It
paid tribute to the troop-contributing countries, namely
Burundi and Uganda, and further expressed gratitude to
all the member States and partners providing support to
AMISOM.

The Assembly called on the United Nations
Security Council to take immediate measures,
including the imposition of a no-fly zone - as already
pointed out by a number of members of the Council -
and a blockade of seaports to prevent the entry into
Somalia of foreign elements and of flights and
shipments carrying weapons and ammunition to armed
groups inside Somalia. It also called on the Council to
impose sanctions against all those foreign actors,
especially Eritrea, providing support to the armed
groups engaged in destabilization activities in Somalia
and in attacks against the TFG, the civilian population
and AMISOM. I would also like to stress the need for
the Security Council to take rapid action accordingly.

Also, since the question of ransom to terrorists
was raised here by the Permanent Representative of the
United States, I am pleased to share with this Council
that the Assembly of the African Union took the
important decision to combat the payment of ransom to
terrorist groups. By this decision, the AU Assembly
requested the Council to adopt a restrictive resolution
against the payment of ransom in order to consolidate
the provisions put in place by resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1267 (1999).

Because AMISOM. can only do so much, I should
like at this juncture to renew the call for its takeover by
the United Nations, in accordance with the express
wish of the Somalis, as contained in the Djibouti
Agreement, in order to achieve an accelerated end to
the ongoing hostilities. We all have a duty to bring an
end to this tragedy in Somalia.

