The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Haiti, document S/ 1995/305.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1995/306, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 April 1995 from the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina, Canada, France, the United
States of America, and Venezuela to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the members of the
Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the transfer of
responsibilities from the multinational force (MNF) to
UNMIH that took place on 31 March 1995 and shares
the Secretary-General's view, as stated in his report of
13 April (S/ 1995/305), that this transfer was a
milestone in the overall efforts of the international
community to bring peace and stability to Haiti. The
Council commends the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, the MNF Force Commander and the
other dedicated personnel of the United Nations and
MNF who made the transition possible.

"The Security Council notes, however, that much
remains to be done to institutionalize democracy in
Haiti and reiterates the Secretary-General's call for the
people of Haiti and their leaders to help UNMIH help
them. While UNMIH' 5 presence will assist the Haitian
Government to sustain a secure and stable

environment, the existence of a functioning and fair
justice system and the early deployment of a
permanent and effective police force by the Haitian
authorities are central to Haiti's long-term stability.
The Council joins the Secretary-General and Friends
of Haiti in inviting Member States to make
voluntary contributions to support the international
police monitoring programme and assist with the
creation of an adequate police force.

"The Government and people of Haiti bear the
primary responsibility for Haiti's political, economic
and social reconstruction. However, the Security
Council notes that the sustained commitment of the
international community is indispensable for
long-term peace and stability in Haiti.

"The Security Council shares the opinion of the
Secretary-General that the issue of security is central
to the entire United Nations operation in Haiti.

"The Security Council underlines the crucial
importance of free, fair and secure elections for the
democratic future of Haiti. The Council stresses the
necessity of a secure environment in Haiti, including
during the June and July legislative and local
election period, and underlines the importance of a
functioning police force and an established judicial
system. The Council urges the Government of Haiti
to take all necessary steps to ensure the success of
the elections, and in particular to register as many
voters as possible prior to the elections and to
assure, in cooperation with the international
community, that political campaigning occurs in an
environment free from partisan intimidation.

"The Security Council welcomes President
Aristide's meetings with leaders of political parties
and members of the Provisional Electoral Council
and stresses the importance of dialogue with a View
to achieving the political consensus needed to
enhance the benefits and credibility of the electoral
process. The Council also calls on the Government
of Haiti to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and the Organization of American States (OAS) to
ensure that the preparations for elections and the
elections themselves can take place in a secure and
stable environment. Consistent with the objectives of
Security Council resolution 940 (1994), the Council
emphasizes the importance for the Presidential
elections to take place on schedule before UNMIH's
scheduled withdrawal in February 1996.
 

"Finally, the Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision to coordinate UNMlH's
peace-keeping mission with development activities
carried out by others. in a manner consistent with
UNMIH's mandate, to help the Government of Haiti
strengthen its institutions. particularly the judicial
system. The Council hopes this coordination will
promote closer cooperation of all concerned in Haiti

as well as improve the effectiveness of intemational
support for rebuilding Haiti's economy."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
