Mr. Kay: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council. I am particularly
pleased to be doing so alongside my new colleague Dr.
Maman Sidikou, who is joining us from Addis Ababa.
I very much look forward to our very close partnership
in the future.

When I briefed the Council in July, I focused on the
threats posed by Al-Shabaab. Since then, I am pleased
to report, that Al-Shabaab has suffered significant
setbacks and that the political process has moved
forward. The Council's landmark visit in August was a
signal to Somalis and Al-Shabaab that the international
community remains committed and that more progress
is needed.

Somalia's challenges remain significant. Urgent
and coherent action on the part of the Federal
Government and international partners is needed in
security, development, political and humanitarian
fields. To that end, we need unity of purpose from
Somali politicians and leaders. Neither Somalia nor
the international community will have patience for
anyone who deliberately stands in the way of peace,
reconciliation and stability.

At the same time as insisting rightly on the critical
need for sustained action, we cannot and should not be
blind to the fact that Somalia, with the help ofthe entire
international community, is living through a moment
of unprecedented change and optimism. We need to
seize the opportunities. Somalia is a country slowly
waking from a terrible nightmare. Two days ago, we
were reminded of just how terrible, when a car bomb
killed at least 13 people in Mogadishu.

There has been important political progress, in
particular in state formation. I congratulate the President
and the Prime Minister for taking that forward jointly.
I welcome the ongoing process of reconciliation and
the establishment of interim regional administrations.
These, clearly, must be full inclusive. Women and
young people must participate in and shape them. The
capacity of these interim regional administrations also
needs to be built with international support, including
from the United Nations.

I encourage the Federal Government to accelerate
an inclusive state formation process in the central
regions. I reiterate my hope that we will have a new
map of a federal Somalia by the end of the year and,
if at all possible, by the time of the Copenhagen
high-level partnership forum next month. There also
needs to be more and faster progress in creating two
bodies - the national independent electoral commission
and the boundaries and federation commission.
Also, the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission should quickly begin
its work in Mogadishu. The parliamentary oversight
committee should be established. I call on the Federal
Government and Federal Parliament to make the
necessary arrangements.

I remain particularly concerned about the risk of
political infighting. Twice in the past 12 months, this
has led to bureaucratic paralysis. The President and
the Prime Minister have navigated a way out of recent
tensions, for which I heartily commend them. I appeal
to all of Somalia's political institutions, including the
Federal Parliament, to focus on the urgent business
of establishing the institutions and processes that
will pave the way to longer-term peace, stability
and reconciliation. This parliamentary session will
be decisive. If key laws are not passed, Somalis will
not achieve their dreams for a new Constitution and
democratic elections in 2016.

In Somaliland, preparations are under way for
elections in June 2015. I am glad to report that I
visited Somaliland in August, at the invitation of the
Government, and we agreed an agenda for future
United Nations engagement, including my own good
offices role.

I warmly congratulate the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the Somali national army for progress
in Operation Indian Ocean. I pay tribute to those who
have lost their lives in bringing peace, including,
sadly, in an attack today. With the death of its leader,
Ahmed Godane, on 1 September, Al-Shabaab has been
weakened operationally and financially by these recent
advances. Planning for Operation Indian Ocean has
been joint and inclusive. It has significantly reduced
logistical problems. The United Nations Support Office
for the African Union Mission in Somalia is running an
unprecedented operation supporting, under resolution
2124 (2013), a dynamic offensive with a fraction of
the capacity that would normally be used to support
a military operation of the same size. However, key
assets, especially helicopters, are still needed, not least
to help ensure secure road access across the country.

Military action will not eradicate the terrorist threat
in Somalia. Military gains need to be consolidated
through stabilization. It is also important to focus on
strategic communication and a comprehensive and
properly funded disengaged combatants programme.
The United Nations is actively assisting with all of that.
We also need more resolute action to end the trade in
charcoal that is funding terrorism.

There has been progress in establishing local
administrations and in the deployment of Somali
police force officers in some newly recovered areas.
The Federal Government has led the strategic and
operational coordination of stabilization activities,
and that needs to be intensified to ensure a coherent
approach. The establishment of local administrations
also needs to be synchronized with the ongoing federal
State-formation process.

I remain concerned that efforts to develop
security institutions are insufficient. I welcome the
recent discussions in London, particularly on militia
integration and a more coordinated and realistic plan
for defence sector reform. I note the improvements in
the Federal Government's reporting on its obligations
under the United Nations sanctions regime and I look
forward to further improvements with the support and
cooperation of international partners. We shall also
continue to support efforts to strengthen the rule of law.

Human rights remain a concern and a priority. I
welcome the recent Visit by Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the recent commitment by
the Federal Government to put the ratification of the
Convention of the Rights of the Child before Parliament.
But I share the concerns of the Independent Expert
on the situation of human rights in Somalia about the
recent arrests ofjournalists, who have yet to face trial,
the closure of media outlets and the increasing use of
capital punishment. I reiterate my call on the Federal
Government to implement its pledge to establish a
moratorium on the death penalty. I also call for further
progress in establishing the independent human rights
commission.

I am very concerned about recent allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse by some AMISOM
troops. I welcome the African Union's commitment,
reiterated in New York on 24 September by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, to a
full investigation in accordance with its zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. It is important
that it be transparent and that witnesses be protected.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) stands ready to lend our support in any way
we can.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia has
continued to deteriorate. Over 3 million people need
humanitarian or livelihood assistance in Somalia today.
That includes over 1 million Somalis who cannot feed
themselves - an increase of 20 per cent in six months.

Humanitarian assistance has been stepped up.
Over 300 metric tons of supplies for tens of thousands
of people have been delivered by air due to the lack of
secure access to recovered areas, but that still falls short
of needs on the ground. Air cargo flights simply cannot

deliver the quantities required. Secure road access is
essential. We must also urgently mobilize sufficient
resources, otherwise we face another devastating
humanitarian emergency, which could undermine the
political and security gains of the last two years.

I welcome the appointment of the independent
advisory panel to the Financial Governance Committee.
I look forward to greater transparency and better
public financial management, particularly in the
area of public-sector contracts. Donors also need to
strengthen the transparency of aid flows and activities
in accordance with commitments under the New Deal
Compact process. The United Nations is doing its part
to comply with its Compact commitments. We shall
soon sign our first integrated strategic framework with
the Federal Government. That will guide more coherent
and better coordinated United Nations efforts to achieve
the national priorities set out in the Compact.

The Copenhagen High-Level Partnership Forum,
to be held in November, will be an important moment
to take stock of the progress towards the goals of the
Somali Compact. It is important that sub-federal
administrations be given a role in the conference,
including in its preparation.

In conclusion, I remain a committed optimist. I do
not underestimate the challenges, or the urgency and
difficulty of overcoming them, but I firmly believe
that Somalia's problems are those of a country coming
together, not a country falling apart. I know the Council
spends a lot of its time dealing with the latter.

I thank the Council for its unstinting support
for Somalia, and I welcome the many commitments
made at last month's high-level event in New York. I
pay tribute to my United Nations colleagues, who are
working with dedication and courage to help Somalis
realize their hopes and dreams. I also want to thank
all of Somalia's international partners, particularly
the African Union, the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, for
their cooperation, contributions and commitment to
Somalia, without which we would not be where we are
today. Somalia's long night is not over, but the sky is at
last getting lighter.

