Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): As the
Council prepares to vote to terminate the mandates of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Iraq
Nuclear Verification Office upon completion of their
missions, I appreciate this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the subject of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) in Iraq from 2003 to the present.

First, I would like to commend the work of the
dedicated professionals in UNMOVIC, IAEA and the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) since
1991. The United States and the United Kingdom,
along with the other United Nations Members who
constitute the Multinational Force in Iraq, have taken
all appropriate steps to investigate each credible report
of the presence of weapons of mass destruction or their
delivery systems in Iraq.

The Iraq Survey Group, comprised of 1,400
experts from several countries, worked diligently from
the spring of 2003 through early 2005 to investigate
Iraq's WMD stockpiles, such as chemical and
biological agents, and any research programmes and
infrastructure that could be used to develop WMDs.
While security conditions in Iraq have at times made
this work difficult and dangerous, the Iraq Survey
Group and the Multinational Force have been well
equipped and trained to conduct such investigations.

These efforts have demonstrated that the current
Government of Iraq does not possess any weapons of

mass destruction or delivery systems. The
Multinational Force, however, continues from time to
time to discover residual abandoned stocks of
munitions, which are handled appropriately in
coordination with the Government of Iraq.

In looking to the future, the Iraqi Government has
a solid commitment to non-proliferation embodied in
its Constitution, approved by the citizens of Iraq in
October 2005. Article 9 states,

"The Iraqi government shall respect and
implement Iraq's international commitments
regarding the non-proliferation, non-
development, non-production, and non-use of
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons, and
shall prohibit associated equipment, material,
technologies, and delivery systems for use in the
development, manufacture, production, and use
of such weapons."

This fact and this commitment stand in contrast
to the circumstances under Saddam Hussein's regime.
The Iraq Survey Group report made clear Saddam
Hussein's intent to develop weapons of mass
destruction as soon as United Nations sanctions were
lifted, the fact that he maintained a breakout capacity
that would have enabled rapid production of chemical
and biological weapons and the fact that he repeatedly
made false reports to United Nations inspectors of
WMD programmes.

With regard to chemical weapons, it is evident
that Iraq had constructed facilities prior to March 2003
that could produce chemical weapons. Iraq had the
capacity to produce large quantities of sulphur
mustards within three to six months, as well as the
capacity to produce nerve agents within two years. The
Iraq Survey Group determined that, following the 1991
Gulf War, Iraq abandoned efforts to preserve its
pre-1991 chemical weapon capability and destroyed
most of its undeclared chemical weapon stockpiles in
1991. A significant number of old, pre-1991 abandoned
chemical munitions have since been discovered and
secured by Coalition forces.
Since 2003, multinational experts have
implemented a series of measures to seal and secure
remaining chemical weapon sites. Coalition forces
have worked hard to investigate reports of abandoned
chemical munitions to ensure that they are accounted
for, analyzed and destroyed to prevent any hazard to
Iraqi civilians. Coalition forces continue to work with

the Government of Iraq to ensure the safety and
structural integrity of these sites.

With regard to nuclear weapons, the Iraq Survey
Group uncovered evidence of the maturity and intent of
the pre-1991 Iraqi nuclear programme. The
Government determined, however, that the Iraqi ability
to reconstitute a nuclear weapons programme had
progressively deteriorated after 1991, despite Saddam
Hussein's interest in nuclear weapons and in retaining
nuclear weapons scientists. There was no evidence that
his Government made a serious effort to acquire the
fissile materials needed to develop a nuclear-weapon
programme.

The Iraq National Monitoring Directorate has
been transformed by the Government of Iraq into an
organization that fully supports international non-
proliferation goals. The Government of Iraq has
requested and is receiving IAEA and other
international assistance to help Iraqi authorities
establish full compliance with all IAEA requirements
concerning remaining material connected to nuclear-
weapon programmes.

Furthermore, the Iraqi Government has
established the Iraqi Radioactive Source Regulatory
Authority (IRSRA), in cooperation with the IAEA,
along with the United States Departments of State and
of Energy and the Nuclear Research Council. Iraq has
committed itself to operating this new, independent
agency in accordance with the IAEA Code of Conduct
on the Safety and Security of Radioactive Sources.
IRSRA currently has a staff of 54 people. With Iraqi
survey teams checking locations known to have had
radioactive sources in the past, the organization has
nearly completed an inventory of Iraq's radioactive
sources and has confirmed and inventoried all those
currently in use.

Unwanted radioactive sources have been
collected and placed in secure storage. Last year alone
260 missions were conducted covering all Iraqi
governorates. Field survey missions are ongoing,
concentrating now on lost or orphan radioactive
sources. As a result, 1,130 radiation sources have been
recovered, while 1,680 radiation sources have been
accounted for and updated in the inventory.

To help secure Iraq's borders, a radioactive
border control training programme has been
established for customs officers and others. The
Government of Iraq has also distributed hand-held

monitoring equipment to 17 border points thus far.
That project represents Iraq's first move to implement
radiological border monitoring.

Since 2003, coalition forces have also worked
closely with the Government of Iraq to ensure that
radiological sources are properly secured and closely
monitored. Proper and secure arrangements for their
appropriate disposition are made at the discretion of
the Iraqi authorities. This close cooperation with
coalition forces and careful accountability of
radiological sources have prevented the compromise of
this sensitive material.

The Iraqi Survey Group uncovered no evidence
that Iraq has retained SCUD-variant missiles.
Debriefing of Iraqi officials from the former regime, in
addition to some documentation that has been
reviewed, suggests that Iraq did not retain such
missiles after 1991. However, the Group did find Iraqi
plans or designs for three long-range ballistic missiles
with ranges from 400 to 1,000 kilometres, and for a
1,000-kilometre-range cruise missile, although none of
those systems progressed to production and only one
reportedly passed the design phase. The Iraq Survey
Group assessed that those plans demonstrated
Saddam's continuing desire, up to the beginning of
Operation Iraqi Freedom, to acquire a long-range
delivery capability.

Given Iraq's investment in technology and
infrastructure improvements in an effective
procurement network, skilled scientists and designs
already on the books for longer-range missiles, the
Iraqi Survey Group assessed that Saddam Hussein
clearly intended to reconstitute long-range delivery
systems that could potentially be used as a delivery
platform for weapons of mass destruction.

The Iraq Survey Group also determined that Iraq
could have established an elementary biological
weapons programme within one month or less if
desired. The Group judged that in 1991 and 1992 Iraq
destroyed most of its undeclared stocks of biological
weapons and agents. Some remaining biological-
weapons-related seed stocks were destroyed following
their discovery by coalition forces following Operation
Iraqi Freedom. Nonetheless, in spite of exhaustive
investigations, the Iraqi Survey Group uncovered no
evidence suggesting that Iraq possessed or was
developing biological weapons, agents or production
facilities.

In summation, with the findings of the Iraqi
Survey Group, the extensive and careful efforts of the
Multinational Force and experts, and the aggressive
corrective actions taken by the Iraqi Government, at
present there is no longer any reason to believe that
significant quantities of Saddam-era weapons of mass
destruction remain undiscovered in Iraq.

Furthermore, the United States and others have
also been working with the Iraqi Government to ensure
that the Iraqi scientists previously engaged in Iraqi
WMD programmes, many of whom are accomplished
scientists and experts in their respective fields, are
gainfully employed and contributing their substantial
expertise to the reconstruction of Iraq. Perhaps most
importantly, Iraq is no longer a country that has any
political intent or military plan to utilize such terrible
weapons.

