Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are deeply disappointed with the vote
on draft resolution S/2019/962 on the cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism. My British
colleague mentioned breathtaking hypocrisy, and I
concur with her. However, we have a different View as
to who was hypocritical in this situation. My German
colleague, as is now customary, attempted to lecture
us about diplomacy today and reproached us for an
unwillingness to compromise. We have already made
a significant compromise on the draft resolution but
for some reason that was not appreciated. We are
asked to make compromise after compromise, over
and over again, and essentially to return to the same
co-penholders' text for draft resolution S/2019/961,
which was unacceptable to us in the first place. We
were frank about that right from the start, although for
some reason the co-penholders still did not believe it.

One could say that what we really observed
today were the double standards of the self-styled
humanitarian stewards of the welfare of the Syrian
people. We were willing to extend the mechanism
and, as many put it, to give our swift approval in the
interests of delivering assistance to Syrians in areas
where that assistance was indeed essential. Meanwhile,
those colleagues of ours who constantly accuse Russia
of obstructing those efforts and speak of the lofty
standards and principles of humanism, have themselves
killed the mechanism, using arguments that can neither
be justified nor withstand criticism.

Let me ask the Council a rhetorical question. Who
won today? Nobody. Who lost? Those same Syrian
people about whom those who blocked our draft
resolution today assured us today of their unceasing
concern. We have already talked about the reasons for
our proposal to reduce the mandate for the cross-border
mechanism's time frame and reduce the number of
crossing points. But the most important thing, which
I want to emphasize, is that we were willing to extend
the mechanism. No one should try to cover that up. Will
the Syrian people whom the humanitarian assistance is
intended for understand the point of our disagreements?
What difference does six months or 12 months mean to
them? We will not accept the reproaches we have heard
today. What are we being reproached for? Is it because
they did not accept our draft resolution extending the
cross-border mechanism? They have deprived the
Syrians of the cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism. Do not attempt to shift blame for that on us.

What will they tell the press when they leave the
Chamber today - that Russia killed the cross-border
mechanism? Or will they trumpet this story in their
media outlets? But how will they explain the fact
that they voted against the Russian draft resolution,
which provides for the extension of the provision of
humanitarian assistance to people in need in Syria
through the cross-border mechanism? Unfortunately,
it is clear to us that some of our partners pursue
not humanitarian but other goals while endlessly
politicizing the humanitarian arena, again and again.
Russia will continue to deliver humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people and continue to work to rebuild
their country, which has been destroyed largely as a
result of foreign intervention.

