Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Allow me first,
Mr. President, to congratulate you and the Jordanian
delegation on the excellent work done during your
Security Council presidency for the month of January
2014. We commend your initiative to hold today's
debate on the theme "War, its lessons and the search for
a permanent peace", which is related to the overriding
purpose of the collective work of the United Nations.

War and peace have been the first and foremost
concern of humankind throughout history, and even
more today because of the catastrophic consequences
of two world wars and numerous other conflicts. It is
the devastation of wars that brought the international
community together in unprecedented collective
endeavours "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war" and to promote social progress and
better standards of life as embodied in the Charter of
the United Nations.

Since its inception, nearly seven decades ago,
the United Nations has proved to be instrumental in
preventing another world war that could, tragically,
entirely destroy human civilization. The United Nations
has worked hard to de-escalate, find solutions to, and
address the consequences of conflicts throughout
the world. Yet conflicts, both between and within
States, still wreak havoc on millions of lives and the
development of too many nations. It is therefore critical
that we reflect on what has produced such tragic
outcomes in certain places, what has prevented them in
others and what we can do to build a lasting peace for
all. Our delegation would like to touch upon a number
of lessons of history.

First, history has shown that too often wars and
conflicts stem from obsolete doctrines of power politics,
the ambition of domination and the imposition and the
threat or use of force in settling international disputes,
including those related to territorial and jurisdictional
claims.
Secondly, history has also shown that warlike
forces will eventually meet with setbacks no matter
how much power they may be able to amass initially.
The aspirations of nations for their independence,
sovereignty and other invaluable, legitimate rights are
a source of great strength.

Thirdly, however, once broken out, wars and
conflicts cause enormous suffering to human beings
and grave consequences for many aspects of the life of
nations directly involved as well as of others, especially
in today's highly connected world. Unfortunately, a
number of them are associated with historical legacies,
misperceptions, misunderstandings and unintended
incidents.

Nowadays the United Nations and its Member
States have more and better means to prevent conflict
and war. We must build, strengthen and make the
best use of the institutions of peace, including the
development of international law, international and
regional organizations and mechanisms to facilitate
dialogue, confidence-building and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

We must denounce the use or threat of use of force
in international relations and promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes and a culture of peace. We
believe that those are the most marked advancements
of the United Nations from the League of Nations, but
much more still requires to be done. In that regard, the
issues raised by the President of the Security Council
are highly important. We must assist nations in the
aftermath of wars and conflict to rebuild and reconcile,
to address the root causes of conflict and to ensure
lasting peace.

As the Security Council is entrusted by the entire
membership of the United Nations with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council should constantly
promote themes and measures to consolidate peace
and prevent war and conflict. It requires consistent
effort by the Council to find peaceful solutions to
ongoing international disputes and conflicts, as well as
the determined search for measures conducive to the
promotion of peace. In that connection, the permanent
members of the Council bear special responsibility.

Having had to go through wars to defend our national
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
Viet Nam understands at first hand the consequences of
wars and conflicts. Viet Nam therefore strongly shares
an ardent desire for peace. As our Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Nguyen Tan Dung, emphasized in his
speech before the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly (see A/68/PV.16), there is an urgent and
immense need to build and reinforce strategic trust,
internationally and regionally, through concrete and
constructive behaviour and adherence to the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Only in
such an environment of strategic trust, in which every
country is a responsible stakeholder, will the world
enjoy a better security environment and will the lessons
of war be fully utilized.

