Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the European Union (EU).

I will read out a short version of my statement. My
full text will be available via my Twitter account in
View of time constraints.

First of all, I would like to thank France for
organizing this very important open debate on this very
urgent issue, which directs our attention to the violent
extremism, intolerance, religious and ethnic hatred that
have gained ground in recent months, in particular in
the Middle East. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, as
a partner for peace, justice and development, applauds
the inclusive nature of this debate.

I will make three points: on human rights, on the
actions my Kingdom has taken, and on accountability.

On human rights, every individual must have the
freedom to express his or her identity. This includes the
right to have any religion, the right to change religion
or to have no religion at all. Human rights, in our view,
apply to all. To exclude any person belonging to a
particular group would undermine the universality of
our common human rights.

My Government is therefore deeply worried about
the deteriorating security situation in the Middle East.
The brutality of the crimes committed by extremist
groups in the region is unparalleled in recent history.
The future of the multi-ethnic and religious landscape
of the Middle East is under imminent threat.

My second point concerns the actions taken by my
Government.

We are committed in our fight against violent
extremism in the region. As amember ofthe international
coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS), we have contributed 250 military personnel and
six F-16 aircraft. Furthermore, we have deployed 130
Dutch military trainers to train local coalition forces to
fight these extremist groups. Furthermore, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands co-chairs the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Working Group within the anti-ISIS coalition.
Of course, we also provide humanitarian assistance to
countries facing the challenge of hundreds of thousands
of refugees as a result of this Violence. To the Syrian
crisis alone, my Kingdom has contributed more than
€114 million since 2012, and at the Kuwait pledging
conference next week my country will further step up
its efforts to contribute to humanitarian assistance in
the region. We hope other States will do the same.

The international community has a collective
responsibility to protect civilian populations from
international crimes. That holds especially true for
vulnerable groups in society, like ethnic and religious
minorities. My Government urges the permanent
members of the Security Council to agree to refrain
from the use of their veto in situations where civilians
are threatened with mass atrocity crimes. We salute the
initiative to that effect of the Government of France.
My third point centres on accountability. Military
action is not enough. Efforts must be made to strengthen
the rule of law and to build inclusive societies.
Furthermore, we need justice. The perpetrators of those
heinous crimes need to be held accountable. Justice and
accountability should be included in the political process
from the start. Impunity would simply create a new
breeding ground for new violent extremism. National
capacities to deal with justice and accountability must
be strengthened as part of the transition and post-
transition process. If accountability cannot be achieved
domestically, the Netherlands calls on the Council to
request the International Criminal Court in the Hague
to play its role as a court of last resort.

In conclusion, the future of the multi-ethnic and
religious landscape of the region is under threat. This
needs a firm collective response from us, the States
Members of the United Nations. The principles of the
United Nations Charter are at stake. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, will continue to contribute to that firm
response.

