Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Council and you, Sir, for having
put the question of the Sahel on the agenda. I would like
to welcome the presence among us and the participation
of the persons who have spoken today. I would like to
thank in particular Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, and Mr. Antonio
Guterres, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

The present debate comes in the wake of the
discussions held by the Council some days ago on Mali,
as it is true that there can be no lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali without a comprehensive approach to the
multidimensional challenges facing the Sahel region.
The strategic concept for resolving the Malian crisis
includes a range of measures devoted to the situation
in the Sahel region. As we all know, the Sahel region
is facing a number of challenges linked to terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the illicit proliferation
of and trafficking in arms, latent armed conflicts,
environmental degradation, climate change, food
insecurity and a grave nutrition crisis. Those problems
have been exacerbated by the Libyan crisis, in particular
as a result of the influx of hundreds of thousands of
returnees and the flood of arms and munitions coming
from Libyan arsenals, which has provided a source
of weaponry for terrorist and criminal groups in the
region.

In that context, the African Union immediately
condemned the attacks that were perpetrated in
mid-January by armed rebels in the northern part of
Mali, as we were aware that those developments could
only worsen a security situation that was already
precarious, create a humanitarian crisis and destabilize
both Mali and the region. Our fears have proven to be
justified.

In the African Union, we became aware very early
on of the need to adopt a comprehensive approach that
would address all the matters at hand, in particular
terrorism, armed rebellions, transnational organized
crime, the illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and other weapons, food insecurity, poverty,
youth unemployment, environmental deterioration and
climate change, problems related to governance and
chronic underdevelopment. Therefore, in December
2011, the African Union Commission, together with
the United Nations, undertook a joint mission in the
countries of the Sahel in order to evaluate the impact of
the Libyan crisis. Subsequently, at the end of January
2012, the Commission convened consultations at the
ministerial level in Addis Ababa among the countries
of the region and other stakeholders in order to consider
the report and recommendations issued as a result of
the joint AU-United Nations mission (see S/2012/42).

In mid-March, the African Union Commission,
working closely with the United Nations, convened
a meeting of experts that brought together the
countries of the region, the various agencies of the
United Nations and international partners in order
to consider the situation in the Sahel region and to
develop recommendations on further actions. The
meeting adopted conclusions that addressed political,
security, humanitarian and development aspects. It also
proposed a follow-up mechanism. Those conclusions
were ratified by the ministerial meeting of the Peace
and Security Council that was held in Bamako on
20 March. The Peace and Security Council requested
the Commission, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the other stakeholders, including the
relevant regional economic communities, to take all the
necessary measures in order to ensure the follow-up
and the implementation of the conclusions reached in
the various areas of action that had been identified, that
is, the security and diplomatic aspects, humanitarian
aid, food security, the reintegration of migrant workers,
sustainable development and follow-up.

The Commission is endeavouring to implement
those conclusions. In that context, it has decided to
enhance its presence in the region by opening offices
in the countries where it has not been represented
and to strengthen the capacity of existing offices in
the region. Furthermore, the Chairman of the African
Union Commission has appointed a high representative
responsible not only for Mali, but for the Sahel region as
a whole, and that representative is the former President
of Burundi, Mr. Pierre Buyoya.

From a more programmatic perspective, the
Commission is engaged in developing a comprehensive
African Union approach to support efforts made by
countries of the region. In that regard, we are seeking
to strengthen consistency between the activities
undertaken by the various African Union entities
involved in the activities and programmes operating
in the Sahel region. To that end, we plan to quickly
convene a meeting that brings together all the relevant
deparments of the Commission, as well as the regional
offices and the specialized agencies of the African
Union, in order to develop a joint plan of action for
peace, security and stability in the Sahel region.

When considering the situation in the Sahel region
and the action that needs to be taken, we must keep in
mind that in recent years the countries of the region
have made sustained efforts, both individually and
collectively, in order to tackle the challenges they
face. In that regard, the Council should commend
the core countries - Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger - as well as other examples of bilateral
cooperation among those countries and the rest of
the region. In the same vein, we should note with
satisfaction the sustained efforts made by the Economic
Community of West African States in order to promote
peace, security, stability and development in the region
of West Africa.

Finally, I would like to welcome the organization
of a regional ministerial conference on border security,
under the aegis of the Libyan Government, held in
Tripoli in March. Ultimately, we must also acknowledge
the contribution that is being made as an intrinsic part of
the mandates of other relevant regional organizations,
namely, the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States and
the North Africa Regional Capability. International
actions should therefore focus on supporting efforts
made by countries of the region and make them more
effective. We in the African Union express the hope that
this meeting will help set a milestone in that regard.

I would like to use this opportunity to draw
attention to an issue of great concern both for the region
and for the African Union, namely, the issue of the
payment of ransoms for the release of hostages. This
has become a significant source of funding that enables
terrorist groups to gain the support of local populations,
acquire the necessary logistics and infrastructure
and recruit new elements, in addition to the resulting
criminalization of local economies. In that connection,
I wish to reiterate the urgent call of the African Union
to the Security Council to adopt a resolution prohibiting
the payment of ransoms to terrorist groups.

For our part, we shall spare no effort to contribute
towards a rapid resolution of the Malian crisis based

on the relevant decisions adopted by the Peace
and Security Council and shall work towards the
stabilization and development of the Sahel region, in
support of the efforts made by the countries concerned
and in close cooperation with the United Nations and
other international partners.

