The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April 2008, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of March 2008. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Churkin
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(5/2008/202)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Haiti in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cazeau
(Haiti), took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/202, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I now give the floor to
Mr. Annabi.


