Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): First of all, let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Madam President,
for organizing today's meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the important issue of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Ukraine
very much appreciates and supports Argentina's
initiative in organizing today's open debate.

Ukraine is deeply concerned over the situation in
the Middle East, and in the Palestinian territories in
particular. It is our strong conviction that the solution
to the question of Palestine should be based on the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the Madrid Peace Conference
formula and the Oslo accords.

Ukraine is committed to a balanced and impartial
position on the Middle East peace process, and is
willing to develop stable and constructive relations with
both Israel and the Arab States, including Palestine. On
the issue of the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, Ukraine
supports the principle of the coexistence of Israel and
Arab states in peace and security. Ukraine welcomed
the Israeli-Palestinian agreement on a ceasefire, which
put an end to the killings among the civilian population
and gave parties an opportunity to find diplomatic
ways to solve their differences. The strategic outcome
of the initiative is to create two States for two peoples
that would coexist in peace and security, based on
the expectations of the international community for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Middle East.

Ukraine considers the principles of the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative to be a key element of international
efforts to reach a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement. Ukraine reaffirms its commitment to
the universal principles and basic norms of international
law, in particular strict observance of human rights,
territorial integrity, inviolability of borders and State
sovereignty. Ukraine stands for an immediate end to the
bloodshed and calls on to maximize the use of political
and diplomatic means to resolve the conflict.

Ukraine proceeds from the fact that, according
to the Charter of the United Nations, the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security lies with the Security Council, and specifically
its permanent members. We consider the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014) on the fight against
foreign terrorists to be an important example of such
responsibility, and call upon all Member States to
support its full implementation.

Ukraine supports the mission of Special Envoy
Staffan dc Mistura, tasked with the Syrian crisis,
as well as other initiatives brokered by influential
international organizations, and calls on the parties to
the conflict to rapidly and fully implement the Geneva
agreements. Ukraine welcomes the cooperation of
the Syrian Government with the overall aims of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Mission to destroy the arsenal
of chemical weapons. We are confident that the final
removal of Syrian chemical weapons represents an
important step for Syria and the whole Middle East
region. Ukraine condemns the ongoing violence and
systematic violations of human rights in Syria.

Ukraine takes a proactive stance on the Syrian
issue. We supported General Assembly resolution
68/182, "Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic". The Ukrainian delegation took part in the
2nd, 3rd and 4th meetings of the Group of Friends of
the Syrian People. Ukraine is concerned about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria,
where the total number of internally displaced persons
exceeds 6.5 million, and almost 3 million refugees
were forced to move to neighbouring countries. In
that regard, we call on Syrian authorities to remove
all bureaucratic barriers and other obstacles to the
expansion of humanitarian aid operations. We also
support implementation of the provisions of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) to ensure the free access
of humanitarian assistance to the affected population
and the protection of medical personnel and United
Nations humanitarian workers. Realizing the critical
humanitarian situation in Syria, Ukraine has provided,
through the relevant United Nations agencies,
humanitarian aid to Syrian refugees.

Ukraine has clearly expressed its position in the
statement issued by the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry
on 16 September on the results of the International
Conference on Peace and Security in Iraq, held in
Paris. Ukraine, which decisively fights foreign-backed
terrorists and itself faces direct aggression, shares the
view that the terrorist group the Islamic State is a threat
not only to Iraq and Syria, but also to the international
community.

