Mr. Nsanze (Burundi): First of all, I would like to
recognize, Sir, your code of conduct in your capacity as
President of the Security Council, which reflects the
characteristics of the policy of non-alignment, that is
impartiality, conciliatory behaviour and dedication to the
sacrosanct principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
For this host of high qualities, you deserve our greatest
tribute.

(spoke in Spanish)

Ambassador Martinez Blanco also deserves our
gratitude, but, above all, our congratulations for the success
he achieved during his mandate as President of the Security
Council in October.

(spoke in French)

My three-page statement will highlight the need to
identify and eradicate the causes of the overall problem
existing in the region of the Great Lakes.

All humanity is shuddering at the sight of the horrors
inflicted on a million and a half individuals. A human tidal
wave has been doomed to a collective martyrdom. There
are both remote and immediate causes for this suffering.
The genocide that crushed nearly a million victims in a
period of three months has swept from their homeland yet
another million human beings. This dual and highly tragic
phenomenon is the remote but principal cause of the
horrendous misery that has burst into the two Kivus. In the
ignoble odyssey imposed on the refugees, the greatest
blame must be borne by the former Rwandan Army and its
interahamwe militia, which, retrenched in refugee camps,
have taken the latter hostage to use them as human shields.

There are more immediate causes for this suffering.
For nearly three years now, various international political

 

circles, numerous humanitarian organizations, foremost
among them the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and numerous
Governments, in particular those of Burundi, Rwanda and
Zaire, have vied with each other in issuing warnings
regarding the immense danger presented throughout the
region of the Great Lakes by the million refugees
crowded on the frontiers of these three countries. The
militaristic designs and subversive acts of the former
Rwandan troops and their backers, namely the
interahamwe militia, continued to poison relations among
member States of the Economic Community of the Great
Lakes countries, namely Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire. The
intermittent acts of aggression aimed against Burundi and
Rwanda by the former Rwandan Army troops and the
interahamwe were both warning signs of the general
deterioration of the situation and of an imminent
explosion in the region.

Fully aware of the enormous risk inherent in the
presence of a large number of refugees along their shared
borders, the three States, acting together and backed by
UN HCR in particular, have continually sounded the alarm
and requested the assistance of the international
community for a triple operation they considered
essential: the repatriation of the refugees to their
respective countries; the disarmament of some 40,000
runaway Rwandan soldiers and their adjuncts, the
interahamwe militia; and finally, encampment in areas far
from the frontiers for refugees who opted to remain
abroad.

Various alternatives were proposed, on many
occasions. Although it was convinced of the merits of
these urgent appeals, which were reiterated time and
again, the Security Council refused to cross the Rubicon,
alleging the existence of numerous obstacles, instead of
taking the bull by the horns and neutralizing the former
Rwandese troops and militia. These men, however, were
armed to the teeth and, on top of everything else,
continuously committed acts of aggression against our
States and sowed desolation among our peoples. This
unhealthy climate ultimately degenerated into a dangerous
powder keg, which irreversibly and inevitably led to the
present disaster.

Regarding the interaction between the causes of the
chronic crises in the Great Lakes region, cold, hard
analysis shows that the fates of the peoples of the Great
Lakes region are clearly interrelated, and that,
paradoxically, the interests they desperately pursue in
their search for survival are in mortal conflict. A common

 

denominator characterizes the citizens of Burundi, Rwanda
and Kivu: the psychosis of fear, which is the cause of their
bitter struggle to cling to their life raft. Hence, we see that
instead of joining together to achieve the same ultimate
goals, these fellow citizens are tearing each other apart. The
result is a problem which is both shared and chronic; it is,
first and foremost, up to the United Nations to tackle this
issue.
Given the interdependence of their respective plights,
solutions aimed at saving our peoples can no longer be
selective limited to isolated, and therefore limited, areas -
that is, to individual countries. To resolve the recurrent
tragedies which flow from age-old causes, the imperative
obligation to confront them comprehensively in the region
devolves on the Security Council especially, and on all the
protagonists. And, from this point of View, the eradication
of the causes of the overall problem in the Great Lakes
region requires, as the highest priority, solutions
commensurate with the seriousness and tenacity of the
issues. These include, first, an international conference on
finding ways to promote and bring about a massive return
of refugees and expatriates to their respective homelands.
The sponsorship, organization, financing and conduct of
such a forum, preferably on African soil, would be
entrusted to the United Nations and to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) in close cooperation with the rest of
the international community.

Such a conference would also take up the
establishment of machinery most likely to guarantee
national security for the elements of each country and
regional security for the States of the Great Lakes taken as
a whole. But security on this dual level will remain an
unattained and unattainable dream so long as the major goal
has not been achieved - or rather, so long as the first
sine qua non condition has not been fulfilled: equitable
power sharing providing the necessary balance among
national communities. This is an inescapable condition,
through which shared power, rather than slaking individual
ambitions, would in fact end up serving as a reciprocal
shield for the elements of each nation.

Over the last few weeks, world attention has been
riveted to the unprecedented magnitude of the tragedy
afflicting Kivu. Another human tragedy of great seriousness
has wrongly been consigned to oblivion. Seven million
Burundi citizens have been crushed under the suffocating
weight of a total economic blockade for nearly four months
now. While for two months the new regime has fully
abided by all the conditions imposed by the Governments
that imposed the embargo, and while the ministerial

 

delegation dispatched last 18 October by the third Arusha
summit had a high opinion of the negotiation plan the
Head of State of Burundi proposed to his counterparts,
our people continues to be sacrificed gratuitously and at
great cost. This embargo contravenes the most
fundamental norms of international law and the charters
of both the United Nations and the OAU, and has
subjected an entire nation to the throes of humiliation and
death.
In September, October and November I transmitted
to the successive Presidents of the Security Council and
to the Secretary-General plethora of official documents
demonstrating the complete determination of the present
leaders to negotiate with all groups, including armed
factions. The negotiations have since run up against the
obstacles raised by the rebel camp. We wonder whether
the architects of these economic sanctions are still
inclined to find excuses for maintaining the embargo.
Aside from the heavy tribute paid daily in numerous
human lives - in particular by the hundreds of thousands
of displaced persons - the refugees who are returning
from Zaire by the thousands, fleeing the cataclysm
abroad, are faced with tragic conditions in their own
country, Burundi, and are being throttled by an embargo
which is arbitrary in every way.

The repercussions on the plight of the Burundi
refugees shed additional light on the interrelationship of
which I spoke a while ago among the chronic causes of
the crises which continue to batter the Great Lakes region
and Burundi, which is situated at the crossroads of this
inter-lake region. Our country has been willed by history
and geography to participate as a full-fledged member in
the settlement of conflicts there. At present my
Government is limiting itself to making the Security
Council aware of the problem of squaring the circle
which, sooner or later, a multinational force will run up
against if its mandate does not include the separation of
former Rwandan soldiers and the interahamwe from
innocent refugees.

In the View of my delegation, the primary task of the
multinational force should be above all, to disarm the
former Rwandese troops and at quartering them in areas
remote from the Burundi-Rwanda-Zaire borders.

Without wishing to be a Cassandra, the Burundi
delegation is obliged to warn that failing to carry out the
task of disarming the former Rwandese troops could
means a repetition of the monumental error committed in
1994 when the United Nations Assistance Mission for

 

Rwanda (UNAMIR) limited itself to standing by passively
at the outbreak of the genocide, then packing up and fleeing
at the height - at the very height - of that scourge.

