Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the office of President of
the Security Council and to thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
speak on the subject of negative security assurances.

The issue of negative security assurances has been
addressed by the General Assembly over the last several
years. The General Assembly has consistently maintained
that there is an urgent need to reach an early agreement
on effective international arrangements to assure non-
nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons. Such arrangements would best be in the
form of an international convention of a legally binding
character. The Conference on Disarmament agrees, in
principle, to the idea of an international convention, but
has not been able to agree on the nature of a common
formula which could be included in such a convention.

 

The General Assembly has therefore appealed

"to all States, especially the nuclear-weapon States, to
work actively towards an early agreement on a
common approach and, in particular, on a common
formula that could be included in an international
instrument of a legally binding character". (General Assembly resolution 49/73, para. 3)

Considering the widespread support for the conclusion
of an international convention, the General Assembly
recommended that

"the Conference on Disarmament should actively
continue intensive negotiations with a view to reaching
early agreement and concluding effective international
arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons".
(ibid., para. 5)

During the last General Assembly session those
recommendations were reiterated in resolution 49/73, which
was adopted by a vote of 168 in favour, none against and
only three abstentions.

The Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement, during their Tenth Summit Conference, held in
Jakarta in 1992, also emphasized the significance of a
multilateral and legally binding convention to adequately
address the security concerns of non-nuclear-weapon States.
The non-aligned Foreign Ministers reaffirmed that position
in May 1994 in Cairo. They stated that

"security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
could contribute positively to addressing some of the
dangers inherent in the presence of nuclear weapons"

and

"called on the Conference on Disarmament to reach an
urgent agreement on an internationally binding
convention". (S/1994/894, annex, para. 54)

Only unconditional guarantees of a legally binding
character can effectively address the security concerns of
non-nuclear-weapon States. Negative security assurances
which are conditional could be subjected to varying
interpretations and to selective implementation. Linking
security assurances to certain criteria would militate against
the objective of providing assurances on a universal basis.
Also, relying on a subjective decision-making process for
extending security assurances could result in arbitrary and
selective application of those assurances. Security
assurances should become operational whenever there is
any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. It also needs
to be ensured that the provisions of security assurances
are in full conformity with the United Nations Charter -
especially Article 51 - which provides that the Security
Council shall act, without discrimination, whenever
international peace and security is threatened.

Pakistan believes that the Conference on
Disarmament, as the sole multilateral negotiating body on
disarmament matters, provides the most appropriate forum
for the consideration of the issue of security assurances to
non-nuclear-weapon States. Such consideration should
result in the conclusion of an international instrument that
provides unconditional security assurances to non-nuclear-
weapon States. For this it is essential that the Conference
on Disarmament should establish an ad hoc committee on
negative security assurances, and that this ad hoc
committee should be provided with a negotiating mandate
for the conclusion of an international instrument of a
legally binding character as early as possible.

Pakistan has consistently advocated that all non-
nuclear-weapon States be provided with credible and
effective security assurances against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons. We will continue to cooperate in
achieving this objective.

