Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me express
our deep appreciation to the People's Republic of China
for organizing this important and rich open debate.

I align myself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union, as well as with the
statement made by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law. I will
deliver an abridged version of my statement; the full
version will be available via Twitter.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has valued the
United Nations since its inception 70 years ago as an
institution indispensable to the achievement of global
peace, justice and development. With that in mind, I
will focus on conflict prevention, the use of the veto
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

The best way to maintain peace and security is
to prevent conflicts from happening - a point just
made by our colleague from Burundi. The primary
responsibility to prevent conflicts, of course, lies
with the State. At the same time, the international
community also shares in that responsibility. We call
upon the Council to use the tools mentioned in Chapter
VI of the Charter to prevent conflicts.

A crucial element of conflict prevention is
immediate action on the part of the Council in response
to early warning. Leadership, clear procedures and
means to act are necessary. That is especially so when
there are signals that large-scale human rights violations
or mass atrocities are about to take place. The Council
has a special responsibility to protect in that context.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands also welcomes a
more forward-looking role for the Secretary-General in
relation to the Council - for instance, through regular
briefings to the Council in which he can raise issues of
concern, even ifthey are not yet formally on the agenda
of the Council. The mediation work of the Secretary-
General could be further enhanced. We also believe
that the interaction between Council members and other
United Nations Members could be further improved.

My second point concerns the use of the veto.
We have been witness too often to mass atrocities
in situations where preventive measures failed. On
occasion the Council has been unable to act to address
such situations because of the contentious use of the
veto. In our view, in those situations the use of the veto
by the permanent members of the Council ought to be
limited. In that respect, we agree with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of the
Maldives, which was very clear. We therefore continue
to laud and support the French initiative for a voluntary
code of conduct for the five permanent members to
abstain from using the veto in such situations.

We believe that the peaceful settlement of disputes
is a vital tool in the prevention of conflicts. Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations recognizes that
crucial objective. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
deeply committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
with a special emphasis on judicial settlements. Among
other institutions, the Kingdom is proud to host the
International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration at The Hague, the legal capital of
the world. We strongly encourage the Council to take
measures to expand the use of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, both in relation to State and non-State
actors.

Under Articles 34 and 36 of the Charter, the
Council can recommend that parties settle their disputes
peacefully. The Council can also suggest the specific
form it deems most suitable and request to be briefed
about the results. In cases where the International
Court of Justice has jurisdiction, the Council can also
strongly urge the parties to take their disputes to the
Court. The Council could also encourage parties to
accept the Court's jurisdiction when the Court does not
yet have jurisdiction.

The Netherlands has full confidence in the quality
of the dispute settlement mechanisms mentioned in
the Charter. We strongly believe that States should not
only submit themselves to those mechanisms, but also
should abide by the decisions taken through them.

In conclusion, the Netherlands strongly believes in
its partnership with the United Nations for peace, justice
and development. It is that firm belief that serves as the
foundation of our candidature for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the 2017-2018 term. The
Netherlands is ready to play its part as a constructive
partner in the Council in the pursuit of the maintenance
of international peace and security. Let me end by
quoting a speech delivered by my Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Albert Koenders, last week in which he quoted
Willy Brandt: "Peace is not everything, but everything
is nothing without peace."

