Mr. Konishi (Japan): Japan has always worked for
peace and stability in Africa, as peace and stability are the
prerequisites for promoting development and prosperity.
Japan therefore welcomes the regional initiative that is
being taken on the situation in the Central African
Republic. The Government of Japan wishes to express its
full support for the efforts being made by the members of
the International Monitoring Committee, namely, Gabon,
Burkina Faso, Mali and Chad, and to express its
appreciation to these countries, as well as to Senegal and
Togo, for contributing troops to the Inter-African Mission
to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB).

The Council has been working with great care on the
draft resolution before us, with a view to responding as best
it can to the request made by the countries of the region. It
has now produced a draft resolution which my delegation
believes is clear and to the point, approving the continued
conduct of the operation in a neutral and impartial way by
the Member States participating in MISAB, so that the
objective of the mission can be attained. Acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council, through this resolution, also authorizes the
Member States participating in MISAB and those States
providing logistical support to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of their personnel.

With the adoption of this draft resolution my
delegation believes that an effective action can be taken to
restore peace to the Central African Republic, thereby
contributing to the stability of the entire region. My
delegation accordingly will vote in favour of this draft
resolution.

In closing, I would like to state that my Government
believes that the initiative being taken by the countries of
the region sets a good precedent for the prevention of
conflicts in Africa. It is therefore pleased that this draft
resolution has been made ready for the consideration of
the Council in a timely manner. We hope that peace will
take root in the Central African Republic in the very near
future, so that it will lead to its long-term stability and
development.

