Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador Nestor
Osorio for the 90-day report of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), covering the period from 21 March to 11 June
2012. We are studying the final report (S/2012/395) of
the Panel of Experts that was presented to the Committee
last month and has since been published. We hope that
the Committee will examine that detailed report, its
conclusions and recommendations in the weeks ahead.

We share the View that the Panel of Experts needs to
undertake its work and activities strictly in accordance
with its mandate as outlined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions and under the direction of the
Committee. It is important that the Panel's reports
are aligned to the broader, but mutually reinforcing,
goals outlined in the relevant Security Council
resolutions - that is, the effective implementation of
the sanctions and a negotiated and diplomatic solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.

Now that the Security Council has adopted
resolution 2049 (2012), extending the mandate of the
Panel for another year, we continue to believe that
the Panel's composition needs to reflect a broader
geographic representation, particularly from developing
countries. We hope that, in appointing members of the
Panel, due consideration will be given to both expertise
and geographic balance. Such measures will help to
broaden awareness of the importance of the sanctions
regime among the wider United Nations membership.

We take note of the recent report by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation
of safeguards in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in Iran.
We welcome the useful round of talks held between
Iran and the five permanent members plus Germany in
Istanbul and Baghdad. We hope that the next round in
Moscow will help deepen the diplomatic process for a
negotiated and peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear
issue.

Security Council sanctions are but one of the means
to achieve the larger and shared objective of resolving
issues related to Iran's nuclear and missile programmes.
We reiterate our view that Security Council sanctions
should not be pursued as an end in themselves. They
need to be harmonized with the larger goals set by
the Council to facilitate a negotiated resolution of
outstanding issues. Given the delicate and complex
regional environment, Pakistan, as a neighbouring
country of Iran, does not wish any escalation of tensions
in an already volatile region. We therefore reaffirm the
need for dialogue and diplomacy. Iran, as a party to the
NPT and member of the IAEA, enjoys certain rights
that need to be respected. At the same time, Iran should
fulfil its legal obligations under the NPT and extend full
cooperation to the IAEA to resolve outstanding issues.

We are confident that the Council, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts will remain mindful of the
need to maintain a balance between sanctions and
negotiations.

