The President: I shall now make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.

Having listened to the members of the Council
and the valuable insights they have presented based on
their own experiences, I can easily state that the
purpose of the meeting has already been well served.
This exchange has proven to be particularly important
for my country, since Turkey is situated at the
crossroads of a host of conventional and asymmetrical
risks and threats dominating a vast geography ranging
from the Balkans to the Middle East, from the Black
Sea and the Mediterranean to the Caucasus and Central
Asia. Therefore, Turkey often finds itself dealing with
a great diversity of issues affecting its own security
and beyond, and tries to help generate peace and
stability in that broad area.

In doing so, we, like many other members of the
international community, rely on and resort to a wide
range of tools, including mediation, preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Indeed, Turkey has recently become particularly
recognized for its active mediation and facilitation efforts.
This is no coincidence, because we see such preventive
efforts as the most cost-effective and efficient way of
resolving potential and existing disputes. We also have
the comparative advantage and capacity to do so. As such,
we attach great importance to building and improving the
preventive capacities of the international community.

In the case of ongoing conflicts, on the other
hand, we are a significant police- and troop-
contributing country in many United Nations and
international peacekeeping missions. Moreover, we are
actively involved in a broad range of peacebuilding
activities, including development assistance schemes,
with a View to helping create the conditions for
sustainable peace. The lessons we have drawn from
these experiences can also shed some light on our
discussion today.

First, starting with preventive diplomacy, the
international community needs to better coordinate its
activities. Given the multidimensional and indivisible
nature of the current security environment, all major
stakeholders need to collaborate among themselves,
starting within the United Nations itself. The Security
Council, in particular, must reach out to its partners
within and outside the United Nations system and
make better use of their comparative advantages in the
pursuit of our shared objectives.

Secondly, the Council's approach to peace and
security should be of a more comprehensive and
strategic nature. So far, there has been a tendency to
use our operational tools in a more sequential fashion
in the order of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. Our
experience, however, suggests that pursuing such a
uniform and linear sequence holds us back in each area
and creates inefficiencies. We should instead be able to
forge an overarching political strategy, placing all these
tools within an integrated, coherent framework. For
instance, mediation and facilitation should not be
merely seen as a way of reaching certain agreements. It
is essential for these efforts to be sustained throughout
the implementation of peace accords, too.

Similarly, peacekeeping, which has become an
increasingly complex and robust undertaking, should
not be confined to stabilization operations carried out
by police and military forces. In order to ensure lasting
success, our peacekeeping mandates must incorporate
an early and long-term peacebuilding perspective. In
this regard, the critical linkages between security and
development, or between human rights, democracy and
security, should be taken into account. The root causes
of conflicts ought to be addressed early on to create the
conditions for sustainable peace and stability.
Likewise, the necessary civilian capacities with respect
to good governance, the rule of law, human rights, and
economic and human development have to be
improved at both the national and the international
levels.

Finally, we have to admit that we operate in a
rapidly evolving and somewhat unpredictable security
environment. Indeed, the risks and threats facing us
constantly change, requiring us to adapt our actions
and responses accordingly. Despite dedicated efforts,
the Council has so far proven to be somewhat slow in
adapting itself to changing circumstances.

In order to remedy this shortcoming, the Council
needs to interact more with non-member countries and
in a more transparent and forward-looking manner. The
Council should also endow itself with enhanced early
warning and assessment capabilities, as well as flexible
resourcing mechanisms. There are many other related
topics we might discuss in this context, but in View of
the time, let me stop here and reiterate my hope that
this meeting will re-energize the Council's efforts for
peace and security.

In the uncharted waters of the twenty-first
century, there is no doubt that we need a more effective
Security Council to fulfil its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. Today's
debate has demonstrated that this common objective is
well within reach. We now need to take the necessary
concrete steps to materialize it. Turkey will always be a
reliable partner of the Council and the international
community in this just and noble drive.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members of
the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2010/18.
It was so decided.

The President: I wish to thank all of the Heads
of State and Government, Ministers and the Secretary-
General for their contributions to this important
meeting. The Security Council has thus concluded its
deliberations.

The meeting rose at 5.30 pm.
10-54839

