Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome High Representative Inzko back
to the Security Council and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and for his service on behalf of
the international community.

Let me also acknowledge the dedicated service of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the Security Council,
Which demonstrates its commitment to playing a
strong, responsible role in the international community.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's term on the Council has also
demonstrated that cooperation and consensus among
the leaders of its constituent groups is possible, even
on complicated matters of international peace and
security. This, in turn, gives us hope that those leaders
can find ways to work together to overcome their
internal political difficulties.

More than 15 years ago, the international
community came together with Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders to end the terrible conflict and
forge a blueprint for the way forward. The hard work in
Dayton, Ohio, paved the way for the lasting peace from
which Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to benefit.
But today the foundations of that historic Agreement
are being challenged, threatening to undercut many of
the gains that the country has achieved since Dayton.
The United States urges the parties to make every
effort to work together across ethnic and party lines to
maintain peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and throughout the region.

Let me make four points in reaction to
Ambassador Inzko's report (see S/2011/283).

First, the United States would like to reiterate our
full support for the authority of the High
Representative under the Dayton Accords. His
authority has been repeatedly affirmed in numerous
Security Council resolutions. We agree that the recent
conclusions adopted by the Republika Srpska National

Assembly present a fundamental challenge to the
Dayton Accords and constitute the most serious of a
disturbing pattern of actions by the Republika Srpska
in violation of the Agreement. These actions raise
serious questions about the Republika Srpska's
commitment to the rule of law and to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's path to membership in the European
Union (EU). They represent a setback to progress made
on the 5+2 agenda towards closing the Office of the
High Representative. And they will have a chilling
effect on the Republika Srpska's ability to attract much
needed foreign investment, complicating the already
difficult road to economic recovery. The High
Representative has our complete support in
condemning these unwarranted and unlawful
challenges to his authority. He will likewise have our
full support in steps he takes to uphold Dayton and
defend and preserve Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We are in the
process of considering our own measures in support of
Dayton and Bosnian State institutions, should they
become necessary.

Secondly, we are extremely concerned about the
absence of a State-level Government more than seven
months after the general elections. The political
stalemate impedes progress on crucial reforms that are
a first step towards membership in the EU and NATO.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders must assemble a
strong coalition Government that is capable of making
the necessary reforms, or risk seeing Bosnia and
Herzegovina fall behind on the path to integration.
Progress is possible if politicians are prepared to set
aside narrow ethnic and personal political agendas and
work towards common goals. The increased
coordination among members of the tripartite
presidency provides us with optimism that this can
happen.

Thirdly, the United States remains concerned
about divisive and chauvinistic rhetoric. Hate speech,
including deeply troubling denials of the Srebrenica
genocide, severely undermines trust and has led to
increased tension between citizens and their political
representatives. All groups have the right to address
their grievances, but calls for secession and territorial
reorganization are unrealistic and destabilizing. They
serve only to deepen ethnic mistrust and division.

Fourthly, let me again emphasize the importance
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's continued cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former

Yugoslavia. The country's law enforcement and
judicial collaboration with regional partners to
apprehend suspected war criminals across borders is a
step forward. We encourage Bosnian authorities to
build on that progress and further advance stability in
the region by creating an institutional mechanism for
such cooperation.

We welcome the EU's decision to enhance its
representation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also
welcome the contributions of the European Union
Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which remain
necessary for maintaining stability, in particular given
the difficult political situation.

The United States is fully committed to the
Dayton Accords and fully supportive of the High
Representative. We remain hopeful that the elected
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina will forge a
consensus around defence, constitutional and other
reforms necessary to peace and stability, and ultimately
for EU and NATO integration.

