Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President, I thank
you for ably presiding over the Security Council in July
and for convening this important debate. South Africa
also thanks the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and the representatives of the small island developing
States (SIDS) for their briefings.

South Africa recognizes the fact that sustainable
development and the peace and security of SIDS can
be negatively affected by crime and violence, as well as
by conflict, piracy, trafficking in persons, cybercrime,
drug trafficking and transnational crime. In particular,
the lack of sustainable livelihoods and opportunities for
further education and the break down in community
support structures can lead to increasing numbers of
people becoming involved in crime.

With specific regard to piracy, as early as 2010 South
Africa involved itself in counter-piracy engagements,
which have been formalized in partnerships with other
African Member States, such as Mozambique and
Tanzania, under the auspices of the Southern African
Development Community. That collaboration has
led to various successes, as reflected by the fending-
off of pirate attacks in Tanzanian waters in 2012, in
cooperation with the European Union deployment,
entitled Operation Copper.

Furthermore, Operation Copper has set up training
programmes as a capacity-building mechanism working
with neighbouring countries. More recently, South
Africa has also begun to focus its naval operations on
counter-piracy operations in the Gulf of Guinea. South
Africa therefore supports the efforts of SIDS to:

First, combat trafficking in persons, cybercrime,
drug trafficking, transnational organized crime and
international piracy;

Secondly, promote the accession, ratification and
implementation of applicable conventions;

Thirdly, enact and apply legislation that prohibits
trafficking; and,

Fourthly, promote strong institutions and improve
protection mechanisms to ensure adequate care
for victims of sex trafficking and forced labour, in
accordance with the relevant national and international
agreements and treaties.

Furthermore, my delegation supports the
development of action plans in SIDS aimed at eliminating
violence against women and girls, who are often targets
of gender-based violence and are disproportionately
affected by crime, violence and conflict.

Peace, security, stability and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including the right to
development, as well as respect for cultural diversity,
are essential for achieving sustainable development
and ensuring that sustainable development benefits all.
All countries will face the adverse impacts of climate
change, but the world's most vulnerable peoples will
suffer the most. And yet, those societies are the least
responsible for the global challenges that we are now
facing. In addition to that shared challenge, rising
sea levels owing to climate change ultimately pose an
existential threat to SIDS.

Even climate change scenarios reflecting moderate
warming during this century could have devastating
consequences, as increases in extreme weather and
slow onset events could further worsen food and
water security challenges, undermine community
development, compromise critical infrastructure,
weaken State governance and strain social cohesion.
Such threats, if not addressed in a timely fashion, could
well reshape the future global security environment
by affecting vulnerable countries' political and social
stability and economic security. Strong domestic
action and robust global cooperation is the only way to
tackle those global challenges, particularly through the
adoption of a fair and ambitious multilateral agreement
in Paris at the end of the year at the twenty-first session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Climate Change Conference.

We believe that the Paris agreement should give
equal priority to mitigation and adaptation, while
establishing clear linkages between the action that is
required of countries and the means of implementation.
That should include enhanced support for country-driven
climate action, including for climate change-related
disaster risk management and for building resilience in
all vulnerable regions, such as SIDS, least developed
countries and Africa.

Furthermore, SIDS represent a multidimensional
concept. Specific challenges for small island developing
countries include, among other things, environmental
degradation, natural disasters, food insecurity, water
scarcity, HIV/AIDS, narco-trafficking, small-arms
trafficking and the impact of terrorism on the economic
sectors, particularly tourism. The implementation
of the sustainable development agenda for small
island developing States must proceed despite the
current emphasis on security. In that regard, we must
acknowledge the increased financial and administrative
obligation at the national level that this places on all
small island developing States, as part of the global
fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, South Africa urges the international
community to fulfil its commitments to SIDS and to
help them build their capacity in strategic areas such
as trade, information and communications technology,
investment, capacity-building, disaster management,
the environment, food and agriculture, the oceans,
water, energy, health and education. That will help
them to push back against the plethora of challenges
that have been identified in today's debate.

