The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.

The adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) this evening
was obviously an historic moment for the Council and,
we hope, will mark a turning point in the Council's
approach to the Syrian conflict. It shows that the
Council can take decisive and united action and can use
its authority to help shape a stable and secure future
for all Syrian. We thank Foreign Minister Lavrov
and Secretary of State Kerry and their teams for their
perseverance. We thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Sellstrom and their teams for the effective work
they have done, often in very difficult circumstances,
to present an unequivocal conclusion to the Council
that Chemical weapons were used on 21 August in
Damascus.

As we know, the resolution does a number of
important things. For the first time, it makes clear that
the use of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. Such a
statement from the Council strengthens a fundamental
norm of international relations that we have had for 90
years - that the use of chemical weapons by anyone in
whatever circumstances is abhorrent and constitutes a
very serious breach of international law. The statement
should act as a strong deterrent to anyone who might
contemplate using chemical weapons in the future.

The resolution imposes legally-binding obligations
on Syria to secure and destroy its chemical weapons. The
Syrian authorities must now cooperate unconditionally
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations, put all of Syria's
chemical weapons and related materials and equipment
fully under international supervision and control, and
ensure their complete, final, verifiable and enforceable
destruction. The Council has decided that there will
be consequences under Chapter VII if Syria does not
comply. It is our collective responsibility to remain
vigilant in assessing Syria's compliance with the
resolution.

Importantly, the resolution also reaffirms that
those who perpetrated this mass atrocity crime against
their own citizens must be held accountable for their
actions. Australia's assessment is that the evidence
available shows that it was the Syrian authorities who
were responsible for this crime, and this incident has
confirmed what Australia has said for a long time - that
the Council should refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The historic significance of tonight's resolution
goes well beyond chemical weapons, of course. It
has been 15 months since the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) on Syria's political transition was
agreed. Now, for the first time, it has been endorsed, at
last, by the Security Council. We must build on this as
a matter of urgency. We need to bring the Syrian parties
together so they can agree on a ceasefire and a credible
political transition.

Whatever the importance of tonight's decision,
however, the terrible fact is that Syrians themselves,
their neighbours and the global community face an
ever-accelerating humanitarian catastrophe 4 what
the Secretary-General tonight called "this catalogue of
horrors", There are now over 2 million Syrian refugees,
5 million internally displaced persons, and 8 million in
need of assistance, and more than one-third of Syria's
housing has been destroyed. The Council must address
this humanitarian crisis more decisively and do so now.
As Foreign Minister Asselborn mentioned, it is the
intention of Australia and Luxembourg to circulate a
text shortly that will give strong support to the work of
humanitarian agencies and sets out clearly the concrete
steps that all parties in Syria must take to address the
humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. I ask all of
my Council colleagues to consider that draft favourably
once it is circulated, with a view to the Council's taking
a decision early next week. Each day we delay creates
another 6,000 Syrian refugees.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
Tonight's decision was a momentous one, and I hope
that we shall continue the legacy in the days ahead.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.45 pm.
