Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): We
thank the Secretary-General for producing his
informative report (S/2012/50), and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings today. We believe that the report,
prepared in conjunction with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), provides and
excellent blueprint for moving forward on the piracy
prosecution front. Among other things, the report
provides a most useful and very comprehensive needs
assessment with respect to ongoing efforts in various
regional States, laying out clearly what the current
state of play is in each venue and pinpointing specific
measures that need to be taken in order to move to the
operational phase.

Even as piracy continues to present challenges off
the coast of Somalia, we are cautiously optimistic
about some of the findings in the Secretary-General's
report, including that the success rate of attacks
decreased in 2011. As more nations implement the
guidance provided by the International Maritime

Organization - the industry-developed best-
management practices for protection against Somalia-
based piracy - and employ the use of privately

contracted armed security personnel, we are hopeful
that the numbers will continue to decrease. However,
we remain extremely concerned by reports that the
geographical expanse of pirate operations is intruding
into the southern Red Sea and extending as far as the
eastern Indian Ocean.

In addition to the human toll associated with
piracy, the economic costs of dealing with the piracy
threat are staggering. The grim statistics reinforce the
need, as one part of the solution to the piracy problem,
to establish specialized anti-piracy courts and increase
the capacity to conduct prosecutions. We note that an
ultimate goal in this regard is enhancing Somali
responsibility and active involvement in efforts to
prosecute and incarcerate suspected pirates. As one
aspect of that, we stress the importance of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia enacting
anti-piracy legislation by 18 May, as called for in the
road map to end the transition, and the Transitional
Federal Parliament passing appropriate counter-piracy
legislation before the end of the transitional period in
August.

We applaud the tremendous amount of work
already under way by the UNODC, UNDP and others
to assist Somalia and regional States in conducting
piracy prosecutions. We are very encouraged by the
projection that, with assistance, States in the region
could collectively increase the number of piracy
prosecutions per year by 125, involving up to 1,250
suspects, in accordance with international standards.
That includes, as appropriate, prosecution of planners,
facilitators and financers of piracy attacks.

We thank, among others, the Government of the
Seychelles for its indication of willingness to host a
regional prosecution centre, contingent on the
establishment of an effective post-trial transfer
framework, and we look forward to the opening this
year of its Regional Anti-Piracy Prosecution and
Intelligence Coordination Centre. We also
acknowledge Council resolution 2020 (2011) and its
commendation of INTERPOL for the creation of a
global piracy database designed to consolidate
information about piracy off the coast of Somalia and
facilitate the development of actionable analysis for
law enforcement. We urge all States to share such
information with INTERPOL for use in the database
through appropriate channels.

We recognize that any increase in prosecution
capacity in the region necessarily will require an
increase in prison capacity. In that regard, we support
the continuing efforts of Somali authorities, UNODC,
UNDP and other international partners in supporting
the construction and responsible operation of suitable
and sufficient prisons in Somalia and elsewhere in the
region. For its part, the United States will continue to
aggressively prosecute suspected pirates in cases with a
United States nexus. We have in custody a total of 28
Somalis at various stages of prosecution or
incarceration, in five cases of attacks on American
citizens or interests.

We believe that the report (S/2012/50) of the
Secretary-General demonstrates that the experts of
UNODC, UNDP, the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia and other stakeholders understand
clearly the problems and needs with respect to piracy
prosecutions and how best to address those needs. That
is why contributions to the Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia are so vitally important to permit timely
implementation by UNODC, UNDP and others of as
many of the specific steps called for in the Secretary-
General's report as possible. The United States
contributes regularly to the Trust Fund and is confident
that projects it funds are making a real difference in
building capacity related to the rule of law in the
region, and specifically to countering piracy.

We also recognize the importance to Seychelles
and other States of the region of international
assistance efforts in the form of the provision of
personnel, as called for in the report. We are studying
ways in which we can contribute materially to the joint
United Kingdom-Seychelles proposed regional
anti-piracy prosecution intelligence and information
centre to be located in Victoria, and believe that the
centre will make a material contribution to the
international efforts to disrupt the piracy enterprise
ashore.

Finally, we endorse the report's suggestion that,
as a logical next step, an assessment be conducted,
with the assistance of States active in naval operations,
to help to determine the number of piracy incidents
where suspects are apprehended and released, as well
as the reasons underlying those releases. As the report
notes, that will assist both in sharpening the counter-
piracy strategy and determining the likely anticipated
demand for prosecution capacity in the region for the
foreseeable future.

