Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I, too, will speak in Arabic and am honoured
to do so.

I recall that the Syrian Arab poet Nizar Qabbani,
who is known and read by all Arabs, imagined, if not
predicted, such a scenario and meeting years before his
death in a very famous poem that begins: "Damascus,
the treasure of my dreams, shall I bemoan to you
Arabism or bemoan my fellow Arabs to you?"

I and my generation clearly remember that when
we were at secondary school in the late 1950s and early
1960s, we used to sing the national anthem of the
Algerian revolution in the morning instead of reciting
the Syrian national anthem. We also used to give - or

donate, as we say in the Syrian dialect - our few
pennies of pocket money to Arab liberation movements
in the Gulf that were fighting for their freedom from
British colonialism. As children, we were happy to
donate our pocket money, little as it was, to help liberate
our brothers in the Gulf from colonial control. That was
long before the oil boom. At that time, Arabism was
different from how some people perceive Arabism today.

Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation
to South Africa and to you personally, Mr. President,
for your wise guidance of the work of the Security
Council for this month. We take this opportunity to
underscore once again the pride that we feel in the
victory of your people and the peoples of Africa over
the discriminatory policy of apartheid and in
questioning the positions of some States that pay lip
service to democracy and human rights. We ask them
whom they supported during South Africa's struggle,
which was crowned with success.

Syria is facing decisive and historic challenges.
We wish for such a period to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian population as a result of the
will of our people, not of anyone else. While such
events have broken the hearts of every Syrian, it
compels Syrians of all affiliations and attitudes to
choose the path of wisdom and to be guided by their
resolute patriotic feelings so that the entire homeland,
not part of it, can be victorious.

The Syrian people, who gave the world its first
alphabet, are more familiar with the scent of jasmine
than with the smell of blood in Damascus. The Syrian
people have throughout the ages always been able to
resolve their crises and domestic problems alone. It has
never accepted any form of foreign intervention in the
internal affairs of its homeland, Syria. It stood proud,
refusing to undermine its cultural and national assets.

The Syrian people will do so once again through
the participation of all Syrians to lead them away from
the crisis and to contribute to the march of national
reconstruction, with the primary objective of meeting
the supreme interests of the homeland and nothing else,
in an atmosphere of reconciliation among all. The
homeland is the property of all.

In Syria we do not have a majority and a minority.
There are only Syrians in Syria. I say the homeland is
owned by all, and it is the property of all. It is a trust,
even if some are misled and defy what is right. Syrian
patriotism rejects external intervention and stresses

that Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity are a red line. Syrian patriotism stresses that
Syrians will stand as one against dissent and disorder,
rejecting violence and resort to arms, while calling for
reform. Homelands are built by all their citizens.

We Syrians have an opportunity to launch a
sincere national dialogue and expedite the pace of
reform in order to establish a genuine national
partnership that preserves the security of the homeland
and the citizen. That is the only way out of the crisis -
a solution that responds to the legitimate aspirations
and demands of the Syrian people without undermining
the homeland. Future generations will hold accountable
everyone who squandered this opportunity.

The Arab people would have very much hoped
that the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and current Chairman of its Council of Ministers had
come to the Security Council to request the Council to
shoulder its responsibilities to end the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories and escalating settler activities and
killing. How strange it is for us to see some members
of the League of Arab States resort to seeking the
Security Council's support against Syria - Syria,
which has never thought twice about making the
ultimate sacrifice in defence of Arab causes.

Those who believe that the States that I am
referring to; who have always stood for just Arab
causes in the Council and beyond; who demonstrate
their enthusiasm for the Arab League out of respect for
its decisions; and who believe that these States are with
us are truly deluding themselves. The fact is that this
enthusiasm has emerged in a context diametrically
opposed to the rightful interests of Arab causes.

What is new today, however, is that the Arab
League has decided to take its decisions to the Security
Council, which has imposed hundreds of vetoes against
Arab causes. What is new is that the Arab League has
transferred these unjust decisions to Syria behind
Syria's back, as it were, and without consulting with its
leadership, in a way that runs counter to the Charter of
the League of Arab States and paves the way for an
ongoing scenario of aggressive interference in the
internal affairs of Syria.

These plans have cross-fertilized with other
schemes and interests of non-Arab States that seek to
destroy and destabilize Syria. This has happened for no
other reason than that Syria does not want to depend on
anyone and will not allow its sovereignty to be
compromised, and because it insists on the
independence of its decisions and on the preservation
of its sovereignty and the interests and security of its
people.

After some powerful circles imposed on this
international organization a policy of double standards,
which it incorporated into every aspect of its work,
howsoever tacit or unwritten, we are now witnessing
the onset of a new phase based on creating illusory
terms of reference and on a policy of distortion and
imposing false facts. Some try to convince world
public opinion that those who seek to defend the
independence of their countries - following in the
footsteps of such great leaders, such as Simon Bolivar,
Gandhi, Dmitry Donskov, Mandela, George Washington,
Mossadeq, De Gaulle, Nasser, Emir Abdul Qadir
al-Jazairi, Sultan Basha al-Atrash, Ho Chi Minh and
Sun Yat-sen - are classified as terrorists and pariahs,
working outside international legitimacy.

Those who are trying to preserve their country
and save it from creative chaos and terror have become
violators of human rights and killers of their own
people. Those who win the support of the majority of
their people have lost legitimacy and have to step down.
It is really strange these days to find certain oligarchic
States that sponsor draft resolutions promoting the
alternation of power, the freedom to demonstrate,
democracy and the protection and promotion of human
rights, do not even have a constitution, let alone a
genuine electoral system, and only exercise democracy
through satellite stations and fancy conference halls.

Those same countries unfortunately resort to the
Security Council to ask Syria for reform and for
democracy. Syria had a parliamentary Government in
1919, one year after the fall of the Ottoman Empire,
while Lawrence of Arabia was wreaking havoc with the
destinies and resources of our region and trying to turn
the clock back on obscurantism.

Syria signed the protocol admitting the Arab
observers because we were eager to keep this issue
under the Arab roof. Syria proved its full and unerring
commitment to the Arab plan of action and the protocol
signed between it and the Secretariat of the League of
Arab States. The report of the observer mission
(S/2012/71, enclosure 4) confirms that fact in
paragraphs 37, 38, 39 and 73. It confirms clearly what
we have been saying. It confirms that there is a
misleading, deliberate, systematic and politically

motivated media campaign to distort and fabricate facts
on the ground. I would refer in particular to
paragraphs 29, 68 and 69 of the report. The report also
notes in paragraphs 26, 27, 71 and 75 the presence of
terrorist groups that have exploited the legitimate
demands of the Syrian people for reform to destabilize
Syria, undermine its security, and undertake terrorist
attacks against the institutions of the State and against
civilians and military personnel alike.

Furthermore, paragraph 44 of the report clearly
indicates that Gilles Jacquier, the French journalist,
was killed as a result of mortar attacks fired by the
opposition. Syria finds it strange that this tragic event
did not move the French diplomacy to indignation,
particularly given that Syria established a committee of
inquiry to investigate the details of the event, chaired
by a judge and with the participation of a representative
of the French television channel at which the journalist
used to work.

The Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States read out some paragraphs in his statement. I
regret that he selected some items from the report (see S/2012/71, enclosure 4) and left out others. I would
like to read from paragraph 26:

"In certain situations, Government forces
responded to attacks against their personnel with
force. The observers noted that some of the
armed groups were using flares and armour-
piercing projectiles".

The Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, who is a dear colleague, objected to requests by
members of the Council to invite General Al-Dabi to
participate in today's meeting. The report of the Arab
observers was not sent to the Council as part of the
documents that were dispatched from the headquarters
of the League of Arab States.

The decision by the League of Arab States to go
to the Council is but an attempt to bypass the success
of the mission of the Arab observers and to ignore its
report. The report, unfortunately, went against the
schemes of some Arab and non-Arab parties who falsely
claimed a commitment to the Arab role in settling the
Syrian crisis while they simultaneously worked, using
different means, to abort the observer mission while
waging a fierce political and media war against it.
Certain Arab officials and some Europeans have
questioned the usefulness of the mission, including the
Prime Minister of Qatar, who visited New York,
Washington and other capitals only two weeks after the
mission began its work, making statements to the effect
that the continuation of the observer mission was
useless and asking that the Syrian issue be transferred
to the Security Council. That occurred while Syria was
fully committed to the provisions of the protocol,
despite a twofold increase in the number of
Government forces killed and a threefold increase in
the number of acts of aggression against public and
private property. That was all due to instructions to
armed groups from outside the country to use the
mission's presence as a time for escalation.

Syria rejects any decision outside the agreed Arab
plan of action and the protocol that it signed with the
League of Arab States. It considers the resolution
adopted by the meeting of the Council of the League of
Arab States a violation of its national sovereignty, a
flagrant interference in its internal affairs and a blatant
violation of the purposes for which the League of Arab
States was established. It is also a violation of article 8
of the Charter of the League of Arab States. Strangely
enough, the League of Arab States requested the Syrian
Government to extend the observer mission for another
month. Damascus agreed immediately. However, the
League of Arab States soon contradicted itself, ignoring
the findings of the mission's report, attempting to
transfer the crisis of an Arab country to the Security
Council, and halting the continuing work of the
observer mission.

The unbridled tendency of certain Western States
to interfere in our internal and external affairs by
various means is neither sudden nor novel. It has
frequently and systematically occurred since the
Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 and the Balfour
Declaration of 1917, not to mention the limitless
support provided to Israel's aggressive and hostile
policies and its occupation of Arab lands.

We all know that the international legal
framework within whose parameters States operate is
based on respect for national sovereignty and
non-interference in internal affairs. Those two principles
are enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations, not Article 52, to which Mr. Elaraby referred,
as well as in article 8 of the Charter of the League of
Arab States. In that context, we stress the exclusive
responsibility of the Syrian Government in the
preservation of civic peace and security and in
protecting its citizens from acts of destruction and

sabotage undertaken by armed groups, not by peaceful
demonstrators, in accordance with Syrian law as well
as with the international agreements to which Syria is a
party, including the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights.

Regrettably, instead of respecting those established
principles of international law, and in the context of
feverish attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of
Syria by co-sponsors of the French resolution against
Syria, certain officials have suddenly fallen in love
with the Syrian people after centuries of emotional
hibernation towards them. Such people foolishly dream
of the return of colonialism and hegemony through
these resolutions. They concoct new terms to justify
interference in Syria's internal affairs by misleading
global public opinion. They are doing exactly what they
did when they misled the world when 130,000 Libyan
civilians were killed, and when 1 million Iraqis were
killed under the pretext of looking for weapons of mass
destruction that were never there to begin with, and
under the pretext of promoting democracy. That is what
they did with respect to the destruction of Afghanistan,
under the pretext of fighting terrorism, or when they
established clandestine prisons and detention centres in
Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib, under the pretext of
promoting freedom.

We stress that Syria draws its strength from the
strength of its people and that it will stand firm in
confronting the enemies of its people. We call upon all
those Arabs and non-Arabs who are fomenting the
crisis and who are bent on exacerbating it to reconsider
those policies and to stop massacring Syrian civilians.
One cannot be an arsonist and a fire-fighter at the same
time. We call on them to support national dialogue and
the Syrian political reform process, as implemented by
the Syrian leadership in response to the legitimate
demands of the people.

By way of example, in February we will hold a
referendum on a new, finalized constitution for the
country that guarantees party and political pluralism as
well as alternation of power. Parliamentary elections
will also be held in the first half of the year, leaving the
final say to the democratic ballot box.

In conclusion, we expect the Security Council to
be a platform for encouraging dialogue as a way to
settle crises. We do not expect it to create or aggravate
crises. We believe that an exacerbation of the crisis
will undermine, not preserve, international peace and
security. In that regard, we welcome the recent initiative
of the Russian Federation to sponsor an all-Syrian
dialogue in Moscow to find a solution to the crisis.

