Mr. Costa: It is an honour to address again this
session of the Council. Since I was last invited to brief
the Council in October 2006, members have had the
chance to see directly the debilitating effects that drugs
and crime have had on Afghanistan.

Today, I would like to brief the Council on the
latest opium crop survey carried out by my Office.
Copies of the survey in my hand have been distributed.
First - the opium situation: at present, it is easy to be
pessimistic about the situation in Afghanistan,
especially regarding opium. But our winter assessment
shows a new and possibly encouraging phenomenon:
divergent cultivation trends between the centre-north
and the centre-south of the country, as was just noted
by Special Representative Koenigs.

In the centre-north of Afghanistan security and
development are slowly taking hold. We know from
experience that stability and assistance help farmers
turn their back on drug cultivation. That has happened
in the Andean region and in South-East Asia. It is now
happening in parts of Afghanistan, where a balanced
system of retribution and rewards is creating an opium-
free belt across the middle of the country, from the
borders with Pakistan in the south-east to the border of
Turkmenistan in the north-west.

I am happy about the establishment of a Good
Performance Fund to benefit provincial administrations
that eradicate poppy. Rewarding compliance with the
law is our best chance of doubling the number of
opium-free provinces from 6 in 2006, mostly around
Kabul, to about 12 provinces by the end of the current
harvest cycle. If that happens, it would mean that a
third of the country would be practically without any
opium cultivation by summer 2007.

In the south of the country the story is different.
There, the vicious circle of drugs funding terrorism and
terrorism funding the drug trade is stronger than ever.
The resulting ever-increasing opium cultivation in the
five provinces of Helmand, Kandahar, Uruzgan, Zabul
and Nimroz is an issue of insurgency as much as a drug
problem. It is therefore vital to fight them both
together, at the same time, with the same weapons.
During my recent visit to Kabul, I was glad to learn
from both military and counter-narcotic officials that
they appreciate that argument and are developing
complementary rules of engagement.

In Afghanistan, the drug problem occurs in a
security vacuum - that is known by all - where illicit

crops coexist with other criminal activities that support
such cultivation. Foremost among those activities is the
importation of precursor chemicals needed to produce
heroin and the exportation of the illicit proceeds
derived from the opium cultivation. The relevant
numbers are big - so big that their lack of detection is
a revealing story in itself.

Think about the following: first, last year alone,
more than 1,000 tons of acetic anhydride were
smuggled into Afghanistan, together with five times as
many tons of other chemical derivatives needed for
drug refining in a country without any chemical
industry. Secondly, more than $3 billion of illicit drug
money was moved in the opposite direction, into
havens where it was laundered and put beyond
reproach. Therefore, border management needs to be
improved in the region.

At the moment, the Government of Afghanistan is
in no position to control its territory, let alone its
borders. Its neighbours and all those with a stake in
stopping the flow of drugs, chemical precursors and
money must help. The United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime has recently proposed a major initiative to
assist Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan to improve border
management and anti-narcotic intelligence cooperation.
The initiative includes physical infrastructures, border
posts, trenches and containment walls, together with
border security encampments.

Operational measures will also be improved, with
joint interception exercises, intelligence-led
investigations, common border liaison offices and
compatible communication systems. Controls at the sea
borders of Iran and Pakistan need to be reinforced,
together with better border checks at freight crossings
into Afghanistan. Attention must be devoted to
container security and to the interception of cargos that
are mislabelled to hide chemical precursors.

Thirdly, I salute the efforts to bring major drug
traffickers to justice. The Council's mission reports
refer to a culture of impunity in Afghanistan. I
therefore applaud the Council's decision in resolution
1735 (2006) of 22 December 2006 to add major drug
traffickers to the consolidated list of individuals and
entities supporting Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In
general, the challenge is to strengthen Afghanistan's
criminal justice system and prosecute people who are
profiting from drugs and crime. In particular,
resolution 1735 (2006) will make it easier to interdict
the incipient Afghan drug cartels, prevent their
operatives from travelling abroad, confiscate their
assets and facilitate their arrest and extradition.

Fourthly and finally, I must mention the cancer of
corruption. The report correctly recognizes bribery,
dishonesty and corruption as major threats to
Afghanistan. These crimes undermine the rule of law.
They are especially ominous as they lubricate the drug
machinery and provide the context for criminal
activity. They facilitate the evolution of the narco-
economy into a tolerated form of enrichment. They
help illicit revenues sink their buying power into legal
economic activity, government structures and
provincial administrations.

Afghanistan has recently ratified the United
Nations Convention against Corruption. As custodian
of this Convention, my Office attaches particular
importance to the fact that Afghanistan is a State party
to the Convention and intends to assist Afghanistan to
comply with the resulting international obligations. In
doing so, it counts on generous funding from Canada.
The general goal is to strengthen the country's legal
and administrative capability, educate a new generation
of young and honest civil servants, enforce corruption
prevention through financial disclosures and
competitive tender processes, and promote
anticorruption investigations, prosecution and the
recovery of illicit proceeds.

With regard to the Afghan opium situation in the
spring of 2007, I stress four points: first, the new,
potentially positive cultivation trends; secondly, the
urgent need to strengthen border control; thirdly, the
importance of the Council's decision to list the major
drug traffickers; and fourthly, the priority of promoting
honest governance. I hope the Council will judge these
developments as helpful in freeing Afghanistan from
the tragedy of drugs, crime and violence.

