Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by expressing the gratitude of the
delegation of Egypt to the presidency for organizing
this important debate on peacebuilding in Africa,
which is indeed a very relevant topic and one that goes
to the heart of the mandate of the Security Council and
peacekeeping. We also welcome presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/12, which you, Sir, prepared. We would
also like to say how much we appreciate some of the
ideas expressed here during the debate.

Over the past few years, we have witnessed an
unprecedented increase in United Nations efforts in
the area of peacebuilding. Those efforts have been
crowned with the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016)
parallel to General Assembly resolution 70/262,
and those resolutions set out a global approach that
takes into account activities and factors that are
essential for peacebuilding. We hope that such an
approach will provide the necessary political dynamic
needed to consolidate peacebuilding in Africa. The
emerging and new challenges that Africa is facing,
including the expansion of terrorist groups, organized
crime, environmental challenges, as well as other
non-traditional challenges, all demand that we adopt
an innovative approach in order to tackle them. The
nature of those challenges has led us to join together in
resolving conflicts via peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding efforts in order to achieve sustainable
development, all against a backdrop of an ongoing,
sustainable process. We must therefore rid ourselves of
the notion of conflict management, and instead focus
on an approach for resolving conflicts by tackling their
root causes.

We cannottalkaboutpeacebuildinginAfricawithout
mentioning the key role of comprehensive and inclusive
national reconciliation and of security sector reform
in both its military and police components. Moreover,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
will be in vain unless the economic and social needs of
the people are addressed in order to ensure the process
is successful. We also need to ensure socialjustice and
that the judicial system is independent and impartial
and the rule of law prevails. We must also strengthen
the relevant institutions in all of the corresponding
areas, which are the main peacebuilding priorities in
Africa.

Wecannotdisregardthelinksbetweenpeacebuilding
in Africa and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), nor the link between peacebuilding in
Africa and the African Union's Agenda 2063, which is
an expression of Africa's determination and reflects the
specific priorities and needs of Africa.

One also cannot talk about good governance, the
rule of law, democratic principles or justice in societies
suffering from hunger, disease and poverty - societies
that are deprived of the foundations of a dignified life
according to internationally recognized standards.
Therefore, it is essential to lay the political, economic
and social groundwork so that the process of
sustainable development is built on a sound foundation.
In that context, Egypt, through the Egyptian agency
of cooperation for development, has trained more than
700 experts from countries that are on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the security, medical,
judicial and agricultural sectors. This initiative is part
ofa process aimed at strengthening the human resource
capacity in those countries.

I would like to reiterate several basic points.

First, we need to adhere to the principle of
ownership in efforts aimed at building peace in Africa.
National authorities need to determine their priorities
and the way to implement them. The same idea also
applies to strengthening institutions.

Secondly, it is important to increase the effectiveness
of the Peacebuilding Commission so that it can play its
role as a coordinating body of national, regional and
international efforts and advise the Security Council, so
that it in turn can develop mandates that are conducive
to peacebuilding, especially sustainable peace.

Thirdly, it is essential to provide sustainable,
predictable, and timely financing for peacebuilding
efforts in Africa. We must also work towards
maximizing the coordination of international financial
institutions and bolstering the investment capacities
of the Peacebuilding Fund in order to strengthen its
human and institutional capacities.

F ourthly, promoting the participation of women and
young people in Africa is also crucial, especially in the
planning and implementation stage of peacebuilding
activities throughout the continent.

Fifthly, we must implement African post-conflict
reconstruction and development policies and promote
the African solidarity initiative in the framework of
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture. Egypt has previously proposed setting up
a specialized centre for reconstruction and development
in Africa as a necessary step. The centre could bolster
all peacebuilding efforts and institutions in Africa.
We welcome Mr. Chergui's proposal of to hold annual
meetings with a view to sharing experiences and
lessons learned, which could be part of a true strategic
partnership between the two organizations.

To truly sustain peace, we will need significant
resources and we will need to take advantage of lessons
learned and the experiences we have built up. We will
need to put an end to the dividing up and duplication
of work, which undermines the effectiveness of United
Nations efforts towards sustainable peacebuilding in
Africa.

