Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I very much welcome the
opportunity to participate in this open debate of the
Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I would first like to say a few words on behalf
of the Commission. I wanted initially to express
appreciation for the recognition of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission that has been expressed by
so many here around the table this morning.

I believe that today's debate is very timely in the
light of the three reviews on the United Nations related
to its peace and security agenda that have been presented
to Member States over the last couple of months.

The reviews make a strong case for changing the
way we do business in order to ensure a more effective
response and support to sustaining peace. More
integrated, coherent and holistic action is called for in
order for our common goal of building and sustaining
peace not to be relegated to a near afterthought, but
rather to put it at the centre of what we do. That will
require concerted efforts from all of us, within our
respective roles, as well as a real shift towards working
better together.

With only 10 years in the making, the Peacebuilding
Commission is still one of the youngsters in the United
Nations family. I would like to highlight three features
that make the PBC a fairly unique intergovernmental
advisory platform to the Security Council, upon its
request, and that have made useful contributions in
support of the countries with which it has engaged over

the years.

First, the countries with which the PBC engages are
always at the centre of our deliberations. Durable peace
can be achieved only at the national level and requires
strong national leadership, building, inter alia, on broad,
inclusive processes. Without their perspective, our
understanding will fall short of addressing the specific
challenges they face. Therefore, it is imperative that we
focus our support on strengthening the capacities of
post-conflict countries in order for them to take the lead
and exercise full national ownership. It is also therefore
a critical aspect of the PBC's advisory function to help
integrate the national perspectives of the countries on
its agenda.

Secondly, the PBC is a staunch advocate for
improved cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union (AU). During the just-concluded Africa
Week, the impressive depth and breadth of the activities
undertaken by both the AU and the regional economic
communities in responding to conflict became clear.

Closer cooperation means first of all that we
listen. By virtue of being neighbours in the region,
these actors have a more intimate understanding of the
issues at hand; they are often more invested; and they
often have a lot of credibility at the national level. By
drawing on these actors' knowledge and experience,
we gain a deeper understanding of country-specific
realities, which in turn is a prerequisite for effective
United Nations support.

The Peacebuilding Commission forged stronger
partnership with regional and subregional actors as a
matter of priority, and we encourage others to do the
same.

Thirdly, the unique composition structure of the
PBC membership ensures that peacebuilding strategies
receive the broad support of key stakeholders, which
contribute to and engage in the process of the design
and implementation of these strategies, both in
New York and in the field. For example, through the
membership of the top troop- and police-contributing
countries, the PBC can help ensure a more holistic
approach when considering decisions on transitions
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We engage
with those that are implementing the often far-reaching
peacekeeping mandates. Our membership also includes
key donors, including the international financial
institutions. Consultations with, and contributions
from, these stakeholders can help to ensure greater
coherence and continuity of international engagement
and support throughout the so-called conflict cycle.

Turning to the relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission - a
relationship that is of fundamental importance to our
ability to fulfil our mandate and to deliver on our
advisory function - I should like to highlight three
points where our respective bodies might work even
better together.

First, through its convening role of a wide array
of critical regional and international actors, we can
help bring a peacebuilding perspective to the Council's
decision-making. Our input contributes to breaking
the silos between United Nations principal organs and
actors and addressing fragmentation and duplication of
effort by bringing together security and development
actors.

Secondly, the PBC can help formulate the post-
conflict strategies of the countries requesting our
advice and bring priority peacebuilding issues to the
attention of the Security Council upon its request.

Lastly, in support of the drawdown phase of
peacekeeping operations, the PBC's partnerships with
regional organizations and international and regional
financial institutions will help sustain attention and
commitment from the international community to
national peacebuilding priorities, focusing in particular
on addressing the root causes of conflict and supporting
post-conflict peacebuilding objectives.

In conclusion, the report of the Advisory Group
of Experts entitled "The Challenge of Sustaining
Peace" will be under consideration by Member States.
It provides important recommendations on how to
strengthen the relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Council. The Group recommends
that the Security Council regularly request and draw
upon the advice of the PBC. We can certainly do
more from our side as well in terms of providing
more timely, relevant and strategic advice on post-
conflict peacebuilding to the Council. A number of
recommendations in the report aim at ensuring that we
remain an effective instrument that can help the Council
meet its longer-term objective, and it is certainly our
ambition to try to live up to that.

I should now like to say a few words in my national
capacity under rule 37 and on behalf of the Nordic
countries, namely, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway
and my own country, Sweden.
A few weeks ago, world leaders gathered here in
New York to adopt an agenda of historic significance.
The 2030 Agenda sets the world on a path towards
sustainable development. A month before that, leaders
met in Addis Ababa to agree on means of financing
for development, and we are now optimistically
looking ahead to Paris, where we are, hopefully, set to
embrace a universal and ambitious climate agreement.
These achievements are signs of political will. They
demonstrate our ability to unite and find collective
solutions to face the most serious challenges of our
time. Vigorous strides are being made with respect to
the development leg of the United Nations.

At the same time, the peace and security leg is
hobbled. The number of conflicts in the world is at its
highest since the 19605. The number of people fleeing
from war, persecution and poverty is the highest since
the end of the Second World War. We have failed in
prevention, and we have failed in our response. The
Security Council is clearly falling short of its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security. The
determination that the international community has
demonstrated in the areas of sustainable development
financing and climate must be matched by Council
resolve to redouble its efforts in support of diplomacy,
good offices and political solutions. The world has
a right to expect that the Security Council and its
members will be guided first and foremost by the ideals
set out in the United Nations Charter.

We believe that we need a more effective,
representative and transparent Security Council that
can adequately respond to today's challenges.

First, limiting the use of the veto would be a key step
in enhancing the Council's ability to respond to global
crises. Therefore, we the Nordic countries strongly
support the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes elaborated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, as well as the Franco-Mexican
initiative to restrain the use of the veto. We encourage
those Member States that have not done so to come
forward and support those initiatives.

Secondly, we need a reformed Council that is truly
representative and that reflects the geopolitical realities
of today, and in which Africa, Asia and Latin America
are adequately represented. The Nordic countries
support the intergovernmental process on Security
Council reform and efforts to move this process
forward.

Thirdly, we need more transparency. Open debates
and public briefings serve to make the Council more
open to the wider membership, thereby contributing
to strengthening the buy-in and the legitimacy of its
decisions. The use of new technology offers new
opportunities.

A topical matter is the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General. We expect the Council to
do its part in ensuring that the landmark resolution
adopted in September (General Assembly resolution 69/321) is fully and promptly acted upon. As a first
step, the next President of the Council should, together
with the President of the General Assembly, kick-start
the nomination process with a joint letter calling for
qualified candidates, especially women.

Fourthly, we need a more holistic approach,
as highlighted in all the recent reports on peace
operations, peacebuilding and resolution 1325 (2000).
Active consultation and dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as with countries on
the Council's agenda, leads to a richer understanding
of the challenges and potential solutions. The use
of other instruments, such as the horizon-scanning
briefings, Arria Formula meetings and informal
interactive dialogues, can help bring potential crises
and deteriorating situations to the early attention of
Council members. Such interaction helps the Council
to devise preventive measures.

Finally, we need more efficiency. New non-permanent
members need to be prepared when they join the
Council. We welcome last year's decision to hold
Council elections six months before the start of the new
members" term. We note the annual Finnish workshop
called "Hitting the ground running", which aims at
providing new members with an in-depth orientation
to Council practice, procedures and working methods.

The expectations regarding the Security Council
are high. The challenges in coming to grips with the
new threats are indeed very daunting, but we believe
that the Council can move to become more effective.
Above all, that requires political will and that members
of the Council take their roles and responsibilities with
the utmost sincerity and with the full realization that
their task is to put the Charter of the United Nations
above their narrow national interests.

