I thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts over the past several days to accommodate this important issue before the Security Council. We appreciate Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo's insightful remarks. Through our engagement as a facilitator and observer of the negotiations on an agreement for the filling and operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam over the last several months, the United States understands and appreciates the importance of the Nile River to the histories and futures of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan. We have seen first-hand how the Nile is deeply intertwined with the national identities of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan and how its future is of paramount importance to the livelihoods and well-being of their peoples. I know first-hand that President Trump has prioritized the Renaissance Dam within our Cabinet. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam poses a unique opportunity for this part of Africa, where droughts, desertification and economic underdevelopment have befallen generations of people. An agreement on the Renaissance Dam has the potential to transform a region that is home to over 250 million people, expanding economic opportunities through transboundary cooperation and regional integration. Increased food security, improved energy access and expanded agriculture projects are just a few of the transformational benefits that the dam can afford the region. The considerable work by Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan over the past several months shows that it is possible to reach a balanced and equitable agreement that takes into account the interests of the three countries if there is a commitment among all to do so. We commend the Government of the Sudan and Prime Minister Hamdok's Administration for the ongoing efforts to encourage this process and bring the parties together, including by hosting talks earlier this month. The United States takes note of the recent efforts of the African Union to facilitate additional discussions among the three countries on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. We acknowledge the efforts of South African President Ramaphosa to bring this issue before the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government. We recognize that this issue is before the Council because time is short and the window to achieving such an agreement may be rapidly closing. We encourage all countries to build on their substantial progress in prior negotiations and the compromises that led to that progress, and further call on all countries to refrain from making any statements or taking any actions that would undermine the goodwill necessary to achieve an agreement. We strongly believe that, with constructive dialogue and cooperation, a solution is within reach, and we reaffirm our commitment to remaining engaged with the three countries until they conclude a final agreement. We look forward to receiving further reports on this very important issue.
