Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I should like first of
all to thank you, Sir, for arranging this important public
meeting on Kosovo. We appreciate your initiative to
hold an open debate on a comprehensive assessment of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). To look beyond the present developments on
the ground, to make an effort to overview the current
results and to approach a consolidated vision of
Kosovo's prospects - this is an ambitious and difficult
task.

While this idea can eventually become another
benchmark on the Security Council's agenda, my
delegation would like to contribute to the discussion
and to outline what we think are the challenges and
prospects ahead.

I am glad to welcome here the Deputy Prime
Minister of the Yugoslav constituent Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Nebojsa Covic', and to thank him for his
lucid statement and important messages and, in
particular, for sharing with us his vision of the future
status of Kosovo.

My special thanks also go to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, whose energetic and result-oriented approaches
we highly appreciate. On behalf of the Government of
Ukraine, I would like to express our full support for the
priorities outlined in his statement and to pledge our
full cooperation. I hope that what we have
accomplished today, no less than what we have failed
to accomplish, will encourage and help both Mr.
Steiner and Mr. Covie in their efforts to tackle the
present problems in Kosovo.

My delegation supports the statement made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

In our view, the current situation in Kosovo
should be looked at foremost from the standpoint of
accomplishing the main tasks of the international
security and civil presence there. Despite a
considerable number of critical comments made today,
one can see that the general tendency in assessing the
current political situation in Kosovo is quite positive.
The records of the recent meetings on Kosovo clearly
indicate that, on the majority of the internal Kosovo
bedrock issues, the Council members are close to
consensus. Our optimism is also based on the progress
achieved by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in establishing self-
governing institutions in Kosovo, in strengthening the
rule of law, in developing cooperation with the
Yugoslav authorities and in fighting organized crime.
Ukraine welcomes and recognizes all these results.

At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
over the critical situation in the area of the return and
protection of national minorities, which might require,
in our view, a completely new strategy. In this regard,
we call on UNMIK to pay particular attention to
implementing confidence-building measures between
all national communities in Kosovo and, together with
KFOR, to taking robust steps to further improve the
security environment in the province. We also appeal to
the Kosovo self-governing institutions and all Kosovo
leaders to actively promote security and returns and to
vehemently combat extremism in all its forms and
manifestations.

It might seem to be quite a paradox, but in
settling the Kosovo issue, the international community
still lacks the most important tool: a general vision and
a single comprehensive strategy on the future of
Kosovo as a multi-ethnic society. Though the wide
range of tasks outlined in resolution 1244 (1999) is in
the process of completion, today it is practically
impossible to assess general progress in the province
and, in many cases, UNMIK and KFOR remain in the
position of so-called firefighters on an ad hoc basis.

In such circumstances, all the positive elements
of the Security Council's deliberations on the Kosovo
issue and all the appeals to establish a secure
environment and to promote a climate of law and order
can easily be considered as some kind of snapshot, as
Ambassador Mahbubani of Singapore called it during
one of our previous debates on Kosovo. In this regard,
I cannot but cite a number of conclusions reached by
the International Crisis Group (ICG) in its recent
report, "A Kosovo Roadmap":

"In order to move towards a resolution of
Kosovo's final status, two distinct aspects need to
be considered: an 'external' and an 'internal'
dimension. The 'external' dimension involves
devising a process to address final status,
including all of the different actors with a stake in
Kosovo's future. The 'internal' dimension
concerns the development of Kosovo's own
democratic institutions, the rule of law and
human rights, so as to prepare Kosovo for
whatever final status may eventually be agreed."

As the ICG mentions, these two parallel paths
need to be negotiated simultaneously in order to reach
the desired destination: a stable, democratic Kosovo
standing on its own feet, peacefully integrated into its
region and with a clearly defined place in the
international community. My delegation does not
support all the conclusions reached by the Group, but
we believe that, in the future, there will be a need to
start elaborating a common comprehensive vision of
possible ways to ensure a democratic, multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo.

From our viewpoint, this strategy has to reflect
the further commitment of the international community
to political and economic stabilization in Kosovo. We
believe that it should include the concept of
performance standards outlined today by Special
Representative Steiner. It should also encourage a
stable partnership between the self-governing
institutions of Kosovo and the Yugoslav authorities and
strengthen the dialogue between Kosovo Albanians,
Kosovo Serbs and other national minorities in the
province.
Ukraine welcomes the recent progress achieved
by UNMIK in the formation of the executive bodies of
the provisional institutions of self-government of
Kosovo. In particular, we commend the readiness of all
the communities to participate in their activities and to
promote an inter-communal confidence-building
dialogue.

My delegation considers the recent transfer of the
Kosovo Albanian detainees from Serbia to Kosovo to
be an important step in this regard. We fully support
the view that attention should now be turned to
accelerating the process of determining the fate of
missing persons of all communities.

As UNMIK enters a new, potentially more
dangerous phase in the sphere of anti-crime activities,
my delegation expresses its full support for the Mission
and calls for all necessary measures to be taken to
combat organized crime and terrorism in the province.
We also note with satisfaction the clear vision outlined
by Mr. Steiner of Kosovo's economic priorities, aimed
at reviving the economy and creating new jobs.
International assistance and help is greatly required for
these tasks, which are among the most burning issues
in the province.

Finally, in pledging our support to Mr. Steiner
and his team, I would like to conclude by quoting his
famous compatriot, renowned poet Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, who once said:

"Until one is committed, there is hesitancy, the
chance to draw back, always ineffectiveness
Concerning all acts of initiative and creation,
there is one elementary truth, ignorance of which
kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the
moment one definitely commits oneself, then
providence moves too Whatever you can do,
begin it. Boldness has genius, power and magic in
it. Begin it now."

