Mr. Erdogan (Turkey) (spoke in Turkish; English text provided by the delegation): It gives me great
pleasure to be here today. Let me at the outset extend
my sincere thanks to President Obama for his initiative
to convene this Security Council summit focusing on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, as well as
nuclear safety and security. The summit gives us an
opportunity to discuss these issues, which require
global attention and attention at the highest level.
Those factors make this meeting very pertinent and
timely. We share a common responsibility towards
humanity on these matters.

Forty years ago, when the threat of nuclear
destruction was hovering over the fortunes of mankind
with a greater magnitude than today, leaders of the
world united to produce the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is
indisputably one of the most important treaties of the
twentieth century. The Treaty is very important because
it reflects mankind's universal and fundamental desire
for peace and security. Today it remains as relevant and
indispensable as it was 40 years ago, with its three
mutually reinforcing pillars: non-proliferation, nuclear
disarmament/general and complete disarmament, and
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

Over the years, much has been achieved along
these lines. However, there is still a need to bolster the
integrity and credibility of the NPT regime. Therefore,
I believe that today's meeting is an important
opportunity to demonstrate our readiness to achieve
these goals and demonstrate strong global ownership to
this end. I believe that will re-energize the international
community and lead to new initiatives as we head
towards the NPT Review Conference next year.

There is a need for an incremental and sustained
approach with respect to nuclear disarmament. In this
regard, the unequivocal undertaking by all five nuclear
weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of
their nuclear arsenals is therefore one of the big
achievements of the NPT. This responsibility must now
be upheld, building on article VI of the Treaty and the
13 practical steps for nuclear disarmament agreed upon
in year 2000. It is in this context that we welcome and
encourage the efforts to replace the Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty (START) with a new legally binding
instrument.

Irreversible progress on nuclear disarmament will
also reinforce the other two pillars of the NPT. In
particular, it is important that nuclear non-proliferation
should go hand in hand with nuclear disarmament
efforts. That should include the entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the initiation
of negotiations for a fissile material cut-off treaty in
the Conference on Disarmament and promoting role of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the
sole multilateral body in advancing the safe and
peaceful use of nuclear technology.

On the other hand, Turkey believes that States in
full compliance with their safeguards obligations
should enjoy unfettered access to civilian nuclear
energy as enshrined in the NPT. We believe that in this
day and age, having weapons of mass destruction is not
going to bring additional safety or security to any
country. On the contrary, those weapons endanger
peace and stability. It is for that reason that Turkey
believes that it is very important to have nuclear-free
zones, especially and starting with the Middle East,
and we continue to support such activities in all areas,
particularly in the Middle East.

It is also very important that the safety of nuclear
resources remain a priority issue for the international
community. There is no doubt that confidence in
nuclear sources will continue to be very important. On
the other hand, nuclear terrorism and illicit trafficking
in nuclear material pose a grave security threat that
needs to be addressed with a global commitment.

Within this framework, we should work on a
comprehensive and mutually reinforcing approach,
making use of available United Nations and IAEA
conventions, as well as other applicable multilateral
instruments. Resolution 1540 (2004) and its effective
implementation is thus of great importance.

Against this background, I would like to take this
opportunity to say that we support the resolution that
we voted upon this morning (resolution 1887 (2009)).

