Ms. Pillay: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council. I shall base my remarks on the experience
gained over the past few years by my Office and the
human rights components in peacekeeping operations.

Nine peacekeeping operations currently have an
explicit mandate to protect civilians. My Office has
worked together with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) to develop policies, guidance and
training on the protection of civilians, building on the
wealth of often innovative approaches that have been
developed in the field.

In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, the human
rights component has dispatched multidisciplinary
protection teams to volatile areas. In Mali, human
rights mobile teams have been deployed to areas at risk,
and human rights call-centres were set up during the
elections. In Afghanistan, civilian casualty monitoring
has provided the basis for influential advocacy, such
as the 8 February report issued jointly by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR).

Human rights officers have also advised on United
Nations military preventive deployments, contingency
plans and sheltering and escorting civilians. They have
also provided a critical bridge with local communities,
human rights defenders and women's groups for
alerts on risks of gross human rights violations. The
human rights due-diligence policy has also contributed
to preventing and addressing violations. All those
approaches are strongly grounded in human rights
functions.
Our experience confirms that timely and well-
resourced human rights monitoring, advocacy and
reporting are essential for the effective implementation
of protection-of-civilians mandates. In South Sudan,
beyond the physical protection of more than 80,000
civilians in United Nations bases, it is clear that human
rights investigation, monitoring, advocacy and reporting
are key concerns now more than ever. Together with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we are
preparing a comprehensive public human rights report.
OHCHR is also providing technical support and advice
for the establishment ofa commission ofinquiry by the
African Union.

In the Central African Republic, while regional
peacekeeping efforts are ongoing, my Office has
been focusing on much-needed fact-finding, public
reporting and promotion of accountability through
the deployment of a rapid-response monitoring team,
increased human rights capacity within the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic and support for the Council's
commission of inquiry. There is an urgent need to stop
the terrible violence in the Central African Republic
and to hold perpetrators accountable. I also note that
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has
decided to open a preliminary investigation. I welcome
the Council's continued attention to the situation in the
Central African Republic, in particular its efforts to
ensure accountability.

The Secretary-General's action plan entitled
"Rights up front", which places human rights at the
centre of the response to potential or emerging crises,
is also strengthening United Nations efforts with regard
both to South Sudan and the Central African Republic,
including those of my Office.

In spite of those developments, I see a number
of areas in which greater support from the Security
Council and States would be welcome.

First, we need to be clearer about what we mean
by the protection of civilians in peacekeeping. Over
the years, the Council has greatly contributed to the
protection of civilians by issuing fully fledged human
rights mandates and mandates to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence. However, the
link between those two mandates and their mutually
reinforcing nature has not always been made clear. The
protection ofcivilians in peacekeeping should be norms-
based. Implementation should be firmly anchored in the
broader human rights protection mandate of missions.
To that effect, my Office has worked with the DPKO
and the Department of Political Affairs to develop a
joint policy, the aim of which is to ensure that human
rights officers, military personnel and other mission
components work better together to respond to the
risk of human rights violations, including in situations
of imminent physical violence against civilians. I
urge the Council to emphasize that link when issuing
mandates, and to ensure that human rights components
are appropriately resourced. My Office is currently
seeking to strengthen our headquarters support to those
components in order to facilitate the speedy deployment
ofwell-trained human rights experts in crisis situations.

Secondly, we need greater support for human rights
access. It is indispensable for the effective protection
of human rights that we establish facts and understand
underlying causes and conflict dynamics. Sound and
compelling human rights information and analysis must
be at the core of strategies to protect civilians. Access
by human rights personnel to remote and at-risk areas
is also critical for deterrence. Our experience in Cote
d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shows the value of close cooperation among human
rights, military and other peacekeeping personnel
to rapidly assess developments in remote locations,
to engage in preventive advocacy with potential
perpetrators and to protect civilians.

Thirdly, we need continued support from the
Council in particularly difficult situations when
protecting civilians requires bold action and swift
decisions and when mission personnel are intimidated,
expelled or attacked because they are doing their jobs.

Fourthly, impunity allows gross human rights
violations to thrive. It undermines the fabric of societies
and prevents the development of lasting solutions. States
must do more to ensure that violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law are investigated
and that perpetrators are held accountable. In post-
conflict situations, where capacity is often minimal,
that requires sustained efforts. That may include mobile
courts, specialized chambers, internationally supported
tribunals, vetting, robust technical assistance to
strengthen the criminal justice system or a combination
of those elements.

I encourage the Council and States to squarely face
the magnitude and responsibility of, and the resources
needed for, that task, in the clear knowledge that
accountability is crucial to the protection of civilians. I
also call on the Council to more systematically condemn
Violations, to remind parties of their obligations and to
demand compliance.

Finally, let us not forget that there are armed
conflicts in which civilians suffer greatly but where no
peacekeeping operation is deployed. I am particularly
concerned about the situation in Syria, including the use
of sieges as a method of warfare and their tremendous
impact on the civilian population. At least 240,000
Syrians, including women and children, remain trapped
and struggle to survive.

Both the Syrian Government and the
anti-Government groups are failing to fulfil their
obligations under international law. There must not be
an assumption that those who remain in Old Homs and
other besieged areas are combatants. All parties to the
conflict must urgently facilitate unimpeded access to
humanitarian relief.

I also reiterate my call to the Council to refer the
Syrian situation to the International Criminal Court
as a clear message to all parties that there will be
consequences for their actions. The lack of consensus
on Syria and the resulting inaction have been disastrous,
and civilians have paid the price. I am appalled by the
massacre on 8 February at Maan, where dozens of
civilians were killed.

Throughout my mandate, I have welcomed every
opportunity to brief the Council and States about
human rights issues in order to contribute to informed
decisions. I have seen tremendous progress in the
emphasis that peacekeeping operations have given to
human rights. I encourage the Council and Member
States to continue putting human rights at the centre of
considerations on peace and security.

