Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Ten years after the Iraqi regime invaded, occupied and
brutalized Kuwait, it is useful for the Council to
remind itself of how we got to where we are now and
of what we can do together to change an unsatisfactory
situation. On 2 August 1990 and for the six months it
took for the United Nations to remove invading Iraqi
troops, the Iraq regime attempted the unthinkable: to
extinguish the existence of another United Nations
Member State.

Once the international community defeated that
attempt, the Security Council focused on ensuring that
the regime which carried out the invasion and which
remains unrepentant to this day would not have the
ability to wage war on its neighbours or to threaten
them with weapons of mass destruction ever again. To
this point we have been successful. The Security
Council has assumed a special role in maintaining
security in the Gulf region; Iraq continues to pose a
clear threat to that security; and it must be the
Council's purpose to ensure that that threat remains
contained.

But it is clear that the Iraqi people have borne the
burden of the regime's policies. The oil-for-food
programme has grown into the largest humanitarian
programme ever run by the international community. It
is a reflection of the regime's lack of cooperation and
of its disregard for its own population that, despite the
billions of dollars that have gone into Iraq under the
programme, Iraq's development levels have not met the
potential of the oil-for-food process. It is equally a
measure of the programme's success that Iraq's
development, by some standards, actually exceeds that
of some of its regional neighbours.

During these past six years, the nature of the oil-
for-food programme has changed, even though the
name has not. But a better name today would be "oil
for development", because such a term would more
accurately reflect the fact that even today the Iraqi
regime could redevelop the country using the oil-for-
food programme, if it chose to do so. Instead, Iraq is
using money and oil as a weapon against the
international community. Iraq has not sold oil since the
adoption of resolution 1352 (2001); that has cost the
humanitarian programme more than half a billion
dollars, on top of the several billion dollars that Iraq
lost by shutting off oil some months ago.

Iraq has made much of the fact that its financial
liquidity will allow it to defy the international
community for several months. It has been clear for
some time that we, the international community, care
more for the Iraqi people than the regime does. As a
result, Baghdad is making clear that despite all its
protests it actually prefers the status quo to our
proposal to change the oil-for-food programme so as to
allow the Iraqi people the broadest possible contact
with the rest of the world, especially through civilian
commercial trade, and to significantly improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq.

My Government is accustomed by now to Iraq's
cynicism towards its own people and to its bluster and
threatening policies. We find it harder to understand,
however, why others would join in playing that game
when the status quo is clearly not satisfactory.

Let us be clear about what we are trying to
accomplish with the United Kingdom draft resolution.
Far from "freezing the present situation", if we agree to
something like it in its current form, we will have done
nothing less than lift the sanctions on regular civilian
commercial trade with the Iraqi people. It is the height
of irony that, at the very moment my Government and
others are prepared to undertake this radical shift of
direction, we find ourselves under attack by others who
have long pressed for change to the system. These
States, like the Government of Iraq, seek to perpetuate
the status quo instead of looking ahead.

We, on the other hand, want to change the system
now so as to allow purchases of the civilian goods
needed to develop Iraq's economy. Under the current
system, to which we will revert if the new system
cannot be brought into being, all exports to Iraq are
forbidden unless specifically permitted by Security
Council resolution or a specific decision of the
sanctions Committee. Under the proposed system,
everything is permitted unless it is contained on a list
of military or dual-use goods, in which case it will be
reviewed, not denied.

Iraq will be able to acquire everything it needs to
improve the lives of its people and to provide for the
country's development. The Iraqi regime will be
prevented only from acquiring the few items critical to
increasing its ability to threaten international peace and
security. Almost every item that Iraq could need or
want for its civilian development will not be subject to
review by the sanctions Committee. Goods could flow
rapidly to where they are needed most under a
simplified procedure. Even items subject to control
would go to Iraq once there is confidence that they
would not be used to rebuild Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction or improve its military capabilities.

Some continue to confuse the proposed review
list with a denial list, so let me address this once again,
because it is at the heart of the proposal. The items on
the goods review list now under negotiation will be
subject to review by the sanctions Committee. If it is
clear that the goods will only be used for civilian
purposes, those goods will be approved for export. This
is a historically significant change in the way the
United Nations does business with Iraq, and it is
directly responsive to concerns raised in this Chamber
repeatedly in the past, and contrary to assertions about
"vague procedures", we are in fact negotiating agreed
procedures that will provide the desired clarity, at least
to almost all of the members of the Security Council.

We share concern that Iraq's neighbours might be
damaged economically if Iraq responds to the changed
system by ending trade arrangements with them. But
there is no way to be certain about anything the
Baghdad regime might do, and Iraq has its own
interests in these trade arrangements. But it has,
however, resorted to threats. Importantly, the current
draft resolution asks nothing of the States neighbouring
Iraq, except to continue consultations with the
Secretary-General. Neither we, nor, I am sure, any
other member of the Council, would seek to impose
any particular set of rules on these countries against
their will and without their cooperation. Instead, we
suggest that we would use the next six months at least
to explore what arrangements might be beneficial in
assuring the promotion of legitimate trade by which the
Iraq regime does not acquire unauthorized items or
illicit cash.

There are a number of other issues being
considered as well in this draft resolution. These
include international civil aviation and different forms
of economic interaction that would open prospects for
the Iraqi people. A number of these have been under
discussion for some time in this Council, and if we
were able to agree on this package, it would be an
important step forward in that regard as well.

Some have suggested this new approach to be an
abandonment of resolution 1284 (1999) and a move
away from implementing the other applicable Security
Council resolutions regarding Iraq. That assertion is
fundamentally misleading. The introduction of this new
approach to Iraq is in fact a bridge between the current
situation and the existing framework of Security
Council resolutions. The Council will still need to be
certain that the region no longer faces a threat from
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. Instead of tearing
up the Council's longstanding approach, this proposal
ensures its survival, expands vastly the range of goods
available to the civilian population and promotes future
implementation by showing the Government of Iraq
that it has no alternative to cooperation with the United
Nations. Perhaps that is why, indeed, the Government
of Iraq prefers the status quo.

The United States of America urges all members
of the Council who want something better for the Iraqi
people to join us in taking the next step toward the
creation of a better - not perfect - but better system
than the one that now exists. The draft resolution now
being considered by the members of the Council,
which moves far beyond the status quo, is that next
step.

