Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, with regard to Ms. Savchenko,
an investigation is under way. Accusations have been
made and there is a legal procedure under way. In
Ukraine, there are many people being detained and held
prisoner who are not subject to any legal procedure.
The provision of the Minsk agreements with regard to
prisoner exchange applies to them. In this case, there
is a legal procedure that cannot simply be disregarded.

With regard to the response of Ms. Power, of course
she exaggerated greatly with regard to the discussions
we have had here in the Security Council since the
beginning of the crisis. Let me explain two things that
we have discussed, since she brought them up.

When the Minsk agreements were signed on
12 February, it was clear - and we said this very
clearly and unequivocally - that before a ceasefire
could take effect in the area of Debaltseve, it would be
necessary to resolve the issue regarding the withdrawal
of Ukrainian soldiers who had been surrounded in that
region. The insurgents proposed that they withdraw,
and then a ceasefire would have immediately taken
effect. Unfortunately, they were given conflicting
orders to break their encirclement. Of course, under
such conditions it was very difficult to expect that an
immediate ceasefire would take effect. Therefore, for
anyone who familiar with the details of this discussion,
the situation regarding Debaltseve could not have been
a surprise.

As to the last point Ambassador Power raised
regarding the location of weapons, this is closely linked
to the work of the Special Monitoring Mission, as
discussed in the Permanent Council of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. But the Mission
must do what is defined by the package of measures;
it must monitor the areas from which weapons are
withdrawn. It says nothing about a requirement as to
where they were subsequently moved, how they were
moved or where they have been stored. As a measure
of good faith, the representative of the Donetsk
and Luhansk People's Republics did provide such
information to the Mission, but I do not know if similar
information was provided by the Kyiv authorities.

But our goal is to focus on the tasks to be carried
out according to the package of measures, rather
than try to add yet further conditions. The task is to
determine whether heavy weapons remain in the region
from which they are supposed to have been withdrawn.
If they do not, then the obligation has been fulfilled.
Where they have been taken to or are stockpiled is a
secondary matter. There are no grounds to ask such
questions ofthe Special Monitoring Mission. But, again
on the basis of good faith, some additional information
has been provided by the insurgents.

