Mr. Moussa: I am very happy to see you, Mr.
Prime Minister, presiding over the Security Council. I
express our deep appreciation for your initiative.

(spoke in Arabic)

I was very pleased to receive the President's
invitation to participate, on behalf of the League of
Arab States, in this important Security Council meeting
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in stabilization processes. Here
let me recall that the Council met in April 2003, under
the presidency of Mexico, on the item entitled "The
Security Council and regional organizations: facing the
new challenges to international peace and security"
(see S/PV.4739).

I turn now to the subject of today's meeting:
cooperation in stabilization processes and
peacekeeping. Here, a question of concern is whether
stabilization and peacekeeping are really two separate
elements. Is stabilization an objective in itself? Is the
purpose to cool down conflicts that are growing?
Sometimes we find that, even when a situation is calm
and when concerns are allayed, danger will remain if
the status quo continues. The notion that stability will
lead to peace and reconstruction has yet to be
confirmed. It is in fact possible to take the opposite
course: first to establish peace in order to ensure the
success of peacekeeping operations, and then to pursue
security, reconstruction, reconciliation and stability.

Cooperation among countries, the Security
Council and regional organizations is needed:
specifically cooperation within the framework of the
Charter. Such cooperation should include peacekeeping
and peacemaking operations that encompass
development and that lead to peace and stability.
Chapter VIII of the Charter and relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly provide the framework for
consultation and coordination between the United
Nations and other international organizations; these are
supplemented by cooperation agreements signed
between the United Nations and individual
organizations. In fact, there now exists a network of
cooperation going far beyond security matters in their
narrow, traditional sense.

As the representative of the European Union said
earlier, international threats are no longer limited to the
military and security areas, and they can no longer be
addressed solely by military means. In that connection,
as we are now discussing the establishment of a new
international system to face unprecedented new
challenges, the subject of cooperation with regional
organizations takes on increasing importance. Effective
cooperation of that kind is now imperative. These
organizations are an important element of the United
Nations, with a view to confronting international
problems that are on the upswing and that have spread
throughout the world.

This prompts me to say that the high-level
committee established by the Secretary-General to deal
with international threats and challenges takes into
account the role of regional organizations and the need
to adjust and concentrate that role with a view to
dealing with international and regional circumstances,
urgent and new situations which are not only political
in nature, but also economic and social situations the
causes of which are poverty, disease,
underdevelopment and terrorism. You will agree with
me that there is a need to amend Chapter VIII of the
Charter to take into account new international
development and the needs of development and the role
played by international organizations.

The question of reform and modernization in
different parts of the world has become an essential
item on the international agenda. As we in the League
of Arab States see it, we have tried to face the needs of
this era and the normal trend of events. The last Arab
Summit, held in Tunisia, adopted documents that show
how to move towards a broad modernization in the
Arab world in order to achieve clear democratization,
strengthen protection of human rights and freedoms,
empower women and achieve independence of the
judiciary, on the basis of economic and social
development procedures based on regional cooperation
and opening up economic and development policies.

In that regard, we must develop cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States as a regional organization. We all recall the
report of the United Nations Development Programme
on human development in the Arab world. It is an
important report, adopted by the United Nations
through the Arab League. All the Arab countries have
taken it into account quite seriously. I think that is a
new sphere of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Arab League and all regional organizations.
The basis of that cooperation is to be found in Chapter
IX of the Charter, which speaks of international
economic and social cooperation, especially in Article
55. This is a responsibility in which all regional
organizations should share as part of the cooperation
between the United Nations and organizations.

Let me speak of the improvements in the work
done by the Arab League - considering that it is a
regional organization, and especially the Economic and
Social Council of the Arab League - in order to open
up to all civil societies of the Arab League the
possibility of achieving consultative status, as it is
done with the Economic and Social Council of the
United Nations, and also with a View to creating an
Arab parliament as the basis for taking steps globally
towards democracy in the region. We have signed a
human rights charter in the Arab world.

Let me stress the importance that should attach to
horizontal cooperation between regional organizations.
That is a question that the Arab League considers
natural, especially in our relations with the African
Union, which encompasses most of the members of the
Arab League in the African continent, who have made
a commitment to implement the goals and principles of
the Charter of the African Union. That is a question to
be considered when we take up the advantages of
horizontal cooperation between regional organizations.

These special and geographical relations between
the two organizations have led to many advantages,
especially in the framework of peace negotiations in
the Sudan and in cooperating to follow the present
situation in Darfur and deal with it, and in relation to
Somalia and its progress towards stability. Tripartite
cooperation between the United Nations, the African
Union and the Arab League could lead, I believe, to
positive results in achieving stability and development,
especially in the Horn of Africa.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, recently have been facing unprecedented
challenges with repercussions on the effectiveness of
multilateralism and the role of regional organizations.
However, international and regional attempts to
marginalize the United Nations and regional
organizations, which were not long in coming, have
been rejected. It appears that the international
community does want an international system of global
security and is affirming the importance of
multilateralism and the importance of the United
Nations Charter and its purposes. We have seen clearly
the gravity and complexity of the question of Iraq and
how difficult it was to deal with this question outside
the United Nations. The Israeli-Palestinian situation is
deteriorating and threatening peace and security
throughout the Middle East. That means that the role of
the Security Council is necessary and essential in order
to save the situation. Hesitating in that area brings us
back to the starting point, where the role of the Council
and its credibility in protecting international peace and
security are concerned.

In the decision of the International Court of
Justice concerning the Israeli wall of separation and
Israeli practices in the occupied territories we have
seen a strong and wise response to those who are
seeking to make use of negative measures against
principles of international law or who are following a
double standard. The International Court has adopted
one standard - the Charter, the principles of justice -
and I believe that that is also the view of the Security
Council when it makes use of its wisdom and plays its
role in keeping with the Charter to affirm its credibility
and effectiveness.

The United Nations and regional organizations
together, seeking to maintain international peace and
security, to achieve economic and social development
and to achieve international progress towards
reconstruction and modernization, I propose that the
Security Council, under your presidency, Sir, in a joint
operation with the Economic and Social Council and
the General Assembly, should lend support to that
approach and that this be done in the framework of the
Charter and the provisions of international law. We
wish to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, and we call upon
the international community to work towards assuring
respect for these rights, to prevent international
organizations from being marginalized in the process,
and to take into account its role and confirm its role, as
has been done in past decades, to strengthen democracy
and the principles of freedom and human rights in the
face of oppression and hegemonistic policies.

In the past we have stressed the need to use the
Security Council and regional organizations when we
deal with different crises. Once again - under your
presidency, Sir, as we did under the presidency of
Mexico last year - we appeal for an international
conference to examine questions or issues that are
threatening international peace and security, and for a
regional meeting to prepare for that conference. I hope
that the Security Council will take these proposals on
board and seek to mobilize international efforts to that
end to achieve concordance of international opinion
around the principles of freedom, the primacy of law
and the Security Council and the United Nations as the
guarantors of those ideas and the guarantors of
international peace and security.

