Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Like previous speakers,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on the latest
developments in Liberia. We are hopeful that the outcome
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Summit, held in Abuja on 17 August 1996,
will lead to a durable peace in Liberia, with the new
timetable serving as a formal framework for the peace
process. It is worth noting and commending the strong
regional leadership role of ECOWAS and its determination
to ensure that the parties respect the agreement they
themselves have entered into.

We are also encouraged by the growing influence of
Liberian civilian groups in the peace process, reflecting the
aspirations of the Liberian people to end this ongoing
tragedy. In this regard, we welcome the appointment of Ms.
Ruth Perry as the new Chairperson of the restructured
Council of State, which, we hope, will fully represent the
will of all Liberians. We expect all faction leaders to
respect the authority and impartiality of this body and its
new leadership.

In view of the tendency of faction leaders to renege on
their past commitments, the international community and
regional actors cannot but remain extremely vigilant.
Several areas remain of great concern to us, particularly the
lack of security that continues to reflect a dangerous and
volatile situation, the persistent violations of basic human
rights, and the continuing inflow of arms. In this regard, the
disarming and demobilization of Liberia's militia members
is also essential in establishing a durable cease-fire and
permitting international peace-keepers to operate to their
full potential. The Council, furthermore, must urge all
States to comply strictly with the embargo on all deliveries
of weapons and military equipment to Liberia, in
accordance with resolution 788 (1992).

Touching on the humanitarian situation, my
delegation remains concerned that relief workers are still
being seriously impeded from delivering assistance to
certain regions and that the safety of relief workers is still
threatened. At this stage, no comprehensive humanitarian
assistance can be constructed to meet the needs of
Liberia, where socio-economic activities have ground to
a halt. Furthermore, over half of Liberia's population
continues to dwell in neighbouring countries as refugees.
Conditions have to be created to promote the return of
Liberians and the reconstruction of their country. Another
aspect of the conflict that has to be kept in mind is how
to reintegrate a generation of young Liberians who have
known nothing but war for the past six years.

Against this backdrop, we believe that the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) can play a
considerable role in contributing to the implementation of
the Abuja Agreement and enhance its chances of moving
forward. In this regard, we believe that the United
Nations has a role to play, and we therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to increase the
number of military observers and civilian personnel to
assist UNOMIL in carrying out its mandate. However,
since the continued presence of UNOMIL is contingent
on ECOMOG's ability to ensure the safety of its
personnel, it is therefore imperative for ECOMOG and
UNOMIL to enhance coordination and cooperation.

In the light of the observations I have just made and
of the positive role UNOMIL can play in Liberia, the
Indonesian delegation will vote in favour of this draft
resolution extending the mandate of UNOMIL for another
three months, until 30 November 1996. We expect the
parties to see this period as an opportunity for them to
demonstrate, through concrete steps, the political will to
resolve their differences and to start out on the path
towards national reconciliation and development.

