Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, our delegation welcomes the
convening of today's debate under the South African
presidency, and, especially, under your guidance. We
wish to reiterate that the question of Palestine is an
issue of ongoing importance for Ecuador. In this regard,
we align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Azerbaij an on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. We are also grateful for
the enlightening briefing delivered by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process.

On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I would
like to refer to three fundamental aspects. First, I should
like to reiterate Ecuador's position regarding settlement
practices and the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Despite the mandatory
nature of resolution 2334 (2016), settlement activity
continues, particularly in occupied East Jerusalem,
as well as evictions, demolition of Palestinian-owned
infrastructure and house confiscations - practices
that contradict international law. Ecuador condemns
all acts of violence and terrorism regardless of where
they originate.

We are extremely concerned by the humanitarian
situation, human rights violations and breaches
of international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We are also concerned about the
continuing economic and financial crisis being faced
by the Palestinian Authority. Unfortunately, those
conditions continue to worsen and deteriorate.

Secondly, we believe it is imperative that the
Council act and adopt all actions aimed at ensuring
the full validity of the fundamental principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
for which there have been repeated calls.

Thirdly, we once again call on the international
community to make tangible progress in supporting
progress towards a peaceful, definitive andjust political
solution for both parties, based on the coexistence of
two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, on the
basis ofthe pre-1967 borders, pursuant to the consensus
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). That is the only
way to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East,
thereby returning the Palestinian people's rights to
them and establishing an independent State of Palestine
that is incorporated into the United Nations as a full
Member State.

We believe that sustainable solutions must be based
on justice, human rights and international law. Preventive
diplomacy is a critical tool to dissipate tensions before
they intensify and worsen. We support all international
initiatives aimed at relaunching the peace talks and
negotiations between Israel and Palestine.

Finally, I should like to stress that Ecuador values
the tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and we reiterate our full support for its mandate.

