Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): First and foremost, I would like to condemn yesterday's deadly attack near Niamey and offer my condolences to the families of the victims. I would also like to reiterate my feelings of solidarity with the Niger and France in this difficult situation. I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for inviting me to take part in this meeting of the Security Council on the political situation in Guinea- Bissau. This meeting, which is being held at a moment when my country is gradually overcoming enormous difficulties that we have been facing for some time, is symbolic for me personally. I welcome the presence and briefings of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea- Bissau and the representative of the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I would like to inform the Council that Guinea- Bissau has a democratically elected President of the Republic who is exercising the full range of his constitutional functions at both the national and international levels. My country has a democratically elected National Assembly that functions normally on the basis of its own rules of procedure and in accordance with the norms of good parliamentary practice. Guinea- Bissau has a legitimate Government whose programmehas been adopted by a majority of the deputies sitting in the National Assembly. All of those points, which reflect the evolution of the political situation, are no longer a secret, as they are in the public domain. To that fact, we should add that we are now witnessing a new discourse in Guinean society - one that is based on national reconciliation. The recent past, which was marked by the discourse of hatred and the social and political divide, is over; today we are clearly witnessing a decline in political and social tensions in Guinea-Bissau. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/755) refers to the increase in cases of human rights violations in Guinea-Bissau. While there may have been some isolated incidents, as referred to in the report, it is far from being a human rights crisis. I would like to reiterate the commitment of the Bissau-Guinean authorities to respecting those rights and the principles governing the rule of law. With regard to the alleged military intervention in political life, it should be recalled that, since the general elections of 2014 - six years ago - we have not witnessed any military intervention in national political life. The democratically elected President of the Republic, proclaimed winner of the elections on several occasions by the National Electoral Commission, with the unanimous recognition by the international community of the transparency of the elections, does not need to resort to a military coup to assume his constitutional power with all its prerogatives. On the issue of drug trafficking, like many other countries, the borders of Guinea-Bissau are not exempt from this criminal activity. My country appreciates the role of international cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking, which is a transnational crime that requires the commitment of all relevant actors at the national and international levels. We therefore oppose any attempt by national political actors to politicize the fight against drug trafficking in order to derive political or partisan dividends. The political synthesis that I have just described is undoubtedly an illustration of the internal commitment of the authorities of Guinea-Bissau and the political line that His Excellency Mr. Umaro Sissoco Embal6, President of the Republic, wished to give to his presidency. But the foregoing political synthesis also reflects the constructive role of the international community, first and foremost the United Nations, which, through its Office in our country, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau (UNIOGBIS), has engaged, since 1999, together with Guinea-Bissau, in, inter alia, the peace process, the rule of law, support for civil society and electoral assistance. UNIOGBIS has consistently sought to devise responses to numerous issues, including those relating to young people, women, civilians and military personnel, journalists, facilitators of the political dialogue and actors with opposing interests that needed to be reconciled in the framework of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic Community of West African States Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau. It is true that the work of UNIOGBIS - which dates back to 1999 - has never been easy. However, we also must acknowledge that it has never lacked perseverance. I should like to take this opportunity, as we near the end of a political cycle, to express our gratitude to UNIOGBIS for its support throughout those years. Allow me to commend the commitment of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), our subregional organization, for having, thanks to its effective diplomacy, helped us to overcome major difficulties, putting an end to the political crisis by making the decision to close out the electoral cycle following the second round of the most recent presidential elections. I wish here to express to the Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Niger our immense gratitude for the solidarity and the perseverance that ECOWAS has demonstrated under the presidency of His Excellency Mahamadou Issoufou, President of the Republic of the Niger. Like the rest of the world, Guinea-Bissau has not been spared by the global health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its economic consequences. It is clear that the decade devoted to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is aimed at promoting universal progress and our commitment to achieving sustainable development, will, unfortunately, be strongly impacted. The consequences of the pandemic over the next few years, initially devoted to combating poverty and reducing economic and social inequality, will be even more severe if we cannot count on the support and the assistance of the United Nations as whole and its agencies, in particular the World Health Organization. In addition to the operations carried out on the ground by United Nations agencies, I believe that it is important to recall the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund, which has proved to be a very useful instrument in the various areas in which it has been called on to become involved, including in combating the COVID-19 pandemic. Since we will be witnessing a reconfiguration of the model of the United Nations institutional presence in Guinea-Bissau, the Government of my country will be monitoring very closely the institutional design of this new presence in order to draw lessons from the past and prevent any dysfunction and, above all, to reap the greatest possible benefit from the United Nations engagement, that is, to increase its effectiveness. At the political level, we are relying heavily on technical assistance from the United Nations in the implementation of all the structural reforms that are considered to be vital to political stability in our country. The establishment by His Excellency the President of the Republic of a technical commission for the review of the constitution set in motion the reform process in our country. It is important to recall here that this reform is envisioned by the Conakry Agreement, whose implementation has long been stalled. In closing, I should like to inform the members of the Council that my mission as the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations has reached its conclusion. This is a unique opportunity for me too express to all present, on behalf of my country, our gratitude for their ongoing support for and solidarity with Guinea-Bissau.
