Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Edmond Mulet for his briefing on
Kosovo for the period from October 2011 to January
2012. We would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements. We also note
the participation of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif.

There were some positive developments in
Kosovo during the reporting period. We are pleased to
note that the seventh and eighth rounds of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue took place in
Brussels, during which an agreement was reached on
the application of the European Union (EU) concept of
the integrated management of crossing points. The
technical protocol for the implementation of that
agreement should also be signed soon. We hope that
the implementation of the agreement at all border
crossing points will help to remove the irritants that
have been a major source of recent tensions in Kosovo.
We also positively note the progress made in
implementation of the earlier agreements on cadastre
records, freedom of movement and acceptance of
university diplomas.

We appreciate the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to de-escalate
tensions in northern Kosovo. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
continues to play an important role in ensuring stability
in Kosovo. All constituents of the international
presence in Kosovo must maintain neutrality while
executing their respective mandates.

We welcome the positive statements from
Belgrade concerning a compromise solution for
Kosovo. We also appreciate the efforts of the
leadership in Pristina to adopt a more conciliatory
approach towards the population in the north.
Conciliatory signals from both sides bode well for the
creation of conditions conducive to winning public
support for a resolution of the outstanding issues.

We note with concern, however, that the overall
security situation in northern Kosovo continues to be
fragile. Such steps as the planned referendum carry the
risk of increasing polarization and hardening attitudes
and positions. Being detrimental to dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of the problems of Kosovo, such
measures should be avoided. We support the impartial
investigation into alleged inhuman treatment of people
and illicit trafficking in human organs.

The achievement of lasting peace needs vision
and the demonstration of flexibility on the part of the
leadership of both sides. Leaders also have the
responsibility to prepare their publics to make the
necessary accommodations. We urge all parties to
pursue the path of dialogue and engagement for the
sake oflasting peace in Kosovo.

