Mr. Chevalier (Belgium) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to commend and, above all, to thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's very important debate.
We welcome the resolve of Africa and its leadership to
bring peace, security and development to their
continent. I can assure you that we share your
conviction that those objectives can be achieved only if
mutual cooperation is genuinely strengthened.

Belgium fully endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
European Union (EU), setting out the results of and
prospects for partnership between Africa and the EU.
Belgium also welcomes the impressive progress made
over the past few years in cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU and the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), as well as in their trilateral
relationship, in the area of conflict management.

Belgium firmly believes in the added value of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that such cooperation should
be based on a solid mutual understanding of what it
can yield and of what can legitimately be expected of
it. If a regional organization decides to establish a
peacekeeping operation authorized by the Security
Council under Chapter VIII of the Charter, the Council
is validating the international legality of the operation.
Such authorization, however, does not imply that the
United Nations is substituting itself for the regional
organization or that it is automatically assuming
political, logistical or financial responsibility.

The situation is somewhat different when the
United Nations decides to support the operation of a
regional organization. In the case of a joint operation,
the United Nations and the regional organization are
both responsible for the preparation and conduct of the
operation. That is a particularly complex form of
cooperation that can succeed only if it is based on a
common political vision.

In order to avoid all misunderstandings,
appropriate consultations between the organizations are
vital, especially in the initial decision-making phase.
Such consultations must help to prevent decisions

made by one party from taking the other by surprise
and to facilitate cooperation in their implementation.
They should also allow us better to determine the kind
of cooperation that is most appropriate, based on the
nature and geographical characteristics of a given
conflict.

Common experiences and lessons learned will
help us to improve cooperation between international
organizations. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is in and of itself a unique
experiment. However, the stakes are extremely high,
since they involve the fate of a local population that
has endured terrible suffering in recent years.
Unfortunately, we must conclude that progress in
deploying the mission has been far too slow. At the
same time, the political process that was to be the
foundation of the peacekeeping operation seems to be
at a standstill. In that context, a strong, shared political
vision of the two organizations involved - the United
Nations and the AU - is critical.

In Central Africa, too, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi have benefited from useful
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the EU has contributed to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the EU-led force in that country,
while in Burundi, significant cooperation has been
established with the AU through the Regional Initiative
and the United Nations Office in Burundi on the
question of the Forces nationales de liberation.

In spite of the great progress made in those
countries - with regard to the democratic electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
give just one significant example - the challenges are
considerable. Peace remains fragile, and civilians, who
deserve the international community's protection,
continue to face daily violence. Belgium will remain
strongly committed in its support for the countries and
peoples of the Great Lakes region, and we will
continue to work closely with the United Nations, with
African regional organizations and with the European
Union. In that connection, the Belgian Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, Development and
Defence will travel together to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to Burundi next week.
Turning to the conflict in Somalia, let me first
commend the members of the African Union Mission
in Somalia for the work they have done in difficult
conditions. The Mission clearly demonstrates that
international efforts to bring security to the Somali
people will achieve lasting results only if they are
based on sincere efforts towards national political
reconciliation. Belgium therefore fully supports the
integrated and gradual approach recently proposed by
the Secretary-General. Such an approach gives us
another opportunity to develop cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations and to
demonstrate the value it can add.

Finally, I wish to say a few words about the
situation in Zimbabwe. I would like to stress that
Belgium is particularly concerned at the increased
tension in that country. We join others - in particular
the Secretary-General - in calling for decisive action,
including through the immediate release of the results
of the recent presidential election, in order to prevent
the deterioration of a situation that is already very
tense. I agree with Prime Minister Gordon Brown that
a very clear, unanimous signal is needed.

Let me conclude with some observations about
the general principles of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. In the view of Belgium, improved
governance is imperative in that regard. A Government
that meets expectations, merits trust and is committed
to democracy and human rights will be better equipped
to eliminate the root causes of conflict. Natural
resources can be an important factor here: depending
on how they are managed, they can either fuel conflict
or bring a peace dividend. Responsibility in this sphere
lies in particular with national Governments, but the
United Nations and regional organizations should take
account of this dimension in their activities aimed at
restoring, maintaining and building peace.

The European Union is an example of a regional
cooperation project which has developed in a way that
none of its founders could have imagined 50 years ago.
The African Union, for its part, is powerfully
committed to blazing its own trail - a trail that is not
yet completely charted. The European Union and
Belgium are ready to assist it in developing the
capacities necessary to overcome the challenges it
faces. I welcome the similar readiness of the United
Nations, which will be reflected in the adoption of a
draft resolution on cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations. Belgium commends the
two organizations for that outcome, and hopes that it
will be promptly implemented both in letter and,
especially, in spirit.

