Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should like to
commend His Excellency Mr. Said Ben Mustapha of
Tunisia for his skilful leadership in conducting the
work of the Council last month.

My delegation believes that the convening of this
urgent meeting was both timely and appropriate in the
light of the tragedy of incalculable proportions
unfolding in the occupied Palestinian territories. My
delegation therefore cannot but voice its profound
concern and deepening dismay at a worsening situation
which could have the gravest ramifications not only for
the Middle East region in particular but for the world at
large.

The international community is witnessing an
intensification of violence resulting in hundreds of
Palestinian casualties, including women and children.
Such a development, together with the imposition of a
siege of Palestinian territories, has caused severe
restrictions on movements of goods and persons,
thereby reversing the positive trends of previous years
and placing the nascent economy in sharp decline. The
dire consequences of the present state of affairs are
clear to all: the unacceptable loss of lives and property,
the perpetuation of economic misery and violations of
human rights that affect the lives of an entire people
and nation. Worse still, these policies of the occupying
Power have heightened feelings of fear, despair and
anger, while destroying all trust and confidence in the
peace process. Such an untenable situation should not
be allowed to continue.

This body is mandated by the Charter to maintain
international peace and security. It therefore cannot
stand idly by and fail to shoulder its responsibility to
take urgent and necessary action at this critical
juncture. On 18 December 2000, the Security Council
did not adopt a draft resolution due to the lack of
necessary votes. That draft resolution would have
dispatched a mission comprising military and police
observers to stop the deterioration on the ground. If
that had been the case, a needless loss of Palestinian
lives would have been averted, and the violence would
have been contained.

The Council should therefore brook no further
delay in implementing such actions, for no amount of
convoluted logic or pretexts can justify inaction on its
part. Undeniably, one human life lost is one too many.
How then can the international community, in all good
conscience, justify non-action - on any grounds -
when scores of Palestinian people are being killed
every day?

In view of the pressing circumstances, my
delegation believes that the Security Council has no
alternative but to intervene at the present time and to
deploy a United Nations monitoring force in the
occupied territories, in order to stop the killing of
innocent civilians, ease tensions on the ground and
bring about normalcy as soon as possible.

Furthermore, the task of restoring and fostering a
climate of trust between the two sides will, hopefully,
lead to the resumption of the peace process. In
addition, in a time of crisis, it is important for the
concerned parties to bear in mind that the momentum
of the Sharm el-Sheikh memorandum and the Tabah
talks should not be diminished and that the arduous
efforts of the past 10 years cannot be in vain, so that
future generations of the people in the region will be
able to coexist in peace and harmony.

In conclusion, we hold steadfast to the view that
the basic elements of a peaceful settlement remain
unchanged and that a comprehensive peace can be
attained only through the unfettered exercise of the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including
the establishment of their own independent homeland.
My delegation also believes that the United Nations
has a historical and moral responsibility regarding the
question of Palestine, the core issue of the Middle East
conflict, and should remain closely engaged in the
process of bringing about ajust and lasting peace.

