Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for presenting the first report on the activities of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which he chairs with most able stewardship. I
would like to reiterate the support of my delegation.

The Iranian nuclear issue in many ofits aspects has not
significantly changed since our meeting of 13 December
2012 (see S/PV.6888), as noted in the latest report of
the Board of Governors, dated 21 February 2013 (see S/2013/103). Pursuant to resolution 2011/69 - in which
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) requested the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Agency to cooperate and step up
dialogue so as to urgently resolve all significant
pending issues, including access to all information,
documents, sites, materials and staff - the two parties
met several times. Unfortunately, the report notes that
no specific results were obtained. Moreover, the report
underscores that the negotiations of December 2012
and of 16 and 17 January 2013, as well as the meeting
of 13 February, which sought to finalize the document
on the structured approach to the issue, did not lead to
an agreement with Iran or to substantive discussions
on, inter alia, the possible military dimensions of the
country's nuclear programme.

In addition to those outstanding issues, it is also
noted that activities conducted in declared installations
under the Safeguards Agreement run counter to relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors. Generally speaking, the report
underscores the fact that Iran has not suspended its fuel
enrichment activities in the declared facilities in Natanz
and Fordow. Moreover, more advanced centrifuges have
been installed at Natanz. The same holds true for heavy
water projects, uranium conversion and fuel production.
In all cases, while the Agency has concluded that the
information obtained basically corresponds to Iran's
statements, additional information continues to be
expected from the country.

In the light of the foregoing, it is hardly surprising
that the International Atomic Energy Agency is
increasingly concerned about the possible existence
of secret nuclear-related activities involving military
sector organizations, in particular activities for the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile. There
is significant evidence that the crisis of confidence
between the international community and Iran
continues to grow.

The information contained in the report of the
Panel of Experts regarding the launching of Great
Prophet VII missiles during the operations carried out
from 2 to 4 July 2012, as well as official Iranian public
statements regarding possible military assistance to
Hamas and other terrorist groups, only exacerbates the
tensions. Those acts, according to the Panel of Experts,
run counter to resolutions 1929 (2010) and 1747 (2007)
and are a source of great concern.

Talks between the group made up of the five
permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany (P5+l) and Iran, such as the meeting held
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 27 February, aimed, inter
alia, at inducing that country to renounce its nuclear
programme and to send its stock of 20 per cent enriched
uranium abroad, have not yet led to significant progress
on the matter.

Despite that regrettable situation, my country
continues to believe in a negotiated solution and calls
on Iran once again to uphold its commitments under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and ofthe International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors.
In that respect, Togo calls on Iran to step up its
cooperation with the IAEA so as to arrive at acceptable
solutions to the requests made by the Agency and to
continue, in good faith, negotiations with the P5+1. We
remain hopeful that at upcoming meetings, in particular
at the expert meeting to be held in Istanbul on 17 and
18 March, upstream of the meeting between Iran and
the P5+1 slated for 5 and 6 April, progress will be made
in that respect.

At the same time, it is crucial for Iran to accept the
request of the IAEA as set out in paragraph 65 of its
report, by facilitating access to the Parchin site and by
addressing the concerns regarding that site.

While recognizing the right of all countries,
including Iran, to develop peaceful nuclear energy,
we would urge that country to work to implement a
peaceful programme and to draw on the cooperation
necessary to achieve that goal.

In conclusion, I should like to express my gratitude
to the Committee and to the Panel of Experts for their
tireless efforts in assisting the Council in the quest for
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear question.
That undertaking requires joint efforts on our part.

It is in that context that Togo is pleased to host, in
Lome from 13 to 17 May, a regional seminar that will
allow West African and Central African countries to
discuss the measures necessary to abide by the United
Nations sanctions regime in that respect and to adopt
relevant recommendations.

