Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): Tonight, in
the midst of the Syrian crisis, the Security Council has
finally proven itself worthy of its name. On 21 August,
the regime of Bashar al-Assad committed the
unacceptable. It killed nearly 1,400 civilians, including
hundreds of children, with gas. The use of chemical
weapons, so abominable that has been banned for over
100 years, is clear in this instance. All evidence points
to the regime. No one can contest it in good faith.

As a result of the threat of strikes, which was not
a mere stratagem, we have finally moved forward.
We put pressure on the regime and its allies. I recall
that although until recently the regime denied the
very existence of chemical weapons, in just a few
days it has had to radically change its stance. It
acknowledged the existence of chemical weapons and
accepted their destruction. France, like other States,
especially the United States of America, has assumed
its responsibilities. We believe that our resolve has paid
off.

Resolution 2118 (2013), which we have just
adopted, meets the three requirements that President
Hollande and I put forward early this week, which may
go down in history, be it with respect to Syria or Iran,
as the international week beginning the end of chemical
weapons. The resolution identifies the use of chemical
weapons as a threat to international peace and security.
The Security Council can therefore act on this issue
at any time in the future and will be the guarantor of
chemical disarmament. The resolution clearly states
that those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable for their actions and brought to justice.
It also provides - as our Russian and American
colleagues agreed in Geneva and worked a great deal
to achieve - that in case of the non-compliance of the
Syrian regime in Damascus, measures will be taken
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

The resolution is not our final goal, but only the
first stage. Unfortunately, one cannot simply believe the
statements of a regime that even until recently denied
even possessing such weapons. The United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons should immediately deploy their joint mission.
The timetable set out in the decision adopted today in
The Hague must be enforced. Syria's cooperation must
be unconditional and fully transparent. The Security
Council, which will be informed regularly, will be
the judge of Syria's commitment. It will, if necessary,
impose measures under Chapter VII of the Charter to
ensure that the objective is achieved. In short, it is not
enough that we adopted the resolution; we must now
implement it. France, like all other Council members,
will see to that.

Regardless of the positive aspects of the resolution,
the humanitarian catastrophe and repression tragically
continue in Syria. Our responsibility commands us to
act to end them. France wishes to take advantage of the
long-sought unity of the Council to advance the political
process, which is the only way to put an end to the
fighting and restore peace in Syria. We need to prepare
the "Geneva II" conference, within the framework
defined by the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), which, as others have noted provides for the
transfer of all executive powers to a transitional body.
Along with the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy, whom I congratulate and thank for their work,
the five permanent members of the Security Council
bear a particular responsibility to that end, as they have
demonstrated on the chemical weapons issue.

Yesterday, I chaired a meeting, attended by the
representatives of a great many States, with the
President of the Syrian National Coalition, Mr. Al-Jarba.
He confirmed that he is ready to send a delegation to
negotiate in the Geneva II process. The supporters of
the Syrian regime in Damascus must, in turn, assure us
that they will make a similar commitment. I know that
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy will do
their all to move quickly in that direction, as I indicated
at the recent meeting of the five permanent members,
which yielded positive results and a date for Geneva II.
France will assuredly support these efforts.

We know that no one resolution, useful as it may
be, will save Syria. That is why the Security Council
must shoulder its responsibilities to the end. Over the
next few weeks, we must focus on the Syrian people and
their martyrdom, which must come to an end as soon
as possible. That will be France's firm and consistent
position in full support for peace.

