Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to
welcome, Sir, Germany's presidency of the Security
Council for this month, to which I look forward. I
would like to express our sincere appreciation for the
excellent presidency of France last month. Indonesia
greatly appreciates your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene this very important meeting, which conveys
the importance of the humanitarian space in armed
conflict. I would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
and Mr. Peter Maurer, as well as Ms. Naz Modirzadeh,
for their briefings, which provided us with a great deal
of information.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
of May 2018 (S/2018/462), active hostilities and
logistical challenges continue to impede the delivery of
humanitarian aid. Armed conflicts have now become
even more protracted and challenging, including
interlinkage with counter-terrorism measures. I
therefore note that preserving the humanitarian space
to facilitate assistance to those in need demands our
increased efforts. It requires our sensitivity and
engagement with all parties involved in armed conflict.
Against that backdrop, allow me to focus on three points.

First, building trust is of crucial importance
to ensure prompt and unhindered humanitarian
assistance. Without trust all is for nothing. That
recalls that the primary responsibility to protect the
population throughout its whole territory lies with
the national Government. We must therefore respect
the sovereignty of the legitimate Government and, of
course, gain the trust of the respective Governments
and the people, including the affected communities
where we are present.

International humanitarian law also offers pragmatic
direction that takes into account the sovereignty and
security requirements of States. Ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian assistance requires engaging with
all parties to the conflict, both State and non-State
actors. It is critical to manage dialogue and to seek
a durable political solution. The message must be
clear, namely, that our presence is not to judge but to
assist. Humanitarian personnel are there to support
the national authorities in showing greater respect for
international humanitarian law.

That brings me to my second point, on the
importance of our collective efforts to safeguard the
humanitarian space, for no single Government can
resolve this alone. Together, we can act expeditiously,
swiftly and effectively from the very outset to help
the affected communities, providing basic needs,
life-saving supplies and essential health care.

Together, we should also be flexible in our approach
to engagement without sidelining humanitarian
principles. It is not easy to deal with certain conflicting
parties. Flexibility sometimes becomes part of the
success in gaining confidence, thereby preserving the
humanitarian space. Indonesia vigilantly upholds the
principles of inclusivity and non-discrimination in its
consultation with all segments of society, including the
military, and in the provision of humanitarian assistance.

My third point concerns the safety and security of

humanitarian and medical personnel, since, working
directly with communities every day, they often face
life-threatening risks in carrying out their mission. Such
a situation may also delay, or even disrupt, an effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Safety and access
for peacekeepers are a must and should be honoured by
the conflicting parties. We must also ensure that United
Nations peacekeepers are well equipped before their
deployment to conflict areas. That includes training
on international humanitarian law and respect for the
core principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality
and independence.

Indonesia will host another regional conference
on humanitarian assistance in 2020. That will also be
a platform for sharing best practices to better protect
humanitarian and medical personnel.

On that note, the Security Council should explore
ways to find more sustainable and context-appropriate
actions in safeguarding the humanitarian space, in line
with resolutions 2175 (2014) and 2286 (2016). There is
no one-size-fits-all approach to delivering humanitarian
assistance. But it must be delivered.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that we have
an obligation to save lives. We need to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is provided to fulfil that
noble intention.

