Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. In addition, Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Armenia align themselves with this
statement.

Let me begin by expressing the European Union's
appreciation for the way that the United Nations has
managed the unprecedented expansion of its
peacekeeping activities. United Nations peacekeepers
serve in conflict zones on a scale that few could have
foreseen 10 years ago.

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of the
landmark Brahimi process, which paved the way for
ambitious reforms and a new era for United Nations
peacekeeping. Today, United Nations peacekeeping is
again at a critical juncture. As noted by Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, the system
is stretched to the point at which some missions face
the risk of failure. That would have serious
consequences not only for international peace and
security, but also for international cooperation.

We commend the Secretariat for its non-paper on
charting a new horizon for United Nations
peacekeeping, and the Security Council for the review
that it has undertaken over the past months on the basis
of the French-British initiative. Those activities,
together with other initiatives, such as the Challenges
Forum, have generated a set of ideas and
recommendations that would better position United
Nations peacekeeping to respond to current and future
challenges.

Today's debate is very timely. It provides an
opportunity to take stock of progress made in adapting
United Nations peacekeeping to new demands and to
set a course for work in the years to come.

After the catastrophic events in Bosnia and
Rwanda in the 19905, the United Nations went through
a period of soul-searching. It proved that the
Organization was capable of learning from setbacks
and adapting to the changing demands of global
peacekeeping. It is encouraging that the surge of
United Nations peacekeeping, while putting difficult
strains on the Organization, has been marked by a
similar determination. The Secretariat's reform agenda
"Peace Operations 2010" has been an important step
towards a more professional and effective approach to
United Nations peacekeeping.

That agenda should now be taken a step further.
We need to build a new political consensus on the
strategic context of peacekeeping and on the role of the
United Nations membership and regional partners in
providing collective support to peacekeeping. The
challenge is to ensure that gaps between needs,
expectations and performance are minimized.

Since the issuance of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), decisive improvements have been
achieved, but many of the challenges identified in the
report remain and there are new demands that need to
be addressed. The financial crisis puts additional
pressure on United Nations peacekeeping, as does the
current overstretch of military, police and civilian
resources faced by many Member States.

The New Horizon paper is an excellent basis for
seeking a new consensus on United Nations
peacekeeping. Its recommendations provide us with a
coherent and realistic framework for future
improvements. They should guide our work in the
period ahead.

While the European Union believes that it is
necessary to consider all of the recommendations in a
positive spirit, at this stage we would like to draw
attention to a few points of strategic importance to
developing the partnerships called for in the New
Horizon non-paper.

First, with regard to burden-sharing, countries
make varying contributions to peacekeeping, and
regional organizations are taking on an increasing
share of the burden. A dialogue should be initiated
between the United Nations and its partners on what
various stakeholders can bring to the table, how we can
improve cooperation and enhance our interoperability,
and whether missions are carried out under the
auspices of the United Nations or those of other
organizations.

My second point concerns consultations. There is
a need to develop closer mechanisms for consultation
among the various actors involved in peacekeeping.
The report outlines a number of concrete
recommendations on how that could be done. We must
seek mechanisms that bring various stakeholders on
board at an early stage, while ensuring a proper
balance between effectiveness and inclusiveness and
without creating unnecessary bureaucracy. The
implementation of the 2003 and 2007 joint statements
on United Nations-European Union Cooperation in
Crisis Management are important contributions in that
respect.

Thirdly, concerning mission management, the
"Peace Operations 2010" agenda should be carried
through and steps taken to continue to enhance
professionalism and the management of missions to
ensure that they have the resources and support
necessary to carry out their mandates effectively. As
recognized in the report, peacekeeping missions cannot
be planned or carried out in isolation from the political
context in which they are to operate. Devising a
political strategy is a fundamental task that should
include exit perspectives.
The European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General's recent report on peacebuilding (S/2009/304),
which highlights some of the challenges in that respect
and demonstrates the close links between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

In December, 10 years will have passed since the
launching of the European Security and Defence
Policy, which is the basis for the European Union's
peacekeeping efforts. Some 20 European Union
civilian and military peacekeeping missions have been
carried out so far, several of them in close cooperation
with the United Nations. The experiences of the
European Union over the past decade in this area have
ranged from those of small observer missions to those
of complex undertakings including both civilian and
military components. Cooperation between the
European Union and the United Nations has been
enhanced along the way - most recently, through the
transfer of responsibilities between the two
organizations in Chad and Kosovo. The European
Union has also developed close collaboration with
important regional actors, in particular through its
strategic partnership with the African Union.

It has rightly been stated that, in peacekeeping,
no one size fits all. The process of forming
partnerships and sharing the burden must continue with
a View to finding the best collective response to global
and regional conflicts on the basis of our various
perspectives, experiences and capabilities. The New
Horizon non-paper should be the starting point for new
political momentum in that regard. The European
Union intends to be an active partner in that process.
