Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): The
Netherlands welcomes this open debate, which offers
all United Nations members the opportunity to present
their views on the question concerning Iraq. We also
express our full support for the statement made by the
presidency of the European Union.

The Netherlands wishes to see the full
rehabilitation of Iraq as a normal member of the
international community as soon as possible. But let us
not forget that it was Iraq itself that, by its actions,
moved into the position of outcast. At the root of the
present situation lies the 1990 invasion of Kuwait by
Iraq. This aggression was reversed back by the
international community, which subsequently
determined that this should not happen again. Hence,
resolution 687 (1991). The Netherlands continues to
support that resolution's clear objective of preventing
renewed Iraqi aggression.

At the same time, the road to the full
rehabilitation of Iraq is equally clear. The Government
of Iraq must comply with and implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Once Iraq has complied,
sanctions will be lifted. If at a prior stage it cooperates
in all respects with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, in accordance
with resolution 1284 (1999), sanctions will be
suspended. Sadly, so far Iraq has not made it possible
for the Council to take those decisions. It even refuses
to cooperate on the issues of the missing persons and
Kuwaiti property.

Despite the attitude of the Government of Iraq,
the Council itself must continue to do what it can to
ease the plight of the people of Iraq. Security Council
resolution 1284 (1999) contributed significantly to
reaching the objective of more targeted sanctions. The
efforts currently under way in the Council to further
improve the sanctions regime proceed from the logic of
that resolution, and we warmly welcome them. We
commend the United Kingdom for having taken the
lead in these discussions.

The Netherlands is pleased to see the introduction
of the principle that all goods and products will be
allowed into Iraq unless they are on the Goods Review
List and there is a specific decision to block them. We
understand that setting up a new regime is a very
complicated task. The new system will inevitably
imply a trade-off between the length of the list and the
manageability of the regime; just as it will be a trade-
off between preventing the unwanted access of Iraq to
military equipment and the fate of the Iraqi people.

In dealing with these trade-offs, the guiding
principle should be whether the new regime can work
in practice. During its membership on the Council, the
Netherlands spoke up repeatedly about the
unacceptably high number of contracts on hold. We
hope and believe that the new system will make an
excessive number of such holds a thing of the past.

A number of delegations have spoken before me
and their interventions cause me to underline one
aspect of the Iraqi question which is not without
significance. The Netherlands believes that the Council
should also look into ideas concerning the maintenance
and improvement of Iraqi oil production capacity. It
will enable Iraq to make full use of the expanded
opportunities within the framework of an improved
sanctions regime for the benefit of its people. Proper
repairs and development of the industry, including
providing the means for good oil-field husbandry, are
needed to ensure sustainable and ecologically sound oil
production over the years to come.

The Netherlands urges the Council to successfully
conclude efforts to introduce the necessary
improvements in the sanctions regime with regard to
Iraq. If it is not possible for the Council to discuss all
aspects simultaneously, we fully understand that the
Council will concentrate first on the important aspect
of the Goods Review List.

