Mr. Egunsola (Nigeria): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
situation in Rwanda and the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR). We are
encouraged by the Government's efforts in trying to
stabilize the political, security and socio-economic
conditions of the country 12 months after what the
Secretary-General himself has described as one of the most
tragic chapters in Africa's history. Starting almost from
scratch and with no infrastructures or public revenue, the
Government in Kigali must be congratulated on its
achievements. The international community has a moral
duty to assist and complement the efforts of the
Government, particularly in the areas of justice and
national reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction,
the humanitarian situation and the return of refugees.

Although the security situation in Rwanda has
improved, thanks to the combined efforts of the
Government and UNAMIR, tension and lack of security
also continue to be reported along the borders, in
particular from areas of Zaire adjacent to Rwanda.
Reports of infiltration and sabotage by armed elements, as
well as allegations that members of the forces of the
former Government are conducting military training and
receiving deliveries of arms, have greatly heightened
tensions in the border areas. In fact the Governments of
Zaire and Rwanda recently admitted that the situation in
the border zone had further deteriorated.

My delegation has supported the request of
Rwanda - as part of measures to stabilize the situation
and assure the Government of Rwanda of its own
security - that restrictions on the acquisition of arms
imposed under resolution 918 (1994) in so far as they
relate to the Government of Rwanda, be lifted. This
would not only enable the Government to defend itself
and its citizens, but also serve to deter military
adventurism from opponents of the Government from
outside. We believe that the mere knowledge that the
Government is in a position to properly defend itself will
make them think twice. To that end, Nigeria together with
other members of the caucus of the Non-Aligned
Movement, initiated the draft resolution before us today.

I believe we all appreciate the fact that no
Government will sit by idly when a force determined to
obliterate it is forming and arming a few miles across its
border. And if we are to save the people of Rwanda, who
have already suffered so much, from being subjected to
another cycle of violence we have to act now, particularly
as we know that any military action in Rwanda would
further destabilize the already unstable situation in the
whole area of the Great Lakes. Moreover, if we expect
the Government of Rwanda to take full responsibility for
peace and security inside the country, we cannot deny the
Government the legitimate means with which to carry out
this responsibility.

None the less, my Government is not unaware of the
other side of the argument, that introducing more
weapons to an already volatile environment has its own
destabilizing effects. That was why the caucus of the
N on-Aligned Movement incorporated into the text of the

 

draft resolution safeguards to ensure that the weapons get
only to the intended beneficiary and are put to the use to
which a legitimate Government has a right, that is, self-
defence: no more, no less. Furthermore, in order to ensure
transparency and, more important, to assure the
international community - particularly the neighbouring
States - that the arms will be put to legitimate defensive
purposes alone, we have agreed to a one-year trial period
during which these restrictions will only be suspended. My
delegation also supports the proposal to establish a
commission to conduct a full investigation of allegations of
illegal arms flows into the subregion.

We look forward in the next 12 months to a
termination of the arms embargo as it relates to the
Government of Rwanda. We are confident that security
conditions both within and outside Rwanda's borders will
have improved substantially, making the further acquisition
of arms by the Government unnecessary even after the arms
embargo is lifted.

To make this possible, however, necessary steps in the
areas of justice, national reconciliation and political
accommodation will have to be undertaken by the
Government of Rwanda, supported by the international
community. For the moment, we are encouraged by the
further steps that have been taken to get the International
Tribunal for Rwanda up and running. We hope it will be
able to commence substantive work in the near future. We
agree that in the meantime something has to be done about
the serious congestion in the prisons, which constitutes a
major humanitarian crisis. The Government of Rwanda
requires the assistance of the international community in
order to improve the prison conditions.

With regard to the return of the refugees, we believe
that some of the steps being taken by the Government, as
well as the proposals for a regional approach that were
agreed in Nairobi and Bujumbura, would, if implemented,
address the urgent problems facing the repatriation of
refugees. We also support the proposals put forward by the
Secretary-General to encourage dialogue among all sectors
of Rwandese society, including those in the diaspora but
not those suspected or implicated in last year's genocide.

On the performance of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), we commend the
contributions that have been made and continue to be made
by UNAMIR personnel in the discharge of their mandates,
and call upon the Government of Rwanda to continue to
extend the necessary cooperation to UNAMIR.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment to
ensuring the stability of the region, as evidenced by his
recent visit to the area.

