Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): There are no small steps on the path of peace. Any distance covered in the right direction brings us closer to the ultimate goal - a return to peace. I fully share the optimism of Mr. Shearer and encourage the South Sudanese political actors to continue to demonstrate political courage in order to make further progress along the difficult but only viable path towards peace in the interest of their people. That optimism also shows through in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/145) in terms of respect for the ceasefire and confidence-building between the parties. The speech of peace by President Salva Kiir on 22 February, in which he particularly called for forgiveness and reconciliation among all sons and daughters of the country, is a historic landmark that should be commended. The Niger supports the decision of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to request a review of the composition and role of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) Regional Protection Force. We also welcome the plan to hold regional conferences as part of the national dialogue. We are well aware of the situation of women and girls and appreciate the excellent work done by Ms. Sunday to assist that vulnerable group of the South Sudanese population. In addition to the political glimmers of hope seen recently, the improvement in the key macroeconomic indicators is another positive sign that could strengthen the current positive dynamic. In that way, South Sudan could benefit from its vast resources and potential to tackle the challenges that its people face. How could we not congratulate the African Union, IGAD, South Africa and South Sudan's neighbouring countries on their involvement in the peace process. We express our support of UNMISS for its very positive role in support of the peace process and hope that it will have adequate resources to even better achieve its mission. Moreover, with regard to the very high price paid by civilians, in particular women, my country would like to recall the importance of implementing the provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan of November 2018 concerning transitional justice, whose true relevance we were able to gauge during the debate organized on this issue during the Belgian presidency of the Council (see S/PV.8718). Only in that way will those severely affected by the horrors of war overcome their trauma and start to pave the way for a genuine reconciliation among all the sons and daughters of South Sudan. We await the good news that Ambassador Malwal, who is here with us today, will certainly give us.
