The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Italy, Japan, Serbia and
Montenegro and Ukraine, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. S'ahovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives ofthe other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Holkeri to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/996, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Harri Holkeri. As this is the first
appearance of Mr. Holkeri in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
Mission of UNMIK, although he is definitely no
stranger to these halls, on behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to him.

I call on Mr. Holkeri.


