Mr. Guerber (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection
of Civilians, which comprises Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom and Uruguay. I would like to
thank the Korean presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this debate, which is long overdue.

Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a challenging task that requires our constant
attention. Unfortunately, the core challenges identified
in the three most recent reports of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/277, S/2010/579 and S/2012/376)
remain and the way forward set out in resolution 1894
(2009) needs to be pursued as a matter of priority.
International humanitarian law requires all parties
to conflict to spare the civilian population from the
effects of hostilities. All too often, however, parties
to conflict fail to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Civilians, including
children and women, are subjected to acts of violence
with severe humanitarian consequences. Also, the
targeting of schools and health-care facilities places
civilians at risk.

We therefore regret that the Security Council does
not debate the issue on a more regular basis. To ensure
greater predictability in the treatment of the protection
of civilian by the Council and in order to have a greater
impact in the field, the Group strongly advocates for
regular biannual debates and for a standing reporting
requirement so that the Secretary-General is in a
position to report every 18 months, as is the case for the
issue of children and armed conflict with the adoption
of resolution 2068 (2012).

The briefings provided by the Secretary-General
during such debates are very important. Up-to-date
information is a necessary condition for meaningful
debates among Member States. We also note the
practice of the Emergency Relief Coordinator briefing
the Council, which we find essential and would like
to see continue in the future, as the Emergency Relief
Coordinator is, inter alia, an advocacy channel for the
wider humanitarian community.

We would also like to reaffirm the obligation
to protect all categories of persons protected under
international humanitarian law, taking into account
their specific vulnerabilities, in particular children and
women. We share the Secretary-General's concerns
that sexual violence, including rape, continues to be a
prominent feature of conflict and remains widespread,
affecting not only women and girls but also boys
and men. As called for in resolution 1820 (2008), the
Security Council should address the root causes of
sexual violence and consider including it as a criterion
in country-specific sanctions regimes where relevant. In
addition, steps must be taken towards full compliance
by all parties to a conflict and full accountability for
violations. Resolution 1894 (2009) reaffirmed the
importance of ending impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We are convinced that the Council should become a
driving force in the area of accountability and promote
an appropriate combination of justice, reparations and
institutional reforms, with a view to satisfying the
essential rights of victims of such serious violations
and to preventing their recurrence.

Also, timely recourse to fact-finding mechanisms,
including, when appropriate, the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission established by
article 90 of Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions, is
crucial to ensuring the credibility of the international
community in that regard. It is particularly important,
however, for the Council to act where credible
information has been provided by such fact-finding
mechanisms. The Security Council should also consider
referrals to the International Criminal Court when and
where national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to
investigate and prosecute those most responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

In addition, humanitarian access remains a critical
challenge. In many cases, access continues to be
difficult, and there has been a marked deterioration in
the past 10 years. In today's armed conflicts, securing
and maintaining such access in order to help and assist
civilians is becoming increasingly more difficult. We
urge all parties to conflict to allow and facilitate rapid,
full and unimpeded access so as to allow humanitarian
actors to reach civilians in need, consistent with the
well-established guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance.

Before concluding, the Group of Friends would
like to recall that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with the State. Enhancing
the capacity of national Governments to sustain longer-
term efforts to protect civilians should always be the
key objective of international action. To reach that
objective, international assistance requires a spirit
of cooperation based on mutual acknowledgement
and national ownership that transcends the actions of
individual actors involved in protection. The support
of the international community should be based on the
recognition that security and development are closely
interlinked, mutually reinforcing and key to attaining
sustainable peace and, therefore, to preventing situations
where civilians might face the threat of violence.

Conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes are also key to the protection of civilians.
The international community must vigorously and
continuously seek to exhaust all diplomatic means
available to ensure the protection of civilians under
the threat of violence. United Nations peacekeeping
operations have an important role to play in enhancing
the host Government's capacity to protect its civilians,
including through the strengthening of national rule-of-
law and security institutions. We should therefore
strive to ensure that missions have the capabilities and
resources they need to discharge their mandate related
to the protection of civilians as effectively as possible.

(Spoke in French)

I should now like to speak briefly in my national
capacity. The full text of my statement has been
circulated in the Chamber.

I should like to begin with the issue ofaccountability
in the case of Syria. In view of the escalating violence
and the absence of any prospects of credible criminal
prosecution, Switzerland, supported by 57 other States,
recently called on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
No lasting peace is possible in Syria if determined
action is not taken to ensure accountability and prevent
impunity. We hope that other countries will join this
initiative by signing the list of supportive States and that
the Council will act by taking the necessary measures.

We would also like to share our deep concern
about the ever-worsening situation with regard to
humanitarian access in Syria. It is unclear how the
delivery of assistance is coordinated and implemented
in disputed areas or so-called areas under the control
of opposition groups. We must therefore find ways to
minimize the number of persons who are beyond the
reach of humanitarian aid.

Securing continued access to the population is
also pivotal in the context of Mali. Despite the speedy
progress of military operations there, we should not
forget the significant needs of vulnerable populations.
We are witnessing once again how difficult it is
to prevent atrocities, protect civilians and ensure
accountability for violations. We welcome the fact
that Mali has referred the situation to the International
Criminal Court.

In general terms, enhancing compliance with
international humanitarian law remains the greatest
challenge. Switzerland is therefore pleased to report
that its joint initiative with the International Committee
of the Red Cross to strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law has gained momentum,
with an increasing number of States engaging in
substantive discussions on this issue. A second meeting
of States will take place in June in Geneva to strengthen
the dialogue on this important issue.
Non-State armed groups constitute a particular
challenge with regard to compliance with the rule of
law in most modern conflicts. We must find a way to
ensure that those groups comply with their obligations
and allow humanitarian access. The latest report of the
Secretary-General is insightful. Whenever the issue of
engagement with non-State armed groups is raised, the
consequences for civilians should be the most important
criterion.

