Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. I also thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Gaza since 30 March. We are appalled by the
number of dead and wounded, which has increased with
each passing week. We respect both the Palestinians'
right to peaceful demonstrations and the Israelis' right
to security. However, violence cannot be justified for
any reason. It will never solve problems and will not
change the behaviour of others.

Japan continues to call upon all parties to exercise
maximum restraint. We also reiterate that international
human rights law and humanitarian law must be fully
observed. There is now a tangible risk of an escalation
of tension on the ground that could lead to further
casualties as we approach the middle of May. We must
all seek ways to prevent that outcome. In that regard,
the Secretary-General's call for an independent and
transparent investigation should be swiftly implemented
in a way that prevents further escalation and casualties.

Behind the current situation, there is a lack of hope
for the Palestinian people. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza is dire. The existing scarcity of electricity and
water will more severely affect people in the summer.
Continued settlement activities in the West Bank not
only violate international law, but also deprive the
Palestinian people of hope for a two-State solution.

The financial crisis of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNWRA) has caused increased anxiety for
Palestinian refugees. These hopeless conditions are
feeding radicalism and do not benefit either party. The
Government of Japan is determined to do what it can
to keep the hope for a peaceful future alive. Regarding
UNRWA, I am happy to announce that, two days ago,
Japan decided to provide $10 million in additional
contributions. We are also ready to call for further
cooperation with UNRWA by Asian countries at the
forthcoming Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development. We hope
the solidarity shown by the international community
will help Palestinians find hope in these difficult times,
and prevent them from being driven to radicalism.

In that context, I also would like to touch upon the
Jericho Agro-Industrial Park. That industrial complex
now creates tangible employment and provides
Palestinian manufacturers and entrepreneurs with
a glimpse of a positive future. We envision products
made in the Park being exported through Jordan
to the region and beyond in the years to come. The
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative has offered
opportunities where Palestine, Israel, Jordan and Japan
cooperate for the economic development of Palestine
through regional cooperation. A ministerial meeting is
expected to be held soon.

Japan believes that keeping hope and mutual trust
alive through these efforts is essential, particularly
when the political track is at a difficult juncture.
Ultimately, though, the projects alone cannot achieve
peace. We reiterate that lasting peace and security can
be achieved only through negotiations between the
parties. Japan calls upon both parties to take concrete

steps towards renewed negotiations, leading to the
peaceful co-existence of a viable Palestinian State and
Israel with secure and recognized borders.

We will enhance our political engagement with both
parties, including at the highest level. Japan continues
to support a two-State solution that accommodates
the aspirations of both sides, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
The final status of Jerusalem should be resolved
through negotiations based on the assumption that it
will be the future capital of both States.

