Ms. Landgren: As members have seen in the
report of the Secretary-General before the Council
(S/20l3/l24), Liberia continues to make significant
progress as it approaches the 10-year anniversary of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Since that August
in Accra in 2003, Liberia has shown the world its
commitment to lasting peace, and the world has shown
its commitment to peace in Liberia. The resilience that
Liberians have demonstrated and their commitment
to moving the country forward are inspiring and bode
well for the hard work that still lies ahead.

Two months ago, Liberia hosted the High-level
Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda in a
meeting that illustrated how far the country has come.
In the words of Foreign Minister Augustine Ngafuan, it
has moved from pariah to partner, from problem child
to problem-solver. As he said, that is indisputably a
remarkable achievement.

The report before the Council describes the security
transition that began last October and in which the
Government will progressively take over responsibilities
from the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I
will say more about that, but let me begin by updating
the Council on the other critical processes that UNMIL
is mandated to support and which will need to advance
in tandem with the Mission's drawdown or, preferably,
somewhat ahead of it.

The Constitution Review Committee, appointed
last September, has been preparing options for that
defining reform process. Only last week, President
Johnson-Sirleaf agreed to add a year to the Committee's
original short timeline. As the Secretary-General noted
in his April 2012 special report (S/2012/230), many of
Liberia's underlying tensions are perpetuated by the
provisions of the Constitution. That makes it especially
important to conduct an inclusive and participatory
reform process. UNMIL is an active partner in that
process, which, on the United Nations side, also
includes the Department of Political Affairs and the
United Nations Development Programme.

Even with the extension, the timeline is brisk. The
Constitution Review Committee is expected to present
its recommended revisions to the legislature by mid-
2014. By law, at least 12 months must pass between
the legislature's action on the recommendations and
a popular referendum, which would now be held by
late 2015. Electoral reform is also moving ahead. The
National Elections Commission has held regional
consultations on a draft electoral law and is discussing
it with the legislature. The draft law features measures
to ensure the independence of the Commission, which
was a major call of the opposition during the 2011
elections.

The Land Commission has been conducting public
consultations on a historic draft land rights policy that
covers private, customary, Government and public
land tenure. The policy will be considered at a national
validation conference next month, with the involvement
of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
and UNMIL, and will form the basis of a new land
rights law. That creates an opportunity for Liberia to
move a step closer to addressing one of its principal
sources of instability and conflict.

Liberia's first justice and security hub, supported
by the Peacebuilding Fund as part of Liberia's
peacebuilding plan, was launched on 12 February in
Gbarnga, Bong County. Justice and security hubs have
the potential to bring Liberians significantly better
access to justice and security services, and the Gbarnga
hub will continue to need close attention even as the
focus turns towards the development of hubs two and
three, in Grand Gedeh and Maryland counties. Later
this year, a review will be conducted of the impact of
the first six months of hub one, but, so far, a major
lesson is that services should be rolled out in tandem
with the infrastructure. The plans for hubs two and
three are being adjusted to provide an earlier focus on
services.

There has been some progress in the area of
accountability. The Supreme Court upheld five
decisions of a judicial inquiry commission that had
issued significant penalties, including the suspension
of two judges, for corruption. In addition, the first case
prosecuted by the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission
resulted in a conviction against a former Inspector-
General of the Liberia National Police (LNP) and four
other defendants for embezzlement of funds intended
for the LNP.

However, issues of corruption and tensions between
branches of Government have remained at the forefront
of political life. In February, the legislature ordered
the Montserrado county superintendent detained in
connection with allegations related to the misuse of
development funds. The legislature then accused the
acting Mayor of Monrovia of thwarting the detention
and proceeded to a vote of no confidence against both
women, who subsequently resigned. That incident has
contributed to the undercurrent of mutual distrust
among Liberia's primary political actors, a climate
that can colour the country's ability to take forward
processes critical to democratic governance and long-
term stability, including constitutional reform and the
fair and transparent management of natural resources.

Liberia's border with Cote d'Ivoire remains a
significant focus for the Government and for UNMIL.
Operation Restore Hope, conducted jointly by the
Liberia National Police, the Bureau of Immigration
and Naturalization and the Armed Forces of Liberia,
has continued since June 2012. Despite a number of
challenges, the operation has proved a credible and
responsive presence along the border. Following cross-
border attacks last August, the border was largely calm
for seven months, although clashes on the Ivorian side
in January and March led to several deaths. In the past
week, with reports of armed attacks in some Ivorian
villages close to the border, increased attention is being
given in Liberia to avoiding any cross-border activity
that could be linked to such attacks. National security
agencies, the UNMIL force and the United Nations
police have carried out robust patrols, some jointly, in
strategic areas of Grand Gedeh, River Gee and Nimba
counties.

There has been no sign of any new refugee
influx, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has also reported growing
numbers of Ivorians returning home, with more than
5,200 so far in 2013. UNMIL and the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire continue our inter-mission
cooperation at all levels and are working actively with
both Governments to encourage the development of a
common border strategy that takes cooperation beyond
immediate security measures.

Ultimately, problems with political, economic and
social roots require solutions of broad scope. We expect
a follow-up quadripartite discussion, between the two
countries and the two missions, next month to move
this dialogue forward. I have just been informed that
this is confirmed for 5 April.

In January, President Johnson-Sirleaf noted in her
annual message that "the cleavages that led to decades
of war still run deep". Efforts over the past decade
have helped the country recover from conflict and set
the stage for a transformed nation. But to realize that
potential, those deep cleavages will need commensurate
attention to institutionalize the foundations for Liberia's
long-term stability.

As part of working towards those long-term
solutions, in December the President held a national
conference to launch the national Vision 2030 - a
long-term political and economic agenda, including
a fair political system, security, the rule of law and
national reconciliation. For the first five years of
the realization of the Vision, the Government has
presented a development plan - successor to the first
poverty reduction strategy - called the Agenda for
Transformation, as well as a National Reconciliation
Road Map, to sequence Liberia's enormous range of
competing priorities.

The Agenda and the Road Map outline Liberia's
path towards equitable growth and institutional
development, and reflect the close links between
reconciliation and development. The challenges are
considerable, and I would draw particular attention
to the need to achieve responsible and accountable
exploitation and management in the race for resource
extraction, where concessions, abuse and allegations
of corruption, already a source of significant tension,
have the potential to act as a catalyst for conflict. The
Government is conscious of those dangers and has
taken some steps to mitigate the risks, but much more
remains to be done.

At this point, let me read into the record a correction
to paragraph 9 of the report of the Secretary-General,
namely, that one deputy to the Auditor-General
resigned, not two.

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.6830), planning for
the security transition has moved to implementation.
UNMIL has begun its next military drawdown under
resolution 2066 (2012), and now, for the first time
since 2005, UNMIL's military is not permanently
deployed in every one of Liberia's 15 counties. So far,
military personnel have vacated two counties and will
leave another two next month. Meanwhile, the Nepali
formed police unit (FPU), the first of three new FPUs,
deployed in full today. During the rainy-season hiatus,
the Government and UNMIL will continue detailed
planning and preparations for the next phase. The
drawdown and reconfiguration have been possible
through the hard work of the joint Government-UNMIL
transition working group, which primes all national
security actors to assume their added responsibilities
and to make effective use of the former UNMIL
facilities.

In October, UNMIL handed over the first of its
facilities to national authorities at Robertsport, in Grand
Cape Mount County, and a second facility, in Foya,
near the Guinean and Sierra Leonean borders in Lofa
County, was handed over in January. Between October
and April, UNMIL's military will have withdrawn from
seven sites, of which the Government has taken over
four. This first phase of transition has been relatively
successful, but, from a security perspective, also
relatively undemanding. Even so, the Government
of Liberia has been stretched to deploy sufficient
resources, equipment and personnel to make good use
of the vacated sites and to cover the recurrent costs of
maintaining them. UNMIL and the Government will
soon hold a retreat to cost out transition needs through
mid-2015 and for the Government to plan how to make
those resources available.

As the Mission hands over locations and security
functions, the United Nations and partners continue
to invest in the development of Liberia's justice
and security sectors. To gauge progress and inform
strategic planning, several studies are under way,
including a review, funded by the Peacebuilding Fund,
of management and accountability mechanisms within
the police, judiciary and prosecution, and a baseline
capacity assessment of the Liberia National Police.
Over the coming months, UNMIL and national partners
will also be part of a security sector reform mapping
exercise to identify gaps, and tomorrow a national
criminal justice conference, supported by UNMIL, is
opening, to review and make recommendations for the
improved functioning of all components ofthe criminal
justice system.

The Peacebuilding Commission's (PBC) active
engagement, including last month's joint visit by the
Liberia and Sierra Leone country configurations, has
generated sustained attention and discussion on these
criticaljustice and security issues. The PBC is a valued
partner in bringing Liberia's peacebuilding issues to
the fore, and Ambassador Tillander's continued efforts
in mobilizing the required resources have been vital.

Women and girls in Liberia continue to face a
high incidence of sexual and gender-based violence,
including rape, often of young children. As Liberia
grapples with those issues, I would like to congratulate
Liberia's Permanent Representative to the United
Nations, Marjon Kamara, for the landmark resolution
reached by the Commission on the Status of Women
under her chairmanship, in which members commit
to the prevention and elimination of violence against
women and girls.

Addressing the Legislative Assembly in January,
President Johnson-Sirleaf spoke robustly of the need
for economic justice and the spread of opportunity for
all, saying that Liberia would never develop unless
Liberians worked together as a team. When Liberians
tell me what reconciliation means to them, most of
them talk about employment and better services.
Lasting peace will require fairness and inclusion for
all Liberians in their country's progress. It is more
important than ever, as UNMIL draws down, to move
swiftly to address the historic and current cleavages
that are so widely acknowledged. The United Nations
and all of Liberia's partners continue to stand by in
support of the legitimate and democratic aspirations of
Liberians, who also tell us repeatedly that they have no
wish to return to war.

