Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Russian presidency for convening today's meeting and
for the concept note (S/2018/524, annex), which calls on
us to consider the root causes of conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa with a view to addressing them
in a more comprehensive and effective way and in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In
particular, we would like to acknowledge your presence,
Mr. Deputy Minister, and to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his important briefing.

As a country steeped in its Hispanic heritage, Peru
maintains historical ties with the countries of the Middle
East and North Africa. We recognize the continuum,
from Morocco to the Persian Gulf, of a rich cultural,
religious and ethnic diversity and we want to highlight
the continuing desire for peace and prosperity of the
region's peoples. Any society or region can always
achieve sustainable peace with the firm support of the
international community, especially in the case of the
various communities of the Middle East and North
Africa region, which have always demonstrated a great
capacity for resilience. The work of the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, must begin with a
comprehensive analysis of the root causes of conflicts,
which, in many cases, are aggravated by political
instability, lack of development, intra-regional rivalries
and the presence of Violent extremism. In that regard,
Peru underscores the importance of ensuring that our
Organization can achieve greater coherence, efficiency
and effectiveness in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. To that end, we propose what we consider
three priority areas for action.

The first is about ensuring the validity of
multilateralism and international law. Peru believes
that with regard to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council must always live up to
the important responsibilities that the Charter of the
United Nations confers on it as well as ensure that its
mandated decisions are implemented. We emphasize
the binding character of international humanitarian
law in any conflict, as well as the need to preserve the
regimes for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and to strengthen international cooperation
so as to effectively combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

We also want to emphasize the Council's
responsibility for protecting civilian populations
from atrocity crimes when national Governments lack
the capacity or will to fulfil the basic responsibility
of protecting their own people. In accordance with
the Charter, we also emphasize the importance of
preventive diplomacy, the prerogatives conferred on
the Secretary-General and the mechanisms for the
peaceful settlement of disputes provided for in Chapter
VI, including recourse to the International Court of
Justice. Peru believes that in a world characterized
by an increasing level of interdependence, timely and
predictable action on the part of the United Nations is
essential to ensuring the effectiveness of a rules-based
collective security system that in turn is essential to
sustaining peace in any given country or region.

Our second point concerns the building and
strengthening of peaceful and inclusive societies
administered by transparent and accountable
institutions. The concept of sustainable peace is
based on building a common vision for a society
while ensuring that the needs of all sectors of the
population are considered, which entails establishing
inclusive institutions capable of preventing and
resolving the conflicts that naturally arise in any
society. It also entails having the capacities to meet the
people's expectations, acknowledging their legitimate
aspirations and protecting and promoting their human
rights - especially those of minorities - as well as
promoting development centred on the individual
and human dignity. We underscore the importance
of involving women and young people in building a
common vision for a future that is able to break the
vicious cycles of present and past conflicts as well as
the need to redouble efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as adopted by the Organization.

Lastly, our third point concerns the promotion of
new regional dynamics. Peru acknowledges that the
countries of the Middle East and North Africa face
significant challenges in achieving sustainable peace
that can lead to serious threats to international peace
and security, in particular with regard to those posed by
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. However,
far from condemning those regions to an endless
recurrence of their conflicts, history shows us that in
many periods and contexts, the peoples of the Middle
East and North Africa have been able to prosper in
peace and harmony while preserving their rich cultural,
ethnic and religious diversity.

In conclusion, I want to point out how important it
is to ensure that those countries, in line with Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, can depend on regional
mechanisms capable of fostering the dialogue and
confidence required to peacefully resolve their disputes
and, ultimately, ensure their peaceful coexistence.

