Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity you have offered
me to speak to the Security Council today about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As emphasized in the report (S/2017/206) of the
Secretary-General dated 10 March on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (8/2017/206),
the political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has undergone profound changes
over the past months, thereby requiring an adjustment
of the priorities and approach of MONUSCO.

The full implementation of the political agreement
of 31 December 2016, which paves the way, in the
clearest possible manner, to the holding of elections,
requires the full support of the United Nations.

Some impediments will have to be removed. The
ruling majority and the Rassemblement have opposing
views on how to appoint the Prime Minister, as well
as on the allocation of key roles in the Ministries for
Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, Defence and Justice
in the transitional Government that will be formed.
The role that the National Episcopal Conference of the
Congo (CENCO) could play in the finalization of the
special provisions is also a source of discord.

The death of Etienne Tshisekedi had a significant
impact on the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, further delaying the finalization
of the special provisions, the appointment of the
Prime Minister and the establishment of the national
agreement and electoral process monitoring committee.

As long as the political dialogue remains at
an impasse, there is a risk that tensions will rise. In
February, some of the seminaries and parishes of the
Catholic Church in Kananga, Kasai, Kinshasa and
Lubumbashi in Katanga were attacked, presumably
because of increased frustration among certain
segments of the population at seeing the political
process stall.

However, I wish to note that in the past few days
the situation seems to be moving in the right direction.
The appointment of the Deputy Secretary-General of
the Union pour la democratie et le progres social, Felix
Tshisekedi, as President of the Rassemblement, and of
Pierre Lumbi, a representative of the Groupe des sept
opposition coalition, to the head ofthe Conseil des sages
of the Rassemblement resulted in the resumption of
negotiations on the special provisions under the auspices
of CENCO on 16 March. In addition, the Presidents of
both houses of Parliament called for an irreversible and
credible electoral process and expressed their support
for the efforts of CENCO.

Notwithstanding the delays in the political process,
significant progress has been made in updating the
voter registry. To date, more than 19 million voters
have been enrolled, and the enrolment process is about
to begin in the two remaining enrolment areas.
The logistical and technical support of MONUSCO
to the enrolment process will come to an end at the
end of this month. At that time MONUSCO will have
transported approximately 3,000 tons of enrolment
material through the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
If authorized by the Security Council, MONUSCO is
willing to provide technical and logistical support to
the electoral process that goes beyond the updating of
the voter registry.

(spoke in English)

The deteriorating security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a source
of major concern. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, violence and threats to civilians
are no longer concentrated in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. Community-
based violence and inter-ethnic clashes have spread
from areas already affected by armed conflict, such as
the Kivus, to Tanganyika, the three Kasai provinces,
Lomami and Kongo Central. Armed group activity in
the east has also increased, particularly of late with the
resurfacing of former elements of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23).

The conduct of coordinated operations by the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) and MONUSCO against armed groups in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have helped maintain military pressure on the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda and the Force de resistance
patriotique de l'Ituri, disrupting their activities. The
FARDC has also been involved in actions against
former M-23 elements who had recently crossed into
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The resurgence of violence in certain areas in
the rest of the country has been exacerbated by the
uncertain political situation, as well as the manipulation
of grievances for political ends, and the provision of
support to armed militias by some political actors. The
increasing use of self-defence militias acting along
ethnic lines points to a growing sense of insecurity and
uncertainty. The risk of electoral violence also remains
high, mainly in urban areas. The potential for violence is
likely to increase further the longer the implementation
of the 31 December agreement is stalled, thereby

prolonging the current political uncertainty.

The spread of violence has been characterized by
a significant increase in human rights violations. The
year 2016 witnessed a 30 per cent increase in human
rights violations as compared to 2015, with MONUSCO
documenting a total of 5,190 human rights violations
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
State agents were responsible for 64 per cent of those
violations, and armed groups were responsible for the
remaining 36 per cent. I am particularly concerned
by reports of the excessive use of force, human rights
violations and the presence mass graves in the Kasai
provinces. I have encouraged the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to conduct thorough
investigations and to ensure that the perpetrators of
those acts are held to full account. MONUSCO of
course stands ready to provide its full support for the
carrying out of those investigations.

I would like to emphasize again that only political
solutions can address and halt the rising levels of
violence now being witnessed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. For our part, MONUSCO
remains fully engaged in protecting and promoting
human rights and the political space and is strongly
engaging with the relevant authorities on a regular basis
to ensure that perpetrators of human rights violations
are held accountable for their actions and are brought
to justice. MONUSCO is also strictly applying the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy for
any and all support provided to State security actors in
the implementation of its mandate.

I am also deeply concerned about the deteriorating
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The continued
depreciation of the Congolese franc, which has lost
over 30 per cent of its value in the past year, the lack
of foreign-currency reserves and the fiscal shortfall
are having an increasing impact on the livelihoods of
Congolese citizens, and will continue to do so in the
coming months.

Those developments are coupled with a
deteriorating humanitarian situation due to the
intensifying violence. A total of2.2 million persons are
currently forcibly displaced. In Tanganyika province
alone, violence forced approximataely 102,000 persons
into displacement in the last quarter of 2016, while
the violence in the Kasais had displaced an estimated
225,000 persons by the end of January this year.

The 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan is funded
at just over 60 per cent, putting pressure on the
humanitarian community to respond to these new
displacements. At the same time, refugees from South
Sudan continue to cross into the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees having registered
28,000 refugees in areas close to the border by January
of this year.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General, the 31 December agreement provides a clear
path towards the holding of elections, setting the stage
for MONUSCO's drawdown and exit. The Mission's
main strategic objective during the coming months
will therefore be to support the establishment of an
environment conducive to the timely holding of peaceful,
credible and inclusive elections, in accordance with the
provisions of the agreement. Accordingly, MONUSCO
has already undertaken adjustments to its posture and
operations. The Mission will continue to make such
adjustments as may be required in the months ahead to
ensure that it is well positioned to use the full range of
tools and resources at its disposal to support the political
and electoral process, contribute to the protection of
civilians and assist with stabilization efforts.

The Mission has provided its full support to the
CENCO-led dialogue efforts and in the updating
of the voter registry. It has strengthened its civilian
and military presence and operations in new areas of
concern outside the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, specifically the Kasais and
Tanganyika. We have also initiated a process of shifting
key functions from Goma to Kinshasa, in order to
strengthen the Mission headquarters. I have requested
that the MONUSCO protection-of-civilians strategy be
revised to address the threat to the civilian population
from armed groups.

The report of the Secretary-General also sets out a
package of measures aimed at enhancing the ability of
the MONUSCO force to support the achievement of the
Mission's strategic objectives in the current challenging
security context through the adoption of a more mobile,
flexible and agile posture. The Secretary-General has
recommended the deployment of two additional formed
police units (FPUs) to help the Congolese authorities
address the potential threat of electoral and politically

motivated violence in key urban centres where there is
no police or FPU presence.

The primary responsibility for the implementation
of the agreement rests with its signatories and will
require the same level of commitment and compromise
that led to its signing, on 31 December. MONUSCO will
continue to provide support for the implementation of
the agreement, while also supporting efforts to address
the mounting threats faced by the civilian population
during the transition period.

I thank you again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council today. I look forward
to the ensuing discussions.

