Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ithankyou, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. We also thank Ambassador
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Ambassador
Djani, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011); and Ambassador Adela Raz,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for their
insights into recent developments in Afghanistan.

We meet at a time when the Afghan people mark
a century of their independence this year and their
country stands at yet another transformational juncture.
Preparations are under way for the presidential elections,
scheduled to be held in a few weeks. Afghanistan is
poised to renew its commitment to an order ensuring
that a democratically elected Government is at the heart
of any process to determine a peaceful settlement of its
issues. We should all join in support of the solution that
will best suit the country and can be implemented in a
sustainable and dignified manner.

Notwithstanding the unforeseen shifts and
challenges to which we are accustomed, we note the
cautious optimism in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/703). Even though the journey ahead may not
be easy or predictable, we welcome the opportunities
for peace and reconciliation emerging from the
various efforts.

It is the Afghan people who will implement and bear
the consequences of any agreements reached. Hence,
outcomes that have constitutional legitimacy and a
political mandate and are arrived at in an inclusive and
democratic way alone can ensure stability. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's call for direct talks.

Peace and reconciliation cannot go forward in an
atmosphere of terror. There has been a surge in violence
in Afghanistan in recent days, including threats to the
election process itself. That has deepened apprehensions
that acts of terror are being used to compete for a place
of advantage in the negotiating process.

The international community needs to continue
its support by fulfilling the commitments made to
the Afghan security forces in their fight against the
scourge of terrorism. The support and safe havens
enjoyed from beyond Afghanistan's borders by groups
such as the Taliban, the Haqqani Network and Da'esh,
as well as Al-Qaida and its proscribed affiliates,
including Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaysh al-Mujahidin,
must be addressed. Having been victims of terrorism,
we understand and empathize with our Afghan friends
over the suffering and pain that they are undergoing.

Amid the clouds of uncertainty of the present, we
should not forget the precious gains that the Afghan
people have made in the past 18 years. They have
strengthened and embraced democracy; established
a constitutional order; promoted the welfare and
rights of minorities and young people; built a strong
and increasingly capable security force; and forged
deeper regional links. They have done all that while
confronting the most brutal threats posed by terrorism.
Even in the most difficult times, the famed Afghan
resilience and strength of character shine through in
their homes, schools, colleges, theatres, markets and
factories and, indeed, on their sports grounds. Lest
anyone doubt that, less than 48 hours ago, Afghan
cricketers secured their second victory in three cricket
test matches played thus far. The last time such a feat
was accomplished by any country was way back in the
19th century. That is only one instance and is symbolic
of the many gains that the Afghan people are making,
unknown to many. Another accomplishment is the
remarkable reclamation by Afghanistan's women of
their rightful place in all parts of society. Those hard-
won achievements need to be nurtured, not nullified.

India's support for the Afghan people is well
known, and I reiterate it here. We believe that there
is hope on the horizon. We remain willing to work
with all countries in the region and beyond, keeping
Afghanistan's sovereignty and its ownership of the
peace process at the forefront.

We hope that the international community, through
the Council and its various instruments, can finally
do right by the people of Afghanistan and support an
inclusive peace that will ensure that the destiny of the
country will be steered by the Afghan people.

