Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. Let me also
express my gratitude to the briefers for their insightful
remarks today.

International terrorism and organized crime
are two significant threats facing the international
community. As stated in resolution 2195 (2014), it is our
responsibility to enhance cooperation and strategies to
prevent terrorists from benefiting from transnational
organized crime. The full and strict implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions is essential to
combating terrorism and organized crime. Japan will
continue to synergize its efforts in countering both
terrorism and organized crime so as to contribute to the
peace and stability of its region and the world.

The years 2019 and 2020 are important years for
Japan's counter-terrorism policy. Two weeks ago we
hosted our first Group of 20 Summit, at which we adopted
a leaders statement on counter-terrorism. Japan will
host further important events, including the 2020 Tokyo
Olympics and Paralympics. The Japanese Government
has tirelessly invested its efforts in strengthening its
counter-terrorism capabilities, including on border
control, information-sharing and public-private
partnerships to ensure the safety of everyone involved
in those events. We have also thoroughly implemented
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Our national efforts work hand in hand with global
action to combat terrorism. We have actively engaged
in contributing to the strengthening of the capabilities
of our fellow Member States. There have been far too
many tragic incidents in recent years around the world,
including Sri Lanka, and we remain ready to cooperate
with States in need of assistance in their counter-
terrorism measures.

Our efforts to combat terrorism must also
synchronize with action against organized crime.
Transnational organized crime is a common threat that
all countries face today. The magnitude and impact of
such crime continues to grow and undermine peace
and security, as well as the rule of law. Combating
transnational organized crime requires not only a
strong commitment and effective law enforcement
domestically, but also robust international cooperation.
In that regard, Japan firmly believes that the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its Protocols serve as the universal framework
for such cooperation. The scope of offences covered
by the Convention is broad enough to include global
challenges, such as terrorism and cybercrime. Japan
has started using the Convention as the basis for its
international partnerships and is committed to further
strengthening its cooperation with all Member States.

Japan will also contribute to collective efforts to
combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
by hosting the fourteenth United Nations Congress
on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, or Kyoto
Congress, in April 2020. Under the main theme
"Advancing crime prevention, criminal justice and
the rule of law: towards the achievement of the 2030
Agenda", Japan wishes to discuss and identify practical
measures, including the effective use of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, with the attendance of high-level officials of
Member States to strengthen international cooperation
and technical assistance to prevent and address all
forms of crime that hinder sustainable development.

