Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the delegation of Turkey for
having convened this very important debate. The
delegation of Uruguay welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277), presented this morning by
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. John Holmes. The report constitutes an important
input for advancing the discussion of this issue. Its
issuance 10 years after this question was first
considered by the Security Council raises expectations
regarding not only the evaluation to be made about the
progress made, but also concerning the core challenges
that lie ahead.

In addition to being an ethical imperative that
reflects the broad evolution of human consciousness
towards ways of life whose core values are respect for
life, integrity and human dignity, the protection of
civilians also represents a legal imperative based on
universally accepted rules of international
humanitarian law. In the case of the protection carried
out by the United Nations in the framework of a
peacekeeping operation, these rules must include the
consent of the host country and the existence of a
Security Council resolution containing such a mandate.

Uruguay shares the view that, above and beyond
humanitarian action, in order effectively to improve the
protection of civilians this activity should be addressed
through a comprehensive approach that also includes
protection through peacekeeping, the promotion of the
rule of law, political stability, disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, reconstruction and
economic and social development.

Given time constraints, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to focus on two extremely
sensitive aspects of this issue: the situation of the most

vulnerable sectors of the civilian population in armed
conflicts, such as women and children; and the
protection of civilians through peacekeeping
operations.

Once again, women and children are identified as
vulnerable groups that require special protection. The
attention given to this subject by various United
Nations bodies, in particular in the General Assembly
and the Security Council, has increased. Despite the
considerable efforts made in this regard, a great deal of
work remains to be done if we are to ensure the due
protection that they are due.

It is imperative to ensure the inclusion of a cross-
cutting gender perspective in all the work of the
Organization, including in peacekeeping operations
and in the field of humanitarian assistance. The number
of cases of gender-based violence, including sexual
violence, in situations of armed conflict is alarming.

Uruguay supports the increased priority being
given to children affected by armed conflicts on the
international agenda, and will continue to contribute to
all efforts in this regard. We value the joint work of
civil society with the entire United Nations system,
including the Office of the Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF child
protection advisers and the staff of peacekeeping
missions; to create sustainable child protection
mechanisms.

We reiterate the need to pay greater attention to
the reintegration of the victims of grave violations of
their rights, in particular in cases of sexual abuse and
exploitation. We believe that it is essential to tirelessly
combat impunity for those responsible for violations in
blatant contravention of international norms, especially
against women and children. In that connection, we
urge the Security Council to refer such cases to the
International Criminal Court.

We are especially grateful for the report's annex
concerning restrictions to access to humanitarian
assistance. We agree that only safe, timely and
unhindered access will make it possible to provide
protection and assistance to those in need.

Any humanitarian response must be sustainable
and take into account the development perspective. In
that regard, it is essential to ensure the necessary
building of capacities at the national level, in particular
in cases in which constraints are due to the physical
environment. We regret that, in some cases, constraints
are the result of Government policies or the practices
of local actors who interfere with humanitarian
operations. The reports of the Secretary-General must
continue to request the facilitation of speedy and
timely access for humanitarian assistance given the
numerous obstacles that continue to be set up even in
cases in which international humanitarian law requires
such access.

Uruguay reiterates the urgent need to preserve
and strengthen the norms of international humanitarian
law in order to ensure the full implementation of the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence. It is also crucial to facilitate access to
humanitarian personal and ensure that they have the
proper security conditions in which to carry out their
tasks.

Enhancing protection by improving effectiveness
and providing greater resources to peacekeeping
operations is one of the five core challenges identified
in the report of the Secretary-General, which stresses
that the inclusion of protection activities in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, which began in
1999 with the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone,
is among the most significant of Security Council
actions on this issue.

Uruguay acknowledges that the Council has
played a pioneering role in the development of this
concept, and especially in translating it into reality.
Nevertheless, we take this opportunity to emphasize
the importance of achieving the broadest possible
support for this issue, in which the lives of innocent
people and the credibility of the United Nations are at
stake.

A wider base of support would not ensure greater
legitimacy for and less resistance to these efforts, but
would also produce a deeper commitment among all
actors involved in implementation. For instance, it
should not be forgotten that those responsible for
implementing the civilian protection mandates of
peacekeeping operations adopted by the Security
Council are by and large troop-contributing countries
from the developing world. Those countries have very
limited opportunities to participate in or influence the
process of developing those mandates.

In that connection, we believe that this is a good
time to highlight the significant effort made by
Member States in March when the Special Committee

on Peacekeeping Operations decided to take up this
issue for the first time. As we pointed out on that
occasion and as various participants on the ground
indicated at the workshop we co-hosted with Australia
earlier this year, there is a need for clear guidelines that
emanate from equally clear and realistic mandates, as
well as for specialized training for those who must
implement this complex task. Above all, there is a need
for appropriate resources.

It is essential to ensure that certain conditions
exist so that this effort can be carried out effectively
and while protecting the physical and emotional
integrity of those who undertake it. In that regard, there
must be a close correlation between mandates and
resources. Too often, civilian protection mandates do
not include the necessary and appropriate human and
material assets. It is therefore essential that those
resources be sufficient to undertake this complex task
successfully to the benefit of all.

Finally, the delegation of Uruguay looks forward
to the joint report of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We hope to be able to continue
to participate constructively on the discussions on this
issue.

