I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam, the two States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on the Security Council. At the outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble, Prime Minister of Somalia, to this meeting. I would also like to thank Special Representatives Swan and Madeira, as well as Ms. Zainab Hassan, for their enlightening briefings. We welcome the positive developments in Somalia, particularly the continuing dialogue between the Federal Government and federal member state leaders, which has ended the political impasse that had been ongoing since 2018. Only through continuing dialogue in a spirit of unity and cooperation can Somalia tackle the political, security and humanitarian challenges confronting it. We also welcome the appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation of his new Cabinet. Having said all of that, I would like to highlight three points. First, the agreement reached by the Somali Government and the federal member states regarding the modalities and timeline for the election is an important milestone. We note that the electoral model constitutes progress having been made on the 2016 model, by expanding the voting franchise and guaranteeing the 30 per cent quota for women in Parliament. We are heartened by the general acceptance of the model by the political parties and civil society organizations. We look forward to further clarifications being provided on several aspects of the modalities and the resolution of several outstanding issues. We hope that the electoral model can be implemented in a secure and peaceful manner, based on the agreed timeline. It is also important to create a favourable environment and to step up the protection measures needed for civilians in the electoral process. We would also like to reiterate the need for continued international support in State-building efforts, including the strengthening of State institutions and the constitutional review, which will hopefully bring long-term peace and prosperity to Somalia. In that regard, we welcome the signing of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework by the Government of Somalia and the United Nations, the priorities of which are aligned with Somalia's national development plan. Secondly, we remain concerned about the volatile security situation. Despite the efforts of the Somali security forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Al-Shabaab continues to demonstrate its ability to conduct attacks, including those carried out using improvised explosive devices and high-profile suicide attacks. We once again condemn all recent attacks by Al-Shabaab and extend our condolences to the Government and the people of Somalia, particularly the families of the victims. We would like to reiterate that any such attack is unacceptable and that all perpetrators must be brought to justice. We are particularly concerned that Al-Shabaab continues to target the Somali National Army (SNA) and AMISOM in recovered areas in Lower Shabelle. We reiterate the importance of a Somali-led update to the transition plan that will lay the foundations for security transition in Somalia, including with regard to future international support. We also believe that it is crucial to continue force generation efforts as well as training and capacity-building for the SNA. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Somalia is concerning. The triple challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic, flooding and desert locusts has resulted in increased displacements and people in need of humanitarian assistance. We are concerned that insufficient funding and ongoing insecurity constitute major constraints to humanitarian efforts. We call on international partners to scale up funding in order to support the humanitarian response plan and alleviate the suffering of the Somali people. We condemn the attacks against humanitarian workers and reiterate the importance of ensuring unimpeded humanitarian assistance and relief. Lastly, we reaffirm our respect for Somalia's sovereignty and territorial integrity and convey our utmost tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and all actors working to ensure lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
