Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
May I at the outset welcome the initiative that you,
Mr. President, have taken in organizing this debate.

At the end of a year which will have seen the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 50/70 - which
sets the goal of the final elimination of anti-personnel
mines - and the conclusion of work of the first Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on
Prohibition or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons, it was indeed particularly timely
for the Council to take up the question of demining in the
context of United Nations peace-keeping operations.

With strict respect for the competences of the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the specialized
agencies and the programmes of our Organization, as well
as of the disarmament forums, the international
conununity must deal with this question in all of its
aspects: disarmament, development and, of course,
humanitarian aspects.

Security Council action in this area must be seen
against the background of the efforts of the international
conununity to eliminate land-mines and humanitarian
interventions to restrict the effects of this scourge.

For France, the objectives are to outlaw and totally
eliminate anti-personnel mines, and my country's
commitment to these objectives is of long standing.

On 9 February 1993, France requested the Secretary-
General to convene the Review Conference for the 1980
Convention in the very firm hope that this would lead to
a substantive review of the provisions of Protocol II of
the Convention.

 
The first Review Conference ended last May. The
results achieved, even if they did not fully meet France's
expectations, nevertheless represent significant progress.
Substantial gains have been made, despite certain
shortcomings, but this is but one stage, and the machinery
adopted for annual consultations and the commitment to
convene another review conference in five years both attest
to the fact that States Parties to the Convention wish to
continue to work together.

France considers that the efforts to put an end to the
scourge of anti-personnel mines will take on full
significance only through the adoption of a verifiable
international agreement on the total elimination of these
mines.

France's commitment to this objective is tangible and,
as proof, I cite the restrictions my country has imposed on
itself regarding, first of all, the export of anti-personnel
mines. In 1993 France became one of the first countries to
proclaim a complete moratorium. This unilateral decision
covers all types of anti-personnel mines and all destinations.

In addition, France decided last September to adopt a
moratorium on the production of all categories of anti-
personnel mines. At the same time, it committed itself to
the destruction of its stockpiles. It goes without saying that
my country urges all States to join it in that decision.

We are aware of the unfortunate figures on the
numbers of land-mines laid throughout the world and the
number of victims killed or maimed each year by these
devices. This shows a very urgent humanitarian need.

France therefore provides considerable assistance to
demining activities. In our national capacity or within the
framework of United Nations peace-keeping operations, we
have sent demining teams and demining training teams to
Lebanon, Pakistan - operation Salam in 1989 - Somalia,
Cambodia, Mozambique and the former Yugoslavia. My
country is now participating in operations in Angola where,
since its establishment, 12 instructors have been working at
the demining school of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III).

I should like to take this opportunity to pay a special
tribute to all the specialized personnel who, with great
courage, have taken on a dangerous, thankless but very
necessary task. I should like to mention here the efforts
made by the European Union in demining and the
contributions of States to the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund. The Permanent Representative of Ireland will,
in the name of the European Union, take up these points
in a statement with which the French delegation fully
associates itself.

Given that the negotiation of universal and binding
disarmament instruments and humanitarian intervention
are two indispensable areas of action for the eradication
of anti-personnel mines, the Council is, in the conduct of
peace-keeping operations, confronted every day with the
problems posed by mines. Recent debates during the
renewal of the mandates of UNAVEM. III or of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
have shown that the existence of mined areas and the
laying of new mines directly affect the implementation of
the mandates of the United Nations forces.

It is therefore important to better integrate questions
linked to mines with all stages of the definition and
implementation of the mandates of United Nations forces,
and I shall offer here only the following few guidelines.
First, we should make the contingents of United Nations
forces and, obviously, populations more aware of the
mine problem. Secondly, we should set priorities for
carrying out demining activities and make them consistent
with the other objectives of the mandates given to United
Nations personnel. Thirdly, we should combine
programmes for mine elimination and the establishment
of national capacity for demining in countries where
peace-keeping operations are being carried out. Finally,
we should obviously ensure the security of personnel
through the provision of protective vehicles and
appropriate means of transportation.

The French delegation, in any case, is very
receptive to all suggestions put forward during this
debate, in its desire to have a better grasp of the problem
of mines in defining the mandates that we give to the
Blue Helmets.

Let us not forget that mines are a major obstacle to
development. The French delegation would like to
reaffirm its determination to act to outlaw anti-personnel
mines, and it urges the greatest possible number of
countries to join it in achieving this great objective.

