Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate, which may help
point the discussion on the way forward, and the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Takasu, for his presentation.

As a member of the Organizational Committee,
Italy fully shares and strongly supports Mr. Takasu's
agenda, which is our own agenda and an ambitious
agenda, as it must be. All of us who took part in the
run-up to the Summit discussing this issue, and after
the Summit in the run-up to the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, remember very well what
we had in mind and what were our expectations and
ambitions. I think that, certainly, we must have a
realistic and pragmatic approach, but we must also, I
repeat, be ambitious. We must have an ambitious
agenda so as to live up to the expectations that were
the expectations of our leaders in 2005. It would be
very sad, to say the least, if we settled for less.

At the outset, I also wish to commend the former
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Permanent Representative of Angola, for his
outstanding efforts in laying the foundation for the
Commission's work. The Peacebuilding Commission
has succeeded in building its credibility by adopting
rules and working methods, developing
implementation strategies for countries on the agenda
and bringing all the stakeholders together to work
towards the same goals, thereby avoiding waste of
resources and overlap of programmes. It has not been
an easy task, as has been recalled. Thanks to
Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins' leadership and
patience - a lot of patience - we succeeded.

On that basis - and, I wish to emphasize, thanks
to the commitment of the Coordinators of the country-
specific configurations, the Permanent Representatives
of the Netherlands and of Norway - the Commission
has adopted a Strategic Framework for Burundi and is

currently working on a strategy for Sierra Leone,
actively involving all the stakeholders through the
United Nations Office on the ground and the
Peacebuilding Support Office. I also join others in
expressing strong appreciation for the work of
Ambassador Gallardo Hernandez as Vice-Chair of the
Commission and as Chair of the Working Group on
Lessons Learned. Here, I express my disappointment
that we are not able to listen to her today on the issue
of lessons learned.

Let me also express my strong disappointment at
not being able to listen to the voice of the European
Union - that is to say, the voice of the most important
donor to the United Nations in this field - and to not
to be able to listen to the voice of Jamaica as the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) coordinator, because
NAM. has a very special take and specific interest on
the issue we are discussing today. And, if I am not
wrong, all of us around this table are here on behalf of
the membership, and being here on behalf of the
membership, we have to listen to the membership. And
I wonder how we think, for example, that we can
encourage the European Union and its 27 member
countries to go on being the main donors and to be in
the vanguard in implementation and in supporting the
Peacebuilding Commission if we do not hear the voice
of the European Union around this table.

Now we have to develop a reliable mechanism
for monitoring and tracking mutual commitments and
trends in the peacebuilding process, without increasing
the burden on national Governments. It is of great
importance for the effective coordination and strategic
advice we all expect from the Peacebuilding
Commission that all relevant actors be included in the
country-specific configurations. That is why we favour
the participation of the European Union, alongside the
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. The same
holds true for the involvement of civil society, once the
guidelines have been adopted for its participation in the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Now it is
crucial to develop an active policy that gears those
relationships towards concrete results.

As noted by previous speakers, significant
achievements have undoubtedly been made thus far.
But one year on, we have to move forward and address
new challenges in a creative and flexible way that will
help to develop policies that fit diverse situations. If
the Peacebuilding Commission wishes to live up to the
ambitions that I mentioned before, it must now
articulate a richer and more varied agenda, enlarging
its vision of the peace process and its range of action.

First of all, we should start looking at peace
processes as a whole. When considering the
establishment of a new peacekeeping mission, the
Security Council could, as appropriate, take advantage
of the advice of the Peacebuilding Commission so that
an effective peacebuilding strategy could be envisaged
at the earliest possible stage. The entire process centred
on the Peacebuilding Commission should be conceived
as a relay race, if I may put it that way, involving all
the stakeholders. If we do not think in terms of
integrated planning processes, we risk failure, wasted
effort and a return to conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission should therefore
take on a more proactive role, on a wider radar screen,
so to speak, in order to better assure the continuity of
what the international community is doing and intends
to do to stabilize a country. In line with such an
approach and in order to fully comply with its role as
an advisory body of the Council, as envisaged by
resolution 1645 (2005), the Peacebuilding Commission
might become a sort of permanent observatory of
potential new countries that are on their way to exiting
the immediate conflict phase.

From such a perspective, it should work together
better and more effectively with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
whole United Nations system to be ready - at the
appropriate time and upon request - to address critical
situations. That would be a marked improvement over
the current procedure of simply waiting until a
situation is placed on the table of the Peacebuilding
Commission, consequently placing it at the starting
point of a process, with the result of losing time and,
thus, effectiveness and efficiency. The point is that,
when the Peacebuilding Commission has a country
situation on its table and begins working on it, that
should not be the starting point of a process. Instead,
we should already have done our homework in parallel
with the peacekeeping aspect. That is why I am
speaking of a sort of relay race. At a certain moment,
the previous runner - peacekeeping - passes the
baton to the next one, who continues the race but who
is already prepared rather than starting from scratch.

The Peacebuilding Commission will be judged by
concrete results on the ground. Allow me then to make
some concrete suggestions for the new Chairman,
Ambassador Takasu. He has already covered these
areas, in part, in his briefing, so in fact I am only
emphasizing what he said earlier. Italy reiterates here
its strong appreciation for the work he has already done
and again assures him of its strongest support.

First, we must enhance dialogue and focus
coordination among all the stakeholders, building on
projects already implemented or approved with full
respect for national ownership of the process. Here, I
also wish to stress, as has recently been said in
connection with Afghanistan, that in talking about
coordination, the point is that people must be ready to
be coordinated. That is also an issue that may cause
problems once we are on the ground.

Secondly, we have to involve the international
financial institutions at all levels - on the ground, at
headquarters and on the executive boards. This has
already been said, but we must have more involvement
than we have had until now.

Thirdly, we must affirm the strategic role of the
Peacebuilding Commission by developing and
implementing the integrated peacebuilding strategies,
to which all the stakeholders, starting with the United
Nations system, should refer, and by designing a
credible mechanism to monitor the stabilization
process.

Fourthly, we should enlarge the agenda not only
by gradually increasing the number of countries but
also by increasing the number of thematic debates that
might support action on the ground.

Fifthly, we should organize more active
participation of the Peacebuilding Commission on the
ground by building a more intense relationship with the
United Nations country offices, the Resident
Coordinators and others.

Sixthly, we must enhance the active involvement
of regional and subregional organizations. That is an
essential point.

And finally, we must envisage, with the help of
the Peacebuilding Support Office, a strategy for
reaching out to the donor community and marshalling
the resources necessary to implement peacebuilding
strategies without duplication. Given the drastic need
for resources, it is all the more important to use them
better and to try to achieve predictable financing for
medium-term and long-term interventions.

I would also add that I believe that the problem is
not the financial resources. When there are ideas and
projects - valid projects - the money will come. Let
us not focus on marshalling resources - money,
money, money. Money will come. The point is
elsewhere; the critical point is to plan what we want to
do. When we have the projects, the money will come.
In fact just yesterday my Ministry, in announcing that
we are contributing another €2 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund, told me to stress that more
millions could very well come, but that we had to be
clear about where they would be spent.

