Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
delegation of Pakistan for their very timely convening
of this meeting, and I thank you, Sir, for coming to
preside over the meeting.

My delegation associates itself with the
intervention to be made by the representative of Ireland
on behalf of the European Union.

We find ourselves before an extraordinary
opportunity to deal with this issue. The challenge to the
United Nations is enormous, and in order to confront it
most assuredly, it is important to take a number of
factors into account.

First, despite the fact that since the publication of
the Brahimi report considerable progress has been
made in strengthening the operational capacity of the
United Nations, there remain some areas in which
efforts should continue to be made. The nature of
conflicts requires multidisciplinary mandates and
increasingly complex missions. That requires the
integrated planning of missions. In addition, the United
Nations capacity for rapid deployment needs to be
reinforced in terms of financing, materiel and
personnel. We should emphasize the importance of
continuing to improve the training of mission
personnel. In that context, it is advisable to continue to
promote the establishment of benchmarks and criteria
to achieve homogenized and interrelated training.

Secondly, we believe that cooperation with
regional organizations can and should play an
increasingly essential role in the reinforcement of the
operational capacity of the United Nations. The recent
experience of Operation Artemis is a good example of
that approach.

Thirdly, we must keep in view the evolution of
the concept of peacekeeping operations, which is
reflected in their multidimensional nature. For that
reason, there should be a more systematic inclusion of
peace-building components such as activities to
strengthen the rule of law, security sector reform,
financial assistance and the strengthening of respect for
human rights.

Fourthly, we believe that the Security Council
should strive to adopt clear and realistic mandates. To
do that, in addition to taking up the recommendations
proposed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, it is important to strengthen the
relationship between the Council and those who
ultimately carry out the authorized mandates.

Fifthly, we believe that the emergence of new
missions in bordering countries has opened up infinite
possibilities for coordination among those missions,
which are undoubtedly worth exploring. We encourage
efforts in that respect.

Finally, it is necessary to prepare an exit strategy
in order to avoid the interminable continuation of
missions. Resources are limited, and missions should
have the goal of achieving a given mandate. The
mission's size, mandate and structure should be
regularly modified based on the progress achieved.

