Mr. Zawels (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Today, in circumstances that are obviously very
different from those in which it has usually considered
this question in the past, the Security Council is
considering the situation in the occupied territories, in
particular the matter of the Israeli settlements in those
territories.

In October 1991, this conflict began to be dealt with
comprehensively, involving all of the parties and the
various and essential bilateral and multilateral
frameworks. The peace process begun in Madrid at that
time has now begun to bear fruit. The first significant
result was the Declaration of Principles on Interim
Self-Government Arrangements, signed by the
Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) on 13 September 1993. The other,
more recent, was the signing on 26 October 1994 of the
Peace Treaty between the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
and the State of Israel.

This process is extremely complicated and
necessarily difficult, with its many actors, issues and
variables. However, the international community and, in

 

particular, the United States and the Russian Federation,
sponsors of the peace process, strongly support this effort,
because they know that a lasting and just solution will
spring only from dialogue and the firm belief of the
concerned parties themselves. More than 40 years of
searching for other means managed only to keep the
conflict alive and, unfortunately, frustrated several
generations in the Middle East. Today, however, we are
walking the path of peace.

The situation created by Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories is a source of concern for my
Government. We believe that the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian authorities should speed up the joint quest
for a solution to this sensitive question. In recent months
there have been some mixed signals; these have confused
and disturbed the Palestinian people, which we find
understandable. I wish to reiterate that the framework for
this action is that stipulated in the Declaration of Principles
on Interim Self-Government Arrangements.

This problem is undoubtedly serious. However, it is
but one of the problems still unresolved and requiring an
active solution by the parties.

The repeated terrorist attacks against both parties, but
especially against Israel, are the barbaric acts of those who
reject peace and seek only destruction and grief, using the
excuse of hatred, the veil of fanaticism or the drug of
resentment. My country has twice been the object of
terrorist attacks related to the Middle East conflict, most
recently in Buenos Aires, on 18 July 1994, when many
Argentines, including, of course, some of Jewish origin,
were killed or wounded. As a result, we are keenly aware
of this scourge and believe that this subject requires the
urgent attention not only of the parties, but also of the
international community in general.

This debate in the Security Council is a good
opportunity to express firm support for the peace process
that began in Madrid in 1991 and to repeat the need for the
parties, with the support of the sponsors and the
international community as a whole, to redouble their
efforts to continue making progress together in this historic
process, which opens up the clear prospect of a time of
peace and prosperity for the Middle East as a whole.

The Argentine Republic, which has a long-standing
relationship of friendship with the Governments and peoples
of the region, supports this peace process strongly and
firmly and believes that it is the right framework, chosen by
the parties themselves, to resolve outstanding questions.

 

From within the Security Council, Argentina will continue
to see to it that the right conditions prevail for the
continuation of this indispensable dialogue between the
parties. We place all our hopes in the success of this
dialogue.

