Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
say, Mr. President, on behalf of my Government, that we
are delighted that you are chairing this very important
meeting, and, on my own behalf, that it is a very great
pleasure to see a very good personal friend in the Chair.

I also would like to thank, on behalf of my
Government, the members of the Council for their
statements of condolence and support today, and
specifically the very personal reflections of Ambassador
Sacirbey. As President Clinton has said, the United States
is determined that the perpetrators of the outrageous and
cowardly attack in Oklahoma City shall be brought to
justice. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and
their families. Although we do not know the motives of
those who committed this heinous crime, we do know that
it bore the senseless, brutal and indiscriminate stamp of
terrorism. Few of the countries represented here have not,
at one time or another, been its victims. The tragedy
should reinforce our common determination to forge a
world where those who obey the law are secure and those
who commit outrages against it are brought to heel.

We deeply appreciate the offers of assistance from
other Governments. At this time, our officials in
Oklahoma believe that they do have sufficient resources.
However, if a need arises, we will be in contact with the
Governments concerned. On behalf of the people of the
United States, I thank all members for this demonstration
of concern for the victims of this crime. On behalf of us
all, I urge renewed commitment to the rule of law and
civility in human affairs.

 

I recall the cautious optimism that went into our initial
decision to ease sanctions in response to Serbian President
Milosevic's announced willingness to close his borders with
the Serb-controlled areas of Bosnia. I recall, too, the greater
realism that characterized our work in January, when we
acknowledged progress made and worked to remedy
weaknesses in the border closure regime. In these exercises,
and in the monthly reviews of the situation, my
Government has welcomed successes, but we have also
been frank about shortcomings in implementation. My
Government has made our concerns known to other
members of this Council, to the authorities in Belgrade and
to the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
(ICFY) monitoring Mission. The United States believes that
Belgrade has not done enough to comply with its
commitment to isolate the Bosnian Serbs. That is why we
could not have supported a resolution that represented
"business as usual".

For the past 200 days, as now, we have supported and
encouraged the excellent work of the ICFY Mission and
have contributed to strengthening its capabilities. If we are
to ensure that the closure of the border is as comprehensive
as President Milosevic said it would be, we have no
stronger instrument than a fully staffed and fully funded
ICFY Mission. We therefore strongly encourage all
Member States to increase their support for this important
Mission.

The resolution we have just adopted is designed to
acknowledge progress, but even more important, it is
intended to close remaining loopholes. This Council must
be prepared to take steps to bolster enforcement and signal
to the Serb authorities that we expect them to live up to
what they claim is a shared objective - absolute closure of
the border, except for those instances and items which the
Council has explicitly exempted. The resolution we have
just voted on is straightforward. Belgrade must close the
land and air border with Bosnia and not seek to circumvent
the closure of that border by illegally shipping goods
through Serb-controlled parts of Croatia. The United States
was prepared to block adoption of this resolution if these
steps to tighten the border closure were not included.

During the 75-day period leading up to 5 July we will
watch closely to see if Belgrade improves compliance with
its commitment to close the border. We urge the ICFY
monitoring Mission, the Co-Chairmen of the ICFY Steering
Committee and the Secretary-General to implement fully
paragraphs 13 and 15 of this resolution. It is up to them to
make sure that the Council's decisions are more than words
on pieces of paper.

We need also to remind ourselves that the border
closure is not an end in itself. Our objective remains what
it has always been: to persuade the Pale Serbs that their
interests, and the interests of the people who suffer under
their misguided leadership, are not served by continuing
intransigence. The border closure has had some effect on
the Pale Serbs, but its political goal, Pale's acceptance of
the Contact Group plan and map, seems as remote today
as it did six months ago. Nevertheless, we must be hard-
headed, patient and persistent in keeping up the pressure
on the Pale Serbs. Similarly, the authorities in Belgrade
should understand that suspension of additional sanctions
will depend on their willingness to take further steps
towards peace, most notably by recognizing the Republic
of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
within their internationally recognized borders.

Let me also say a word about the performance of the
United Nations peace-keeping forces in these tragic
conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. Members of the
Security Council must keep in mind that our credibility,
and that of this Organization, depends on our willingness
to respond to provocations. The United Nations forces on
the ground have faced continuous challenges, now
perhaps more difficult than ever. My Government
appreciates the sacrifices they have made and the good
they do. We are also prepared to support measures that
would enhance the ability of those forces to defend
themselves and to carry out their mandate with greater
effect.

In closing, let me say that the United States insisted
that a message be sent by today's action. The message is
clear: when it comes to sanctions relief, this Council must
remain vigilant to ensure that Belgrade is vigilant in
delivering on its promises. Our few successes in Bosnia
have come from our firmness and resolve, not from a
willingness to give Belgrade the benefit of the doubt.

