Mr. Madeira: I would like to express my full
agreement with everything that Ambassador Keating
said in his briefing. I shall therefore limit my
intervention to security aspects, specifically in relation
to security for the election itself, the security of the
candiates, the offensives and our exit strategy.

The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
is working hand in hand with the Somali national
security forces and the election security task force,
and we are making progress. There was an issue with
Cadaado, and agreement was recently reached whereby
AMISOM. would deploy in Cadaado in the coming days
to ensure that the security aspects of the election are
well looked after.

With regard to the security of the candidates, the
election security plan for the 2016 elections, jointly
adopted by the Federal Government of Somalia,
AMISOM. and the United Nations, already foresaw
the possibility of requests for personal security, as is
already happening. However, the issue was equally
widely debated by members of the international
community accredited in Somalia and based in
Mogadishu and Nairobi, who devoted a specific
meeting to discussing the security to be provided to
traditional elders, candidates and other eminent persons
participating in the electoral process, the electorate,
election bodies, observers, election facilities, public
venues, accommodation premises and the community
in general, so as to ensure an incident-free election.
Participants unanimously concluded that, given the
large number of elders, candidates, eminent persons
and other entities in need of special protection and
security during the electoral period, it was materially
impossible to provide dedicated personal security to
individual candidates, elsers and eminent persons at
their residences or in the form of convoys and escorts,
due to reduced capacity and a scarcity of equipment and
other resources. However, it was agreed that collective
security for them would be possible. That would be
provided for a predefined period prior to, during and
after the elections, in specifically designated locations,
such as election centres, assembly points, polling
stations, some public venues and buildings, as well
as hotels, residential areas and other duly identified
accommodation premises.

In that context, we are currently seeing the
movement of various security groups converging onto
Mogadishu. That is causing a serious security problem,
as Al-Shabaab can just disguise themselves as such a
group and do damage. Somali national security forces
and AMISOM. are working on this and discussing these
matters to see how these specific issues can be handled.
An important meeting will take place tomorrow in
that regard.

Another important aspect is the need to continue
the offensives to dislodge Al-Shabaab from its
hideouts and to degrade and disrupt their activities and
eventually destroy it. In that connection, it becomes
extremely important that this time the offensive not
just be for us to remove Al-Shabaab from its hideouts;
we need to effectively occupy the cities and towns
that Al-Shabaab presently occupies so that they do
not come back to retake them. To that end, we need
to work hand in hand with the forces in place, local
populations and Somali national forces. For that, those
forces and entities need support. Such support is not yet
forthcoming. It is important that specific attention be
given to this matter; otherwise we will continue to do
What we have done many times, removing Al-Shabaab
from towns and then having to do it again once they
return.

Capacity-building for the Somali security forces is
a central concern. There is no way that AMISOM. or any
other external forces can bring lasting peace to Somalia
unless and until the Somalis themselves are capable
of taking over responsibility for the security of their
country. We have been given 21,000 uniformed troops,
which are presently benefiting from Security Council-
approved logistical support. Those forces are still
not capable of taking on Al-Shabaab in a sustainable
manner because they lack the basics - coordinated
training, a common doctrine, uniforms, equipment,
rifles and even barracks where they can be housed
and trained. We need to address those issues with the
required urgency.
As was rightly said, AMISOM. is organizing
itself in a manner to be able to start leaving Somalia
by 2018. It would not be the right thing to do if by that
time Somalia is still not capable of taking care of its
security responsibilities.

What must be done in that regard is very Clear. The
2016 African Union-AMISOM. concept of operations
clearly outlines the steps that have to be taken, and
those steps start with us - dislodging Al-Shabaab
from the main towns in Lower Shabelle and from the
main port cities in the north-east of the country, and
to do that we need everyone to cooperate, particularly
the Somali National Army. The Commissioner for
Peace and Security presented a very detailed letter to
the appropriate United Nations bodies in New York.
We would like to ask the Council to look at that letter,
consider what each point means and aims to achieve
and give us a response as quickly as possible, because
the rainy season is starting and we need to launch our
offensives. A plan has already been adopted and we are
about to leave, but we badly need the logistical support
that has to be approved by the Council.

