Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by conveying our condolences on
the passing away of former President George Herbert
Walker Bush. We express our sympathy to his entire
family. President Bush was an old friend of the Chinese
people. Over the years, he witnessed and promoted the
historical development of Sino-American relations and
made positive contributions to the friendly relations
between our two peoples.

I welcome you, Mr. President, to New York to
preside over today's debate. I thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for their briefings.

China commends Cote d'Ivoire for setting the
theme of today's debate - Post-conflict reconstruction
and peace, security and stability". Maintaining
peace, building peace and achieving lasting peace are
important responsibilities of the Security Council. Post-
conflict countries are now confronted with the pressing
task of economic development. Only when people's
basic needs are met and their livelihoods guaranteed
can peace be consolidated and a relapse into conflict
avoided.

The concept note prepared by the presidency of Cote
d'Ivoire (S/2018/1063, annex) is highly illuminating. As
for the role that the Council should play in this process,
I would like to make the following three observations.

First, it is important to respect the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the basic norms governing international relations. We
must respect the national sovereignty and ownership of
the countries concerned, while helping them to craft a
development path tailored to its national specificities.
Priority should be given to capacity-building, helping
countries achieve early transitions and self-driven
development.

Secondly, equal emphasis should be given to
development and security, and both the symptoms
and root causes of conflicts should be addressed.
Poverty and underdevelopment are the major sources
of conflict. The international community should
comprehensively advance the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, strengthen
global partnerships for development and honour aid
commitments in order to promote sustainable peace
through sustainable development. Due attention should
be given to building institutions, enhancing social
cohesion and progressively allocating more resources
to development areas.

Thirdly, we must enhance the role of the United
Nations in post-conflict reconstruction. United Nations
field offices should uphold their respective mandates.
Those in development areas should focus on fulfilling
their development mandates and attach importance to
strengthening cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. The international community should
actively support African countries in implementing the
African Peace and Security Architecture Road Map
(2016-2020) and the African Union's Agenda 2063, and
encourage regional organizations to play an active role
in the reconstruction of post-conflict countries in the
region.

The poor are usually among the most affected and
most vulnerable in the context ofconflicts. Accelerating
poverty alleviation and achieving development are
urgently needed for consolidating the post-conflict
peace dividend. As the most populous developing
country, China is deeply aware of the link between
development and people's well-being. It is our abiding
commitment to share development opportunities and
results with other countries around the world. We
have actively assisted developing countries, including
those in post-conflict situations, through South-South
cooperation.

The Beijing Summit of the Forum on China Africa
Cooperation was successfully held in September. We
were very pleased to see President Ouattara, Chairman
Faki Mahamat and Secretary-General Guterres there.
At the Summit it was decided that China and Africa
would focus on eight major initiatives in the next
three years - industrial promotion, infrastructure
connectivity, trade facilitation, green development,
capacity-building, health care, people-to-people
exchanges and peace and security - in the form of
Government assistance, as well as investment and
financing by financial institutions and companies.
A total of $60 billion in financing will be provided
to African countries. President Xi Jinping's Belt and
Road Initiative, an international public good offered by
China, has become the world's single largest platform
for international cooperation.

We welcome the participation in the Initiative of
all parties and countries. We are pleased to see the
remarkable achievements that Cote d'Ivoire has made
with regard to its post-conflict reconstruction. In
recent years, its economy has maintained an annual
growth rate of over 8 per cent. China has been actively
engaged in the reconstruction process in Cote d'Ivoire
and has provided support and assistance to the best of
its abilities. Chinese peacekeepers participated in the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. The projects
in that country that have been completed with Chinese
aid, such as the farmland and water-conservancy
projects and the construction of rural schools, continue
to have a positive impact. The Soubre hydropower plant,
financed by China, became operational in December
2017. It is the largest hydropower station in West Africa
and has generated thousands of job opportunities
for the local community. China will continue to
take concrete actions to support Cote d'Ivoire and
other African countries in their reconstruction and
development endeavours.

Before I conclude, I would like to recall that the
first President of Cote d'Ivoire, Felix Houphouet-
Boigny, once said that the dream of humankind should
go beyond simply having a home to live in or a piece
of bread to fill one's stomach. He said that Africa
should strive to realize the dream of building a greater
human family. Alongside other countries, including
African countries, China stands ready to contribute to
achieving lasting peace and common prosperity in post-
conflict countries and to play a strong role in building a
community with a shared future for humankind.

