Mr. Dacie (Serbia): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the threat to international peace and security
posed by foreign terrorist fighters, which is an issue of
the utmost regional and global importance. In addition,
I would like to express my special appreciation to
President Obama for presiding over the Council's
business earlier today and for providing thrust and
gravitas to the message that we aim to send.

Serbia, one of the sponsors of resolution 2178
(2014), welcomes the adoption of this resolution on
foreign terrorist fighters, which, we are convinced,
will go a long way in addressing terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations as the most serious threat to
international peace and security. We believe that the
resolution and our discussion today will strengthen
cooperation among all Member States in the fight
against terrorism and extremism.

Terrorist threats have intensified in the past decade,
and extremist activities of any kind and in any place
find fertile soil in unstable political situations and a
lack of socioeconomic opportunities. The problem of
terrorism is complex and calls for the coordination
of activities and the allocation of equal attention to
all its aspects, both at the national and international
levels. The root causes of terrorism are manifold and
widespread. They include religious fanaticism; social
exclusion, especially of ethnic and religious minorities;
uneven access to education and the lack of job and
economic opportunities.

The fight against terrorism will be hard and long,
and military measures alone will not be sufficient.
A multidimensional approach is needed, and we,
therefore, welcome the adoption of the resolution today.
Banning the recruitment and transport of potential
foreign fighters by national laws, controlling money
and arms flows and engaging local communities in
addressing extremism are just some ofthe multifaceted
measures that the resolution provides for.

Serbia, too, has faced the problem of foreign
fighters. At the end of the 1990s, extremist fighters
joined secessionists in the southern Serbian province
of Kosovo. Today, radical preachers, in increasing
numbers, preach faith in the Raska region in south-
western Serbia and in Kosovo in religious centres
financed from abroad and recruit young people to fight
alleged religious wars. Persistent efforts are being
made by my country to confront the threat of terrorism.
Money laundering and the financing of terrorism have
long been sanctioned, and the criminal code is now
being amended to provide for harsh prison punishment
of foreign fighters, their recruiters and financiers.

In conclusion, let me also reiterate the readiness of
my country to step up cooperation with all countries
in the region and beyond and coordinate our activities
accordingly.

