Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): At the outset,
Mr. President, I hope you will permit me to make a
small procedural suggestion. In the past, during
significant debates, the Council would, from time to
time, allow non-Council members to speak first. I hope
that that practice will be considered in due course when
we have significant debates. I make that point because
I think today's debate is significant, as I will explain in
my remarks. I am also, of course, obliged to thank
Jean-Marie Guehenno, Kamalesh Sharma and the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste. I apologize
for doing so quickly, but, as I have only five minutes, I
will concentrate on substance. In the four and a half
minutes that I have remaining, I would like to make
five points.

My first point, which I would like to emphasize
to the Council, is that we hope there will be a
consensus on the need for continued United Nations
assistance to Timor-Leste. I think that is the most
important decision we need to take at this meeting. The
reasons why begin with the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/ll7), which points out the
need to consolidate and build upon the gains already
made. I have not read the report, so I cannot say
whether I agree with it 99 per cent or 100 per cent. But
we agree significantly with the report.

The second point we would like to make is that a
precipitous withdrawal could jeopardize the fragile
success that we have had in Timor-Leste. When we talk
about the success of Timor-Leste, we should not forget
the point, just made so eloquently by Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta, that there is still fragility. We must bear
that fragility in mind as we consider this decision. If
members of the Council read my text, they will find
that we compare building up Timor-Leste to building a
house, saying that that we may have put up the skeletal
framework of the house, but various key components
must still be put in place. That job must still be
completed. We hope that that message will register
with the Council.

Thirdly, we hope any drawdown will be based on
a realistic assessment of the situation. It must be based
on a hard-headed assessment of the realities on the
ground, not carried out mechanically according to some
abstract timetable. We make this point because we are
aware that, in the past, a timetable was worked out for
drawing down the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) and was based on a reading
of the circumstances then. Circumstances have
changed, and we must take a decision on the basis of
the circumstances as they stand today. Frankly, the best
description of those circumstances is found in the
Secretary-General's report, which points out that
institutional weaknesses pervade key institutions of
governance despite the progress made in many areas.

The fourth point we would like to make is that we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation for an
extension of UNMISET. Here, as we are all aware, the
man of the hour is Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi; his name is
associated in the Council with the famous report that
he submitted. And, of course, we are familiar with the
Brahimi principle: that the Security Council should be
told not what it wants to hear, but what it needs to hear.
That was put across in the report presented to us today
by Jean-Marie Guehenno, in which the Secretary-
General made a strong and carefully considered case
for an extension of UNMISET for another year with a
modified mandate and a reduced scale of some 58
civilian advisers, 157 civilian police advisers, 42
military liaison officers and a military contingent of
some 310, including an infantry company with support
and aviation elements.

Those recommendations reflect extensive
consultations among, inter alia, the United Nations,
UNMISET and the Timorese leaders. They are not
unjustified requests and are certainly not excessive,
given the magnitude of the task at hand. Indeed, as the
Secretary-General notes, such a comparatively modest
additional effort could make a crucial difference in
broadening the scope and increasing the sustainability
of the remarkable achievements already registered and
in allowing Timor-Leste to reach a threshold of self-
sufficiency.

My fifth and final point is, in some ways, the
most important. As we can tell from the debate we
have had so far and from listening to Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta, the recommendation for the retention of
a military contingent will be the area of greatest
debate. It is important to put that request in the proper
context. While the security situation has remained, by
and large, uneventful over the past few months, that is
by no means indicative of the situation likely after May
2004. It is certainly not inconceivable that
troublemakers are lying low until the United Nations
withdraws its military and police presence. That is why
we support this recommendation in the Secretary-
General's report.

I want to reinforce the point made by Jean-Marie
this morning when he said that a small formed military
presence with aviation and support should be retained
after May 2004. He added:

"By maintaining a high level of visibility through
regular patrols and civil-military cooperation, that
component could help limit the destabilizing
effect of too abrupt a downsizing exercise."

In my remarks, I have spelled out the reasons why this
military presence should remain. We hope that the
Security Council will support and agree to the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we believe that Timor-Leste has
certainly come a long way, but that much remains to be
done before it can be self-sufficient and ready to stand
on its own. We hope that the Council will pay attention
to the overall situation before it makes its final
decision.

