I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. Let me begin by saying that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses its solidarity with our Egyptian, Ethiopian and Sudanese brothers and sisters. In the spirit of camaraderie, we extend our sincerest support to their collective struggle for an equitable, reasonable and lasting agreement on the allocation of water resources from the Nile River. As a small island whose identity is inextricably linked to a body of water, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recognizes and fully appreciates the intrinsic value of the Nile to each of the parties, not only as a symbol deeply enmeshed within their national identities but also as a critical resource upon which their dreams of development and prosperity depend. Therefore, we respect each country's national interests and wholeheartedly accept their very credible concerns. At the same time, their collective identity, crafted through the existential links of the Nile, gives us confidence that they are more inclined to work together than to pull further apart. In this regard, we are encouraged by the parties' determination, as demonstrated at the 26 June meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, to continue their trilateral negotiations, in good faith and in the spirit of solidarity, towards an agreement that is reasonable, equitable and amicable. We urge them to take the requisite bold political steps to conclude those negotiations. Given the intensified droughts and resource shortages precipitated by climate change, we acknowledge the need for a comprehensive, sustainable agreement that thoroughly addresses each party's concerns so that current and future generations of Egyptians, Ethiopians and Sudanese can live, work and play together as they peacefully coexist with their neighbours along the Nile. On issues as complex and consequential as this, final settlements can only be achieved through a shared journey in which each party builds a reciprocal and recognizable sense of understanding. It is important to note that the concerned parties are almost at the end of this painstaking journey, as more than 90 per cent of the issues have already been resolved. We are therefore confident that our Egyptian, Ethiopian and Sudanese brothers and sisters will settle their outstanding disagreements, as all families do, with discretion and harmony. It is the collective wisdom of Africa that will facilitate a lasting solution to this situation.
