Mr. Mitri: Since my last briefing, Prime Minister
Ali Zeidan and his Cabinet have taken office in Tripoli.
The Prime Minister appears to enjoy broad support
from the General National Congress, political parties
and the public. The new Government has expressed its
determination to tackle the major internal problems
facing the country. Equally, the Prime Minister has
taken the initiative to enhance relations of cooperation
and mutual respect with neighbours in the region, as
well as with other international partners.

In recognition of the importance of the Prime
Minister's office in exercising leadership in policy
implementation and ensuring coordination among the
ministries, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has been providing technical assistance in
developing effective institutions and processes. Similar
assistance has been provided to the General National
Congress to support the establishment of its internal
structures.

Since my most recent briefing (see S/PV.6857),
the Libyan constitution-making process has gained
increased political significance, with mounting public
pressure on the General National Congress to move
expeditiously towards forming the constitution-drafting
body. The General National Congress has not yet
determined whether the members of that body are to
be appointed or elected. That this debate is intertwined
with regional politics is evident. The General National
Congress has formed a committee to organize public
consultations around this important matter. UNSMIL
is providing support to the work of the committee.
Libyan civil society has also increased discussions
on constitution-making procedures and on the
constitution's content. UNSMIL continues to encourage
inclusive dialogue on both sets of issues, hoping to
enhance progress in the process leading to the making
of the constitution.

On 14 January, women members of the General
National Congress announced the formation of
a caucus, one of whose key aims is to ensure the
fair representation of women on the constitutional
drafting committee. UNSMIL has been supporting
their efforts in advocating for women's rights and
political participation. In this context, I also recently
met with representatives of the Amazigh, Tabu and
Tuareg communities to discuss their demands that the
Government and the constitutional process address
issues affecting their communities, including questions
of Libyan identity and citizenship, political participation
and language rights.

While the security situation in Libya remains
precarious, efforts to reform the security sector have
begun to assure greater coherence. On 11 December,
the Minister of the Interior announced his plans to
develop and restructure the Ministry. His priorities
include increasing police presence and visibility,
moving gradually towards the integration of members
of the Supreme Security Committee into the police,
and establishing a vetting mechanism aimed at
instilling public confidence in the police force. Since
then, more than 20,000 revolutionary fighters - quite
a large number - attached to the Supreme Security
Committee have individually enlisted in the Ministry
and the training process has been set in motion.

The plans of the Government, and those of the
Minister of the Interior in particular, have been met
with resistance from certain revolutionary brigades
that are not ready to surrender their weapons and be
absorbed into State institutions. UNSMIL continues to
offer, in a more coordinated and efficient manner, its
technical advice on the issues of demobilization and
reintegration, training, national security policies, legal
frameworks, organizational structure and budget.

On 9 December, the borders, petroleum and
critical infrastructure guards entity was placed under
the command of the Army's Chief of Staff to ensure
improved command and control of military operations.
UNSMIL is supporting the Government in developing
a comprehensive defence policy, through the process
known as "Towards a Defence White Paper", facilitated
in close consultation with concerned Ministers, leaders
of various military and security institutions, regional
military commanders, General National Congress
committees, non-governmental organizations and even
former revolutionary fighters. The draft of the full
paper is expected in February.

UNSMIL and its partners in the international defence
working group, continue to assist in the development of
military education and training, personnel and pension
reform, defence legislation and regulations, and media
and communications capabilities. A number of experts
have been embedded in the Ministry ofDefence and the
Office of the Army Chief of Staff.

On 5 and 6 December, the World Health Organization
facilitated national consultations in partnership with
the Warriors' Affairs Commission for Rehabilitation
and Development, the Ministry of Health and Libyan
universities to design a curriculum for a one-year course
on the psychosocial rehabilitation of former combatants
and their families, to be launched in March.

Various Libyan institutions, with the help of
the United Nations and other international partners,
continued to make significant progress in clearing
unexploded ordnances and improving ammunition
management. Risk education, including a Ministry of
Education training ofteachers programme, is supported
by UNICEF. However, much remains to be done. For
2013, the United Nations will require $21 million of
voluntary funds to efficiently continue its activities.

Security along Libya's borders remains a key
concern given the current capacity limitations and the
possible impact of recent developments in Mali. In early
December, Prime Minister Zeidan visited Algeria,
Chad, Niger and the Sudan to discuss border security
and ways to improve bilateral relations. This visit
resulted in agreements on border security cooperation.
On 12 January, the Prime Minister met with the Prime
Ministers of Algeria and Tunisia in Ghadames and
agreed to joint measures to combat organized crime,
terrorism and smuggling across borders.

Meanwhile, discontent among the population in the
south has increased, with accusations of insufficient
service delivery prompting a temporary walkout by
some General National Congress members to draw
attention to the issue. Libyan authorities at the highest
level expressed, through visits and otherwise, their
willingness to address these problems. Prior to that,
my Deputy led a joint United Nations country team-
UNSMIL mission to the south from 19 to 23 November.
They met with local authorities and representatives of
civil society to look into humanitarian and development
needs. Some oftheir findings were shared with officials
in Tripoli.

Despite some progress, the security situation remains
problematic. On 3 January, President el-Magariaf
survived an assassination attempt during a visit to
Sabha. On 12 January, unknown gunmen fired upon
the vehicle of the Italian consul in Benghazi. Targeted
attacks on security officials continue in the east. The
head of Benghazi's police directorate and a top official
in the city's Criminal Investigation Department have
been killed. Police stations in Benghazi and Derna have
been attacked on many different occasions, as have
police patrols.

The Ministry of the Interior, supported by the
Benghazi local council, has begun to implement
a participatory security policy involving citizens
and tribal leaders, aimed at creating the stability in
Benghazi that Libyans desire. Benghazi residents
organized a demonstration on 28 December, in which
they demanded an end to the attacks against security
personnel, an investigation into the recent events, and,
most important, the dissolution of all armed groups. In
my meetings with the local council, non-governmental
organizations, political parties and independent figures
during my visit to Benghazi, all emphasized the need
for more effective implementation of the Government's
decisions to improve security in the east. They also
expressed their deep feeling of marginalization and
called for genuine decentralization and for the election
rather than selection of a constitutional drafting body.

The security situation in the east of Libya poses
a serious challenge to the Government and threatens
to derail its attempts to secure stability. Assassinations
and attacks have to be viewed primarily in the context
of the resistance of some armed groups to the State's
attempt to re-establish its authority. The opposition of
armed radical groups to the military intervention in
Mali may exacerbate the situation, given ideological
and/or ethnic affiliations, as well as porous borders
in Libya. Senior Libyan officials whom I met recently
stressed their concern over the situation and pledged
to provide better security to the diplomatic community
and the citizens of Benghazi.

In my last briefing, I reported on the situation in
Bani Walid, which has since stabilized. Our human
rights team is continuing to follow up on alleged human
rights violations committed during and in the aftermath
ofthe conflict. A documented report has been completed
and I will present it to the Libyan authorities upon my
return to Tripoli. Events in Bani Walid and elsewhere
highlighted the urgent need to promote reconciliation
and transitional justice. In December, the United
Nations, in collaboration with the Ministry of Justice
and relevant Government entities, held two conferences
on reconciliation and transitional justice. A new draft
law on transitional justice, introduced by the Minister
of Justice, who is a human rights advocate, provides
for a more coherent truth-seeking mechanism, clearer
provisions of criminal accountability, and expanded
provisions on compensation.

Various efforts towards upholding the need for
national reconciliation and the imperative of justice
alike are likely to be affected by tensions that could
be created or exacerbated by the divisive character
of certain thorny issues. Following the exclusion
from public positions of persons associated with the
previous, Al-Qadhafi regime, on the basis of reviews
by the Integrity and Patriotism Commission, there is
a strong drive among certain political forces to take
this even further. On 26 December and following the
proposal of some of its members, the General National
Congress discussed the adoption of a law on "political
isolation" and formed a committee to make a proposal.
UNSMIL encourages consultations on this proposal,
looking carefully into possible undesirable effects on
reconciliation, social cohesion and political pluralism.
We are firm in our conviction that the distinction
between personal misconduct and affiliation need not be
overshadowed by the desire to be receptive to a popular
demand. Any law should also provide sufficient due
process guarantees for those whose rights are affected.

The continued detention without due process
and mistreatment of several thousand people arising
from the conflict remain a source of deep concern.
While there has been some progress in the screening
and processing of conflict-related detainees, this has
remained limited in scope. UNSMIL continues to
urge the Libyan authorities to accelerate the screening
of such detainees, the release of those against whom
there is insufficient evidence, and the transfer of
detainees to State-controlled facilities. Additionally,
UNSMIL continues to advise the Libyan authorities on
prison reform. UNSMIL has also commenced weekly
meetings with the General National Congress human
rights committee and held additional training for civil
society organizations.

UNSMIL continues to advise the Office of the
Prosecutor-General on the implementation of an overall
prosecutorial strategy, with a focus on cases of those
with a high level of responsibility or those responsible
for serious crimes. In that regard, on 1 January the
Office of the Prosecutor-General announced that it had
made significant progress in its investigations against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi appeared before the criminal
court in Zintan on 17 January on charges ofundermining
State security and attempting to escape from prison.
The hearing did not address, for the time being, any
crimes related to the conflict. The trial of Mahmoud
Al-Baghdadi, former Secretary of the General People's
Committee - a sort of Prime Minister - under
Al-Qadhafi, commenced on 12 November. The court
adjourned until 11 February to allow the defence
additional time to summon witnesses.

On 17 December, the United Kingdom Government
hosted an international meeting with the participation of
Libyan officials from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs,
Defence, Interior, Justice and Intelligence to discuss
international assistance to Libya in its reform of the
security sector and institution-building in the justice
sector. The meeting - which was attended by officials
of Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Qatar, the United
Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, the United States
of America and Turkey, as well as the European Union
and the United Nations - endorsed those priorities,
emphasized the importance of coordination, and
identified specific international assistance needed to
realize progress. A ministerial conference will be held
in Paris in February. UNSMIL will continue to assist
the Libyan authorities in preparing for the conference
and will be ready to assume its responsibilities in
ensuring proper coordination in following up on the
decisions of the Paris conference.

While the determination of the authorities and
their many initiatives may augur a greater capability
of moving forward in institution-building, it is worth
underscoring that there are still many difficult
decisions to take in the areas of constitution-making,
transitional justice and reconciliation, not to mention
security sector reform. In going forward, broad-based
support for such decisions is necessary.
Equally necessary is seeking consensus on
national priorities in this critical phase of democratic
State-building. For that purpose, the Libyan authorities,
political forces, community and tribal leaders,
revolutionaries and civil society organizations should
engage in a process of national dialogue. UNSMIL is
committed to assisting in that endeavour.

