Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): When 3 million people flee their country
because of its economic and political collapse, the
threat to the stability of the region becomes evident.
For Belgium, it is clear that the Security Council has
a responsibility to address the situation in Venezuela,
which constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. In order to prevent further deterioration of the
situation, we call on all members of the Council to work
together to promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

I also wish to commend the countries ofthe region for
showing great solidarity and generosity towards those
Venezuelans seeking refuge in their countries. Belgium
expresses its support for those countries, as well as for
Mr. Eduardo Stein, Joint Special Representative of the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the International Organization for
Migration, in their work to help Venezuelan refugees.

As the situation on the ground is most unstable, I
would like to echo the statement issued today by the
European Union to make four main points: first, to
call for restraint and the de-escalation of the situation;
secondly, to stress the need to restore constitutional
order in Venezuela and begin a process ofreconciliation;
thirdly, to emphasize the importance of listening to the
Venezuelan people themselves; and, fourthly, respect
for their fundamental rights.

First of all, I would like to urge those who bear
influence over these events to exercise restraint.
Mass protests in Venezuela over the past few days
have been the subject of indiscriminate violence by
the authorities, resulting in the tragic deaths of many
people and leaving many injured. Belgium extends its
sincere condolences to the families of those deceased.
We strongly condemn the excessive use of force by the
security forces and, like Ms. Bachelet, we call for an
independent investigation to be conducted.

Secondly, Belgium calls for the restoration of the
constitutional order. The presidential elections that took
place in May were neither free and fair nor credible,
thereby depriving Nicolas Maduro's Government of
democratic legitimacy. Venezuela urgently needs a
Government that truly represents the will of the people
and can initiate a process of reconciliation. Belgium
recognizes and fully supports the National Assembly as
a democratically elected institution. We implore that its
powers be restored and respected. Furthermore, I call
on the authorities to guarantee the civil rights, liberty
and security of all members of the National Assembly,
including its President, Juan Guaido, while respecting
their immunity as enshrined in the Constitution.
Thirdly, we must listen to the people of Venezuela.
The citizens of this country have bravely made their
voices heard on many occasions in recent years. Some
have paid with their lives. When they voted for change,
their voices were not heard. Today they are in the streets
of Caracas to claim the right to choose their future.
Belgium reiterates its deep conviction that a peaceful
and inclusive democratic solution is the only sustainable
way out of the current political stalemate and the serious
social crisis it has caused. Alongside the European
Union, we call for the urgent holding of free, credible
and transparent presidential elections with full respect
for the Constitution and in accordance with democratic
standards. If the organization of new elections with the
necessary guarantees is not announced within the next
eight days, we will take additional measures, including
recognizing the constitutional role of the President of
the National Assembly, Juan Guaido, in line with article
233 of the Constitution.

Fourthly, the fundamental rights of the Venezuelan
people mustbe respected. The detention of demonstrators
and acts of violence against them are a source of serious
concern. Belgium calls on the authorities to put an end
to the arbitrary detention of demonstrators and political
opponents and to ensure respect for the fundamental
rights of detainees. The freedom of the press must be
guaranteed. In the same vein, we call on the authorities
to take concrete measures to mitigate the impact of the
crisis and facilitate access to humanitarian aid in order
to meet the most urgent needs of the population.

In conclusion, we call for a non-violent and
democratic solution to the crisis to be found. We
recall that this crisis can be resolved only through
dialogue and that dialogue alone can lead to a process
of reconciliation.

