Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by expressing our gratitude to the Chinese presidency
for convening this open debate on the crucial issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. I would also like
to extend my special thanks to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2012/376) and briefing, as well as to
the other speakers - Ms. Amos, Mr. Simonovie and
Mr. Spoerri - for their presentations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been a high priority on the agenda of the international
community, including the Security Council, for many
years. Through its resolutions, regular meetings,
statements, sanctions regimes and, most importantly,
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, the Council has established important
standards and measures for the protection of civilians
and has consistently focused international attention
on this issue. However, as is also recognized in the
Secretary-General's report, civilians continue to pay
the highest price in the wake of armed conflicts around
the world.

The challenges to civilian protection are vast,
ranging from the scale of needs on the ground and
challenging security environments to a lack of proper
infrastructure and capacity. At the same time, the
most outrageous challenges are inaction and neglect
of civilians' suffering, along with the prevailing
atmosphere of impunity and lack of accountability
for deliberate attacks against them. In that regard, the
best deterrent is undoubtedly putting a speedy end to
impunity and holding to account those responsible for
war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
other gross violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The recent cases involving
Charles Taylor and Thomas Lubanga have sent a clear
message to all perpetrators around the world that such
grave crimes are never forgotten, forgiven or tolerated,
even when committed by high-level figures.

Promoting a culture of impunity at the State level,
including fomenting wars of aggression and hatred of
one's neighbours, as well as glorifying the perpetrators
of the gravest international offences, will only enable
further violations of humanitarian and human rights
laws, particularly in regard to depriving people of their
homes as a result of continued acts of foreign military
intervention, aggression and occupation. Ending
impunity is thus essential to ensuring sustainable
peace, justice, truth and reconciliation, and to
upholding the rights and interests of victims and the
well-being of society at large. All in all, the security
of civilian populations is an absolute precondition for
the long-lasting political settlement of conflicts and
for providing development assistance in post-conflict
situations.

Particular consideration must be given to the
protection of civilians driven out of their homes
and displaced as a result of armed conflict. The
Secretary-General's report states that the number of
internally displaced persons has steadily increased over
the past 15 years. Azerbaijan supports the continuing
efforts to raise awareness of the problem of internal
displacement worldwide. We believe that the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance
of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa - the first
binding document on internal displacement - will
further contribute to that process.

It is crucial that recognition of the right of
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and to concrete measures aimed
at overcoming obstacles to such return, be applied
more systematically by the international community.
Assuring the right of return constitutes a categorical
rejection of the results of ethnic cleansing and offers an
important measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land and deprived of their property,
thereby removing a source of possible future tension
and conflict.

My country's familiarity with the suffering of
civilians in armed conflict is not based on hearsay.
Some of the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, including war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, have been
committed in the course of the Republic of Armenia's
ongoing aggression against Azerbaijan. Thus, the
forcible deportation of about 230,000 Azerbaijanis
from their homes in Armenia at the end of the 1980s
was accompanied by killings, torture, enforced
disappearances and other crimes throughout Armenia.
Even children were not spared.

The period from 1991, when Armenia initiated
combat operations on the territory of Azerbaijan,
until the establishment of the ceasefire in 1994 was
marked by an increase in the magnitude, intensity and
consistency of the attacks on Azerbaijani civilians.
In February 1992, the Azerbaijani town of Khojaly
was completely razed to the ground and its civilian
population was subjected to an unprecedented massacre.
The attack on, and the capture of, the town involved the
extermination of more than 600 Azerbaijani civilians,
including children, women and the elderly. Thousands
of civilians were wounded and taken hostage, many of
whom remain missing.

Despite the formal ceasefire, deliberate attacks
by the armed forces of Armenia against Azerbaijani
civilians and civilian objects, in contravention of
applicable international law, have become more
frequent and more violent over recent months, resulting
in the killing and maiming ofmany inhabitants residing
near the front line.

On 8 March 2011, a nine-year-old Azerbaijani
child was shot dead by an Armenian sniper. On 14 July
2011, in the village of Alibayli, in Azerbaijan's Tovuz
district, which borders on the Republic of Armenia,
a 13-year-old Azerbaijani girl was killed and her
32-year-old mother was seriously wounded as a result
of the blast from an explosive device built into a toy.
The toy, stuffed with an explosive device, was found
by the victim in the river, which has its source in the
territory of Armenia and flows through that village.
According to the conclusions of the investigation,
the booby-trapped toy was made in Armenia and was
dropped into the river intentionally. Its target were
children of neighbouring Azerbaijani settlements.

The overall assessment of the causes and the tragic
consequences of the war unleashed by Armenia against
Azerbaijan makes it clear that the attacks on Azerbaijani
civilians, including the killing of children, are part of
Armenia's widespread, deliberate and systematic policy
of aggression and hatred. That policy is clearly reflected
in the famous interview of 15 December 2000 with the
then Defence Minister, now the incumbent President of
Armenia, Serzh Sargsyan. Responding to the question
as to whether things could have happened differently
and whether he had any regrets about the deaths of
thousands of people as a result of the Armenian attacks
against Azerbaijani civilians, he said frankly that he
"has absolutely no regrets", since "such upheavals are
necessary, even if thousands have to die". No further
comments are needed here to explain the logic and
the attitude of the Armenian leadership to the issue of
civilian protection.

Azerbaijan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict. All parties
to a conflict must abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law
and must strictly follow the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in attacks. Innocent
civilians should not pay the price for the lack of progress
in the settlement process. Keeping civilians in constant
fear by killing them, shelling their homes and inflicting
serious damage on their property on almost a daily basis
will not be averted by simply advocating artificial and
tactically driven confidence-building measures. It will
not serve as a stimulus for the other side to agree to such
measures. The best confidence-building measure is
showing a real desire to achieve progress in negotiations
based on the norms and principles of international law
and the withdrawal of occupying forces, as well as an
unwavering commitment to human life.

