Mr. De Hoop Scheffer: It is a real pleasure for
me to be in New York and an honour to have been
invited to address the Security Council this afternoon.
My remarks will focus on the support of NATO to the
United Nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but I
should like to start with a couple of observations about
our respective organizations.

As an alliance of 26 democracies, NATO allies
are bound together by common values, as well as a
commitment to common defence. In the past decade,
NATO nations have expanded the geographic scope of
alliance operations and activities and have transformed
their nature, all without forgetting our core task, of
course, of collective defence.

Each operation requires a political decision by
allied nations to commit their young men and women
to a potentially hazardous mission. Such a grave step is
never taken without extensive consultation among
allies. In response to the series of new strategic
challenges, the alliance has decided to go out of area to
build stability in a number of regions that have an
impact on the security of the Euro-Atlantic area.

The United Nations has also faced a
multiplication of its activities and tasks in this fluid
strategic environment. It is therefore not surprising that
NATO and the United Nations, each within their
specific roles, have found increasing scope for
cooperation, especially in peace operations.

That brings me back to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
because, in a real sense, the alliance's transformation
began in the Balkans. The Bosnia mission was
undertaken in close cooperation with, and under a
mandate from, the United Nations. The decision to go
out of area in the Balkans was a historic decision for
the alliance. It was NATO's first peacekeeping
operation. But just as important, it represented the birth
of United Nations-NATO cooperation.

Since 1992, NATO has provided continuous
support to the United Nations in the Balkans. In 1995,
some 65,000 troops were deployed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, under a United Nations mandate, to
implement the military aspects of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. United Nations and NATO cooperation has
resulted in a safe and secure environment. State
institutions have been established, human rights are
now respected, and the country has been set on the path
to integration into Euro-Atlantic and European
structures.

Today only 7,000 troops remain in the country -
a clear indication of the considerable progress that has
been made, progress which is also to a very large
extent due to the relentless efforts and very hard work
of the successive High Representatives for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, from Carl Bildt to Lord Ashdown.

Given our joint successes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is not surprising that NATO support to
the United Nations there has been viewed as a template
to be applied to other demanding crises. That involves
close cooperation with other major international
players, including the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

In a cooperative international effort, NATO
contributed to successfully defusing the crisis in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, paving the
way for a lasting political settlement, in the framework
of the Ohrid Framework Agreement. And since 1999,
under a United Nations mandate, NATO has been
involved in stabilizing the situation in Kosovo. Last
month, NATO-led troops provided security for the
Parliamentary Assembly elections there. The good
cooperation between the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) on the ground continues to be
crucial for the stability of the province. That was also
underlined by the Special Representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General for Kosovo, Soren Jessen-
Petersen, when he addressed the North Atlantic
Council of NATO yesterday.

While there has been real progress, work remains
to be done, and the closely coordinated international
effort must continue across the wider region. But,
given the improved state of security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is the right time to terminate the
Stabilization Force mission. As the Council heard from
Lord Ashdown this morning, NATO is now working to
hand over peacekeeping responsibilities to the
European Union next month. I therefore look forward
to a Security Council resolution authorizing that
handover of responsibility. But that does not mean that
NATO's long-term commitment to the country has
changed.

NATO will retain a military presence in the
country and has already established a new headquarters
in Sarajevo, which will provide advice on defence
reform and will remain engaged in bringing indicted
war criminals to justice. Cooperation with the ICTY is
a key conditionality for further progress in relations
between NATO and Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would
like to underscore the words spoken this morning by
Lord Ashdown on the position of Republika Srpska in
that respect. Cooperation with the ICTY is crucial for
any further development of the relations with NATO,
starting with membership of the Partnership for Peace
programme.

With the imminent termination of the
Stabilization Force mission, it is timely to review all
that has been achieved there. I would draw attention to
some of the lessons that I believe to be key.

The first is to anticipate spillover. As we have
seen in the Balkans, when States fail they tend to
threaten security and stability not just in their own
region, but well beyond. That does not mean that
NATO must intervene in each and every instance. But
we should always be aware that indifference might be
more costly, over time, than timely engagement.

Secondly, success in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
clear demonstration of international institutions
complementing each other and reinforcing each other's
efforts. A holistic approach calling on the relative
strengths of the different international organizations is
vital. And it is also valuable to involve as many
individual States as practicable. NATO benefited
greatly from the operational participation of many non-
NATO nations.

Finally, I would highlight the need for political
dialogue to articulate a clear end-state, and the need for
determination to see the mission through until that end-
state is achieved. Those are essential elements for
reasons of political legitimacy, for sustaining public
support over the long term, and for political credibility.

Together with a robust military capability, those
were the main ingredients of NATO's success in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But I believe they will also
be the key for NATO to deliver success in other
operations.

NATO is now playing a major role, under a
Security Council mandate, in Afghanistan. It leads the
almost 10,000 strong International Security Assistance
Force and is progressively expanding its presence
throughout the country. Last month, it assisted the
United Nations by supporting Afghan Government
efforts to provide a secure environment for the
presidential elections, as well as by directly supporting
the electoral process. Also in Afghanistan, NATO will
continue to deliver on its commitments.

In Iraq, under the terms of Security Council
resolution 1546 (2004), and at the specific request of
the Interim Government of Iraq, NATO is providing
assistance in training and equipping the Iraqi security
forces. We are in the process of substantially enhancing
that assistance.

I am aware that the alliance's involvement in
those two countries has prompted some people to
suggest that NATO is taking on the role of global
policeman. I can assure the Council that nothing could
be further from the truth. But the alliance's security
interests are affected by events in those countries, and
it is therefore logical for NATO to assist the efforts of
the United Nations and of the international community
there.

As I mentioned earlier, every international
institution has something to offer, and its particular
skills must be used to best effect. As far as NATO
support is concerned, there are a number of benefits
that I would wish to highlight.

First and foremost, I would emphasize NATO'S
utility as a framework for political dialogue and action.
It is an alliance of 26 sovereign and democratic
nations, and it binds together Europe and North
America in a multilateral approach to security. But
NATO is also a framework which facilitates
participation by other nations.

During the NATO-led operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the contributions from NATO's partners
were indispensable, as were the contributions from
other nations. Overall, troops from all five continents,
from more than 20 non-NATO nations, served
effectively under NATO command and alongside
NATO troops. That framework for action is tried and
tested, and it has accumulated a wealth of experience.
NATO also has a unique capacity to back up its
political decisions with serious peacekeeping and
peacemaking power. That power is flexible and is
easily tailored to the various demands placed upon it. It
encompasses training and advice to troops likely to be
called upon to carry out peacekeeping duties, through
activities such as participation in NATO-led exercises;
advice on interoperability issues; and the sharing of
doctrine and documentation.

It also includes operational planning, with the
associated force generation, strategic movement and
logistics support. Of course, it also includes substantial
military assets - land, air and maritime - that are in
short supply elsewhere. These assets include the
necessary mix of capabilities for both combat and post-
conflict reconstruction, as well as the appropriate
deployable command elements to ensure maximum
operational effectiveness. They now also include high-
readiness units such as the NATO Response Force.

Finally, I would stress NATO's proven
determination to stay the course. Our 12-year
commitment to support in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
testimony to our resolve and ability to sustain our
operations over lengthy periods if and when necessary.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is the most successful proof of
the effectiveness and potential of the United Nations
and NATO working together for peace and stability. We
have developed an effective operational relationship
between our two organizations there, and we have
adopted the model of our cooperation to other
operations.

NATO nations are deeply committed to the
United Nations. In the Treaty of Washington, which
founded NATO, Allies reaffirm their faith in the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and they acknowledge the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In the field, NATO has broadened its scope for
support to the United Nations since our original
peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our
support now includes missions in other theatres and
active cooperation on common challenges such as the
fight against terrorism. The Alliance has already made
a significant contribution to United Nations operations.
NATO nations are always prepared to consider further
requests for support, and I fully expect and trust that
this cooperation will continue.

