Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, Switzerland would like to stress the
importance of the obligations contained in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. It is clear
that only increased respect for and better
implementation of international humanitarian law by
all the actors concerned will make it possible to
alleviate the suffering and better protect civilians, who
are the main victims of conflicts.

While the parties to a conflict are primarily
responsible for complying with and for implementing
international humanitarian law, it is equally important
for other actors to be involved. Switzerland would,
therefore, once again like to invite the Council to
demand in its resolutions that all parties to a conflict,
as well as peacekeeping forces, abide by their
obligations under international law. Moreover, we
would like to reiterate that respect for and
implementation of international law are indissociable
from the fight against impunity. Although this task is
primarily the responsibility of national jurisdictions,
the International Criminal Court plays a vital role when
national jurisdictions are unable to prosecute persons
suspected of committing international crimes. It is,
therefore, essential that the Council ensure, whenever
necessary, that States cooperate fully with the Court.

I would like to endorse the words of Under-
Secretary-General Mr. John Holmes and will
concentrate on two aspects. First, the five initiatives
presented in his report contain concrete and realistic
recommendations. Here, the establishment of a group
of experts on the protection of civilians is an important
proposal that should be implemented as a priority.
Switzerland intends to support it once it has been set

up.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal for a
systematization of reports to the Council on situations
where there are serious difficulties of access.
Switzerland also believes that humanitarian access
should be the subject of systematic follow-up and
analysis, using clear indicators that have been
established in advance in order to ensure that the
Council is duly informed of the main problems and
challenges in this area. The experience of the Council's
working group on children and armed conflict is an
interesting example. The best practices drawn from this
group could be integrated into the evaluation of the
problem of access. We invite the Council to take into
account the ongoing work that uses those indicators
and to encourage debates on this basis.

At a different level, a meeting of experts on the
subject of humanitarian access in situations of armed
conflict will be held from 30 June to 1 July 2008 in
Montreux in Switzerland at the invitation of my
Government. The main purpose of this meeting will be
to discuss and identify measures to improve
humanitarian access in armed conflicts, taking into
account the existing legal framework and the realities
on the ground. It is my hope that the results of this
meeting will be useful to the Council.

To return to my second point, persons displaced
in their own countries in situations of increased
vulnerability have specific needs, both in terms of
protection and of assistance. For 10 years, the guiding
principles on internally displaced persons have
demonstrated their relevance and effectiveness.

We would like to draw the Council's attention to
the interdependence between peacebuilding and the
taking into account of the needs of displaced persons.
On the one hand, the non-resolution of the issue of
displacement can lead to instability that can jeopardize
efforts aimed at restoring peace. On the other hand,
solutions to the issue of displaced persons cannot be
lasting unless their needs as regards security, access to
basic services, property rights, justice, reconciliation,
reparation and post-conflict reconstruction and
political transition have been met.

In that context, the recommendations made by the
Representative of the Secretary-General on human
rights of internally displaced persons deserve to be
taken into account by all parties concerned during the
negotiation and peacebuilding process, including the
Security Council. In particular, Switzerland urges the
Council to take into consideration the framework for
durable solutions that has been developed by the
Representative of the Secretary-General, which
provides an important tool for action in the search for
lasting solutions for the millions of displaced persons.

