Mr. Mukerji (India): I should like to thank the
United States presidency for organizing this debate
on the protection of journalists in conflict situations
under the theme of the protection of civilians. I should
also like to thank the presidency for the concept paper
on the subject (S/2013/393, annex). We have benefited
greatly from the briefings given today by the Deputy
Secretary-General and other briefers.

Before making our observations on this subject,
we would reiterate India's consistent View that the
protection of journalists in all situations is the foremost
responsibility of every State. In India, articles 19 and 21
of our Constitution guarantee the right to life, personal
liberty, freedom of speech and expression. Such
constitutional rights are of fundamental importance
in any democratic society. Journalists play a crucial
role in ensuring that citizens exercise these rights in
reality. As the world's most populous democracy, India
is committed to the protection of these rights for all its
citizens, including journalists.

Our ingrained awareness of these rights is an
integral part of our participation in the peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations, to which India has
been the largest contributor. Indian United Nations
peacekeepers have helped to restore peace and security
in conflict situations around the globe and thereby
facilitated the creation of an environment conducive
to the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and
expression.
Since 1950, India has adhered to and fully supported
the Geneva Conventions. We also recall the Council's
demand in resolution 1738 (2006) that all parties to
armed conflict comply fully with the obligations
applicable to them under international law related to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel. Such compliance is necessary not only for
access to information, but also for the resolution of
conflict situations and for post-conflict peacebuilding.

While discussing best practices for protecting
journalists in conflict situations, we would recommend
certain basic precautions. These recommendations are
meant to put in context issues of access and security
in conflict situations. First and foremost, journalists
should function within the relevant domestic laws of the
countries concerned so that they have full recourse to
the protection afforded by such laws to them. Secondly,
their access to conflict zones should be secured in a
legal manner. Thirdly, they should maintain strict
neutrality and impartiality and not become a party to
the conflict. When journalists follow such precautions,
it will become easier for States to protect them, facilitate
their professional work, and ensure that they become a
catalyst for conflict resolution and peacebuilding. For
their part, national Governments must come together
and pledge to provide protection to journalists in
conflict situations, especially where their whereabouts
and coordinates have been provided in advance.

We have witnessed the tremendous dynamism
and professionalism of journalists in reporting from
conflict situations. Manyjournalists, including women,
have performed their professional duties at grave
personal risk. The protection that these journalists have
received from responsive mechanisms, established by
States under the rule of law, demonstrates the need to
further support the development of such mechanisms.
The efforts of the Council and of the international
community must be directed at assisting national
authorities in augmenting such mechanisms, and in
generating greater awareness of these issues. That is the
most sustainable method for sovereign Governments to
discharge their responsibility to protect journalists in
conflict situations.

