Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I can be brief because I
feel there is general unity in the Security Council on this
issue. I should like to align myselfin particular with the
statements delivered by my European colleagues who
have already taken the floor today.

First of all, I would like to express Germany's
support for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas.
We support his analysis and recommendations. With
regard to the analysis, there has been some progress
made on the democratic front, with some very specific
and positive steps having been taken. I would like
to reiterate what he said with regard to the Gambia's
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission,
what he said about Cabo Verde implementing resolution
2467 (2019) on sexual Violence, and what he said about
Senegal and Togo 4 two countries in which there are
more women involved. Those are very good examples,
and I hope that they are taken into account by others.

Nevertheless, the glass remains half empty.
Mr. Chambas mentioned the violent extremism that
is increasing in some areas, deterioration of security,
human rights violations, gender-based violence in many
countries, humanitarian crises, internally displaced
persons, drug trafficking, and herders and farmers
at each other's throats. In this context, I would like
to highlight a point that we believe is very important
even if it was not mentioned by many speakers today,
namely, the security implications of climate change in
the region.

In terms of actions going forward, I feel that
when we put all of the burden on the United Nations,
we must remember that the most important thing is
national ownership. National Governments must do
their homework - and the international community
can support them in that - but there has to be national
ownership. It has to be through national ownership
that democratic rules are implemented, accountability
guaranteed, the judiciary strengthened, the participation
of women and wider civil society ensured, and the
involvement of youth prioritized. Indeed, if we look at
the demographics, youth should be at the top of every
Government's agenda. Furthermore, Governments
must focus on good governance in general, acting
with respect for national constitutions, particularly
with regard to the length of presidential mandates. Of
course, these are regional problems and therefore it is
necessary to take a regional approach.

I also wish to highlight what Mr. Chambas said with
regard to the Lake Chad Basin Governors' Forum for
Regional Cooperation on Stabilization, Peacebuilding
and Sustainable Development. It is very positive that
the Governors are genuinely addressing the problem of
extremists and are working together with the Heads of
State and the Governors of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as taking
on board the views of other neighbouring countries in
their work.

This is where the United Nations and its good
offices can help, and therefore cooperation with
ECOWAS and the Group of Five (G-5) for the Sahel
is very important, as are the efforts being undertaken
by Mr. Chambas and the Secretary-General with regard
to the One United Nations approach. The members of
the Security Council visited Mali and Burkina Faso
and we witnessed the many challenges they face there,
particularly in Burkina Faso, and how important One
United Nations, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund are there. The latter is being used
prolifically, which is something I can only encourage.

Finally, I would like to return to what I mentioned
previously regarding the challenges posed by climate
change. We support the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and are pleased to note that it is
working specifically on the preparation of a report
on climate-related security risks. Germany stands
ready to support the United Nations. We are spending
€50 million on strengthening the security sector in
Burkina Faso. The G-5 Sahel is also on our priority list,
and we have spent €150 million on the G-5 Sahel since
2016. We support the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Regional Stabilization Facility for
Lake Chad and have spent €40 million to this end, as
we believe UNDP needs to play a very important role
in the region.

