Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Jose Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, to the Council today, and to congratulate him on
the achievements of the Timorese people. I would also
like to welcome Special Representative Khare and
thank him for his comprehensive briefing.

Timor-Leste has made significant progress since
the political crisis and violence of 2006. Although the
situation remains fragile, the Timorese commitment to
peace is clear. It was on full display on 30 August,
when Timor-Leste celebrated the tenth anniversary of
the popular consultation. My Government welcomes
the progress which the Timorese have made in the area
of security, in particular in the development of a
national security policy and draft security legislation,
and we recognize the increased professionalization of
the Timorese police and military, as witnessed by their
efforts to ensure a secure and stable environment
following the February 2008 assassination attempts on
the President and Prime Minister.

The recent transfer of policing responsibilities
from the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) to the National Police of Timor-Leste
in three districts was a step forward, and we hope to
see further such transfers to the Timorese police in the
near future. We also encourage the Timorese, as they
continue to develop their national security policy, to
clearly delineate the roles of the police and the
military - an essential element of effective rule of law
and administration of justice.

The United States is committed to assisting
Timor-Leste to develop its security sector. We have
increased our military cooperation and are currently
conducting training exercises in Timor-Leste and
neighbouring Indonesia. We are pleased that key
Timorese decision-makers have accepted our invitation
to participate in programmes at the Asia-Pacific Center
on Security Studies in Hawaii for the second
consecutive year.

Timor-Leste has also made progress in
democratic governance and rule of law. We
congratulate the Timorese on carrying out peaceful
local elections and commend UNMIT for its support to
this process. We also applaud President Ramos-Horta's
initiative to open a broad dialogue with the Timorese
people on priority issues. But a critical element of
democratic governance is an independent judiciary. We
therefore encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue its administrative reforms, including the
development of legislative frameworks and a justice
sector that establishes accountability for criminal
offences and puts an end to impunity for grave
violations of human rights. We believe that the
recommendations of the independent comprehensive
needs assessment of the justice sector could provide
critical tools for reforming the sector and improving
accountability.

Social cohesion and economic development are
key to long-term stability. The recent closing of camps
for internally displaced persons and the safe return and
resettlement of those individuals are important steps
towards reconciliation. Further, we acknowledge the
progress that Timorese officials have made in
addressing the national priorities outlined in the
international compact for Timor-Leste (see S/2008/501, para. 36) and the measures the Government is taking to
improve access to primary education, decrease
malnutrition, lower unemployment levels and increase
child protection. It is critical that the Timorese
leadership continue these efforts to reduce poverty and
create additional employment - a priority benchmark
identified in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/504).

For our part, the United States will continue to
support the Timorese people in these efforts. We have
provided $24 million this year to support an array of
programmes, including in health, rural economic
development and judicial reform.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to Special
Representative Khare and thanking him for his
dedicated efforts to advance stability and prosperity in
Timor-Leste. We would like to wish him every success
in his future endeavours.

