Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to start by thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, and Ambassador
Vieira for their comprehensive and detailed briefings
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

We wish to focus on two points today: first, the
political situation in Guinea-Bissau, and, secondly, the
future of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).

Belgium welcomes the successful holding of
legislative elections in March, shortly after the visit
carried out by the Council, which enabled us better to
understand the challenges that country is facing. We
welcome in particular the high level of participation
and the strong mobilization of women, which are the
indications of the democratic vitality of the society of
Guinea-Bissau.

The appointment of a Prime Minister and a
Government, especially the announcement that
presidential elections will be held on 24 November, are
encouraging news. We invite the Government to take
the measures necessary to organize credible, free, fair
and peaceful presidential elections. However, tensions
and a climate of mistrust continue to characterize the
political landscape. This is for us a source of concern,
as we should not overlook the fact that political
stability will contribute to socioeconomic recovery
and to the combat against trafficking. The time has
come for national political actors to play a positive and
constructive role. In that regard, we believe that the
sanctions regime remains appropriate.

Concerning UNIOGBIS, we would recall
the importance of respect by all parties for all
provisions of the Conakry Agreement, and also of the
implementation of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) road map. Belgium believes
that in order to ensure an orderly transition, it is vital
to avoid proceeding with undue haste if conditions on
the ground are not suitable. The transition process of
the United Nations presence in no way means that the
international community is abandoning Guinea-Bissau.

For these reasons, we call for a greater involvement
on the part of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the strengthening of the country team and of
the resources provided to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

In the immediate future, Belgium calls for
coordinated action between UNIOGBIS and the
Group of Five international partners represented in
Guinea-Bissau: the African Union, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
European Union and the United Nations. The follow-
up provided by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the support provided
by the Peacebuilding Fund are also important elements
in the new chapter that will begin in Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Belgium's
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sori-Coulibaly, in the exercise
of her functions.

