Mr. Li Zhenhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their respective briefings on
the implementation of the completion strategies of the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism of the
International Criminal Tribunals.

We have noted with pleasure that the two Tribunals
have made further headway in their work and have been
moving steadily forward with the completion strategy.
The ICTY branch of the Residual Mechanism will start
operations as of 1 July 2013, which we acknowledge as
an important milestone.

As for the work of the two Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism, I wish to make three points. First,
under resolution 1966 (2010), the two Tribunals are to
complete all the work that remains and are to be closed
by the end of 2014 at the latest. We have noted the delay
in part of the work of the two Tribunals, as mentioned,
and we believe that the Council resolution should be
strictly followed. We hope that the two Tribunals will
continue to take effective measures to accelerate the
pace of work, while ensuring the quality of their trials,
so as to complete their work on schedule.

Secondly, the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism has been progressing well, and part of its
judicial functions have been handed over to it smoothly.
The Hague branch of the Mechanism will soon come
into operation. China hopes that the ICTY will organize
its work in various areas so as to ensure the smooth
start and operation of the Hague branch.

Thirdly, we have noted that the two Tribunals
still face some difficulties in their related judicial
activities and administration. As mentioned earlier
by the previous speakers, there are still nine fugitives
within the jurisdiction of the ICTR. Therefore, there
remain potential cases involving the arrest of fugitives
and the placement of those convicted and sentenced.
We call upon the countries concerned to continue their
cooperation with the two Tribunals and to arrest the
fugitives at large. At the same time, we also hope that
the countries able to do so will provide the necessary
assistance to the two Tribunals in areas such as the
placement of those sentenced. We also take note
of Serbia's proposal with regard to the serving of
sentences, which we think is very important.

