Mr. Melki (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
Inzko, for his enlightening briefing on the latest
developments, particularly in the electoral process.

The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina went to
the polls on 7 October to elect their representatives at
the level of the cantons, parliamentary assemblies and
the presidencies. More than 20 years after a deadly
conflict was brought to an end by the Dayton Peace
Accords, we can today be pleased by the holding of
elections deemed free by observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. However, the
many irregularities referred to in the report (S/2018/974, annex) of the High Representative deserve our attention
so as to prevent their recurrence in future elections.

The new authorities will face three priorities
following the elections. The first, which is essential
for the future of the country, is national cohesion. As
pointed out by the High Representative and several
members of the Security Council, the provocations
and controversies launched by some political leaders
fuel inter-community tensions and undermine efforts
to build trust among the communities. It is the
responsibility of the new leaders to reject rhetoric
and positions that are likely to reopen the wounds of
the past. As such, almost a year after the closure of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the creation of the Residual Mechanism, France
strongly condemns the glorification of crimes and war
criminals, regardless of their community of origin.
It is unacceptable that after the commission of cruel
acts - and we all remember the Srebrenica massacre,
among others, as has been recalled - that politicians
continue to lift up as examples those responsible for the
most serious crimes. Strengthening national cohesion
requires more than ever that there be progress towards a
more consensual operation of the institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We welcome the amendments made
to the criminal procedure code, which are an all-too-
rare example of a constructive approach.

National cohesion will have to be based on
justice. That is the second priority, no less essential,
on which I wish to expound. The rule of law and
respect for human rights are not a luxury to which only
prosperous countries can lay claim. On the contrary,
it is a condition for just and sustainable economic and
social development, the vitality of civil society and
the stability of institutions. France therefore calls on
all political actors to respect the decisions taken by
national and international judicial bodies, including on
the issue of electoral reform, in the interests of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Bosnian citizens.

On the other hand, it is essential to make progress in
the fight against corruption and organized crime and to
ensure that all investigations are conducted in the most
impartial manner. We expect the Bosnian authorities
to take strong measures against a phenomenon of
corruption that fuels mistrust of the authorities and
encourages younger generations to continue to leave the
country. The High Representative has just mentioned
the statistics of those departures, a worrying indicator
for the future of the country.

That brings me to the third and last priority,
which is the European perspective. France associates
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union in a few minutes. The prospect of
European Union integration, in due course and when
the conditions are met, is an extension of the European
Union's widespread and multifaceted involvement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Throughout that involvement,
the European Union military Operation Althea, to
which we have just renewed our collective support
and which must continue its transition with regard to
its non-executive tasks, continues to contribute to the
stabilization of the country. The competent European
services, for their part, are redoubling their efforts to
support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its rapprochement
with the European Union and to prepare an opinion
on the candidature of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
membership in the European Union. It is up to Bosnian
political leaders to implement the necessary reforms,
particularly in the areas of the rule of law, human rights
and economic and social development, in order to
make progress along their path towards Europe. In that
perspective, we encourage Bosnian political leaders to
favour a consensual decision-making process.

As we commemorate the centenary of the end of the
Great War, we have the responsibility to bear witness
to the cruel Violence that ravaged Europe over the past
century and to defend, with force and conviction, a
spirit of reconciliation. It is not only an ideal but also
a practice, as has been mentioned. France does that on
a daily basis with Germany. We encourage the leaders
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage resolutely in that
direction with the interests of all Bosnian citizens as
their sole objective.

