Mr. Dumitru (Romania): I would like to begin
by commending you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1308 (2000). I also wish to express
our thanks to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to
Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
briefings on action taken to implement that resolution.

There can be no doubt that today - as we mark
five years since the adoption of the resolution -
HIV/AIDS remains an urgent threat to peace and
security. My delegation fully recognizes that there is a
clear link between the AIDS pandemic and peace and
security. Movements of people as a result of conflict
fuel the spread of HIV/AIDS, but the epidemic itself
also causes social and economic crises that can
threaten stability and security. Fighting the spread of
HIV/AIDS is therefore linked to preventing armed
conflict. It requires a coordinated response on the part
of all relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council.

We agree that there is a need for continued efforts
to implement the already existing plans of action on
HIV/AIDS. The special session of the General
Assembly on HIV/AIDS, held in June 2001, was
another major step in fostering support for the global
fight against HIV/AIDS. Its outcome, the Declaration
of Commitment, General Assembly resolution S-26/2,
sets out a comprehensive framework for an effective
response. This process must be closely followed up in
the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We
therefore welcome the General Assembly's High-level
Meeting on HIV/AIDS held on 2 June 2005, in which
many ministers participated, as well as today's open
Council briefing.

Moreover, we are encouraged to learn from the
presentations of Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Piot that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
UNAIDS have already implemented a number of
concrete steps. Together, they will help minimize the
threat of the spread of HIV/AIDS in conflict zones and
help protect the local populations and the peacekeeping
troops that are deployed there from infection.

In this regard, my delegation would like to
underline that prevention must be the mainstay of our
response. We fully subscribe to the idea that
peacekeepers and other uniformed personnel can and
must be important contributors in the fight against the
spread of HIV/AIDS. We therefore encourage DPKO
and UNAIDS to continue to emphasize predeployment
training, as well as continuous awareness and
educational activities during deployment, particularly
in high-prevalence countries, including through
HIV/AIDS advisers.

My Government remains committed to pursuing
the full implementation of resolution 1308 (2000), and
we are exploring ways of making its implementation
more effective. The Government of Romania has
clearly shown that there is strong political will and a
readiness to undertake the necessary actions to
maintain a low prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the country.
In this respect, I would like to underline that the
Government of Romania last year approved a 2004-
2007 national strategy on the overseeing, control and
prevention of HIV/AIDS infection. The strategy
stipulates as an objective the assurance of universal
access to information and education, as well as to
services for the prevention of HIV/AIDS and sexually
transmitted infections in the military services.

Among other things, the national strategy refers
to the elaboration and implementation on military
bases of a curriculum on the prevention of HIV/AIDS
and sexually transmitted infections, information and
education activities and the development of a protocol
and prevention kit on HIV/AIDS for members of the
armed forces who participate in military missions
outside Romania.

I would like to conclude by expressing support
for the recommendations made in the UNAIDS report.
Against this background, I would like to welcome and
support the initiative of the Greek presidency to
conclude today's meeting in a practical way: with a
substantive presidential statement.

