Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.

Peru is following with profound concern the
persistent cycle of destruction around the question of
Palestine, whereby episodes of escalating violence, as
over recent months, are followed by fleeting periods of
relative calm. This pattern, coupled with the Security
Council's inaction and the inertia of certain key actors,
has a negative impact in what is already a highly volatile
context and generates unpredictable consequences
for the Middle East and for the world in general. We
are alarmed that the prospects for a political solution
seem to grow ever weaker and that unilateral actions
risk triggering an even greater escalation of tension
and violence.

Peru reiterates its firm condemnation of the
launching of rockets and incendiary devices by
Hamas, which threatens the lives of the Israeli civilian
population, cause material damage and further
undermine the potential for a political solution.

At the same time, we underscore that, pursuant
to international humanitarian law, the legitimacy of
Israel's self-defence hinges upon its strict adherence
to the principles of proportionality, distinction and
precaution. In that regard, we must recall its obligation
to abide by the resolutions of the Security Council. In
particular, we believe there is an urgent and pressing
need to put an end to increased settlement activity, home
demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, in accordance with resolution
2334 (2016). Those actions are contrary to international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the Palestinian State and undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution.

We note with concern the continuing deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West
Bank, and how it contributes to fuelling increased
radicalization and extremism among the population. We
welcome the significant financial contributions intended
to improve living conditions in Gaza, which have
helped to improve electricity supply, create jobs and to
provide medical services. Nonetheless, we underscore
the temporary nature of such measures and that they
must be followed by political agreements that bring to
an end the suffering of millions of Palestinians. That
means, among other things, making tangible progress
in the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which
entails the restoration of Palestinian Authority control
throughout the area. It also means ending the Gaza
blockade under conditions that guarantee the security
of Israel.

Moreover, we are concerned at the destabilizing
effect of the Israeli Government's decision to withhold
a significant proportion of Palestinian taxes. In that
regard, we welcome the willingness of Arab countries
to consider options for providing assistance at a
forthcoming meeting to be held in Cairo. Nonetheless,
we note for the definitive solution to the problem lies
in strict respect for the obligations governing the
economic relations between the parties.

In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Organization. For that to be achieved,
the support of the international community and a
constructive role on the part of the Security Council
are essential.

