Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey the
condolences of the Government and people of my
country to my colleague on the Russian Federation
delegation in the wake ofthe tragic incident that claimed
children's lives in the commercial centre in Kemerovo.

A few minutes ago, I was checking the list of the
States members of the Security Council and I realized
that two - only two - ofits 15 members have embassies
in Damascus. That is why the statements made by the
representatives of those two countries offered the most
accurate description of the humanitarian situation in
my country. They were able to provide an objective and
fair assessment of the situation there.

In late 2016, right here in the Chamber (see S/PV.7834), we announced the good news to our people
in Syria that the Syrian Government would liberate
eastern Aleppo from armed terrorist groups, and as a
Government, an army and a responsible State we have
done just that. Today we announce to our people the
good news that the time has come to liberate all of
eastern Ghouta from these armed terrorist groups. We
declare that we will liberate the Golan, Afrin, Raqqa,
Idlib and the rest of our occupied territory because, as
a State, we reject the presence on our territory of any
illegal armed group or occupying Power, regardless of
the excuses, just like all other States represented in the
Council. Such victories would not have been possible
if we had no just cause. They would not have been
possible without the sacrifices made by the Syrian Arab
Army, the support of our people and the support of our
allies and friends.

Facts that have come to light recently with the
liberation of eastern Ghouta from armed terrorist groups
again prove what we have always told the Council since
the first day of the global terrorist war waged by Saudi
Arabia, Qatar, Israel, Turkey, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France against my country. We
said that the suffering of Syrians is the result of the
practices of armed terrorist groups against civilians.
The testimonies of the tens of thousands of our people
leaving eastern Ghouta underscore that those groups
have continued to deprive them of their freedom,
destroy their livelihoods, disperse their families and
prevent them from leaving to areas under State control
in order to continue using them as human shields. They
have seized control of humanitarian assistance in order
to distribute it to their supporters or sell it to civilians
at exorbitant prices. They have also targeted the safe
corridors allocated by the Government with explosive
bullets and mortar shelling, which has led to the death of
dozens of people, including some Palestinian brethren.

We have borne witness to a state of hysteria in
recent days and weeks in the Council as the Syrian
Government has sought to exercise its sovereign right,
combat terrorist groups and eliminate terrorists in
Syria in order to restore security and stability to all
Syrians and implement Council resolutions against
terrorism. That state of hysteria proves that the States
supporting those terrorist groups have never sought to
end the suffering of Syrians. They have sought only
to perpetuate and prolong their suffering in order to
blackmail the Syrian Government, at the political and
humanitarian levels, and save terrorists from their
certain deaths. I would like to assure the supporters of
terrorism, some of whom are present in this Chamber,
that the plan that they have promoted for the past seven
years has failed. Their plan was to deny that the Islamist
takfiri groups were terrorists and instead present them
as moderate Syrian opposition. That plan has failed.

Eastern Ghouta has not fallen, as my colleague
the representative of the United States stated. It was
liberated in the same way we liberated eastern Aleppo.
It is terrorism that has fallen in eastern Ghouta, not
civilians. As the representative of the United States
said, today should be a day of shame for the supporters
and sponsors of terrorism and terrorist groups. They
have supported those terrorist groups for years in order
to topple the Syrian Government by force in favour
of Islamist takfiri groups. Such actions have led to
considerable suffering among the Syrian people, and I
have proof of it. Two days ago, at the Senate Armed
Forces Committee, led by Senator Lindsey Graham,
the Chief of Central Command, General Joseph Votel,
stated that "the change of the Government in Syria by
force in favour a number of Islamist opposition groups
has failed".

The Security Council has to date held 49 formal
meetings to discuss the so-called humanitarian situation
in Syria and a number of informal emergency and Arria
Formula meetings. The Council has read reports and
heard briefings that were replete with falsehoods that
senior officials of the United Nations sought to present
in order to serve the policies of some influential
Western countries that are members of the Council and
to pressure the Syrian Government. Such reports and
briefings were completely devoid of professionalism
and objectivity. They have failed to take note of the
attacks on the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic, including the attacks by
the international coalition, led by the United States, and
those by the Turkish regime and the Israeli occupying
force. Those same parties have also sought to provide
all kinds of support to terrorist groups associated with
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other militias fabricated
in those countries.
After 49 reports and hundreds ofmeetings, briefings
and thousands of working hours, some countries
continue to refuse to recognize that the humanitarian
crisis in Syria is the result of an external investment in
terrorism and unilateral coercive measures. Forty-nine
reports have been issued, and I say today that my words
are falling on deaf ears. People from the Netherlands
say that beautiful flowers have thorns. The Netherlands
is famous for its flowers. Perhaps that saying reflects
the situation on the ground.

Mr. Lowcock stated that the Kashkul was targeted
by a missile but he did not specify its origin. He
said there are eight shelters for those leaving eastern
Ghouta. He did not mention the efforts of the Syrian
Government to host the 150,000 civilians leaving eastern
Ghouta. He does not know who manages those shelters.
Perhaps aliens are taking care of the 150,000 civilians.
Mr. Lowcock stated that the United Nations, its partners
and the Syrian Red Crescent are helping people from
Ghouta. He did not mention the Government at all. If
the Government has no role to play, why ask it to help
the Council? Why does the Council request its approval
for the entry of humanitarian convoys? Mr. Lowcock
stated that 153,000 people left Afrin and went to Tell
Rifaat because of military operations. Who forced
153,000 people to leave Afrin? Was it not Turkey that
forced them to leave? Was it not the Turkish aggression
against Afrin that forced these people to leave?

Mr. Lowcock mentioned the Syrian Government
only once, saying that it approved the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the Rukban camp. He did
not say that the United States was behind the obstacles
preventing the deployment of the humanitarian convoy
in question. The United States occupies the Rukban
camp and the Tanf area. I will not go into detail now
for the sake of time. I will not even go into the details
of the forty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/243). I will give only one example to prove that
the report lacks objectivity and impartiality.

The report devotes nine paragraphs to the suffering
of civilians in eastern Ghouta and the damage to the
infrastructure there as a result of Government military
operations, as the report claims - nine paragraphs. As
for the situation of the 8 million civilians in Damascus,
the targeting by terrorist groups of the capital with more
than 2,500 missiles, the killing and injury of thousands,
and the destruction of homes, hospitals and clinics, the
report dedicates only one sentence to Damascus. The
report says,

"Attacks on residential neighbourhoods of
Damascus also continued from eastern Ghouta,
resulting in deaths, injuries and damage to civilian
infrastructure." (S/2018/243, para. 8)

We hope that the United Nations will not adopt
in eastern Ghouta the same approach that it has taken
in previous situations by not providing support to the
areas liberated or achieving reconciliation. We hope
that the United Nations will adopt a new approach in
line with the Charter and international law, based on
full coordination and cooperation with the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is the only party
concerned with the protection and support of Syrians.
We hope that the United Nations will not succumb to
the dictates of certain influential Western countries in
the Council that run counter to humanitarian action, the
Charter and international law.

During the past week alone, the Syrian Ministry
of Commerce has distributed 4,000 tons of food to
civilians leaving eastern Ghouta. I am not sure about
the sources mentioned by the representative of France,
because France does not have an embassy in Damascus.
So its sources ofinformation cannot be credible.

In conclusion, the States sponsoring terrorism
have instructed armed terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons once again in Syria. 1 ask the Council to
pay attention to this information. They asked them
to fabricate evidence, as they have in the past, in
order to accuse the Syrian Government. We sent this
information to the President of the Security Council
yesterday. According to that information, this theatrical
act will be produced by the intelligence agencies of
these countries, and the starring roles will be the White
Helmets. The production will be directed by foreign
media. This theatrical act will take place this time
in the areas close to the separation line in the Syrian
occupied Golan. Terrorist groups will use poison gas
against civilians in Al-Harra. Afterwards, the injured
will be moved to the hospitals of the Israeli enemy for
treatment there. Council members can already imagine
the testimony that will be offered by doctors of the
Israeli occupation forces.

The information we submitted also refers to
another theatrical act in the villages of Habit and
Qalb Lawza in the suburbs of Idlib, where a number
of satellite transmitters and foreign experts have been
spotted. This time, the cast will include women and
children from an internally displaced persons camp on
the Syrian-Turkish border. Once again, I provide the
Council with this serious information.

