Ms. Kane: At approximately 5 o'clock in the
morning on Sunday 25 June, eight Palestinian militants
left the southern Gaza Strip via a tunnel and infiltrated
an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) base near the Kerem
Shalom Kibbutz. The militants fired several anti-tank
rockets into the IDF base and a gun battle took place.
Corporal Gilad Shalit, an IDF soldier also holding
French nationality, was taken hostage and is now being
held by militants in Gaza. Two IDF soldiers were killed
and a further three wounded. Two Palestinian militants
were killed in the operation.

Three Palestinian militant groups - the Nasser
Salah el-Din Troops of the Popular Resistance
Committees; the Izz el-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the
Hamas military wing; and the newly formed Islamic
Army - issued a statement confirming that they had
conducted the operation and were holding the soldier.
They subsequently stated that he would not be released
and that information on his state of health would not be
provided before Israel releases all Palestinian female
and under-age detainees.

The Palestinian Authority spokesman called upon
those who abducted the Israeli soldier to guarantee his
safety. President Abbas called for the release of the
soldier. He met with Prime Minister Haniyeh and
contacted international counterparts. Prime Minister
Olmert ruled out negotiations over any exchange of
prisoners. The Israeli cabinet agreed that the
Palestinian Authority would bear full responsibility for
06-41366

any harm to Corporal Shalit and approved
recommendations to prepare and deploy Israeli forces
for urgent military action.

International efforts to secure the peaceful release
of the soldier, especially by Egypt and reportedly by
France and Jordan, have been continuous. The
Secretary-General has been in frequent touch with
parties in the region, including Prime Minister Olmert,
President Abbas and President Al-Assad of Syria. He is
also consulting individually with his Quartet partners.

The Israeli military operation to obtain the
release of Corporal Shalit began just after midnight on
28 June. The operations began with the destruction by
F-l6 aircraft of two bridges in central Gaza. The IDF
then struck Gaza's only power station from the air and
ground forces moved into the Gaza Strip. Israeli tanks
and armoured personnel carriers moved into the
airport, located at the south-eastern end of the Strip.
Israeli military aircraft broke the sound barrier over
Gaza, causing sonic booms. On the same day, four
Israeli Air Force fighter jets overflew Syrian territory,
breaking the sound barrier over a presidential villa in
Lattakia.

There was a further air strike on the afternoon of
Wednesday 28 June on a largely disused training camp
in the south of the Gaza Strip. Another Israeli incursion
into Gaza took place on the early morning of Thursday
29 June. The Israeli Air Force shelled an open area in
the compound of the Islamic University in Gaza and
Israeli tanks entered northern Gaza. On the afternoon
of 29 June, the Israeli Air Force attacked a car in the
Gaza Strip. Its occupants escaped.

On 25 June, an 18-year old Israeli from the West
Bank settlement of Itamar was abducted by Palestinian
militants as he was hitchhiking. His body was found in
Ramallah on the morning of Thursday 29 June. The
Palestinian Popular Resistance Committees claimed
responsibility for his abduction and killing.

In a military briefing on 29 June, an IDF
spokesperson stated that the ongoing operation was
aimed at halting rocket attacks on Israel from northern
Gaza, in addition to securing the release of the missing
soldier. Between 25 and 30 June, Palestinian militants
reportedly fired l7 rockets from the Gaza Strip into
Israel, including ll on 29 June alone. There were no
reported casualties.
3
Also on the night of 29 June, Israeli forces
undertook a large-scale arrest raid in the West Bank
and Jerusalem, detaining 64 Palestinian Authority
officials, including eight ministers and 21 Palestinian
Legislative Council members, and 23 suspected
militants. The Israeli Attorney General has said that
those arrested will be charged under anti-terrorism
legislation.

Violence continued last night as the IDF
reportedly conducted several operations in the Gaza
Strip, including a reported 30 air strikes, as well as in
the West Bank. The Ministry of the Interior in Gaza
was targeted by an aerial strike and sustained major
damage. Two militants from the Al-Aqsa Brigades -
the Fatah military wing - were reportedly killed
earlier today in Nablus by Israeli military forces, and
one Palestinian Islamic Jihad militant died following
an air strike in Rafah. No other Palestinian deaths have
been reported.

The air attack on the power station on Wednesday
destroyed six transformers and the switchyard. The
power station cannot transmit, so over 40 per cent of
Gaza is now without power. Water pipes were also
damaged in the attack and approximately 130,000
people have been without water. Most hospitals possess
generators and are continuing to function, and there are
sufficient food supplies to last two to three weeks. The
crossing points between the Gaza Strip and Israel have
been closed since the beginning of the IDF operation,
however, so supplies of food and medicine will
decrease to critical levels unless those crossings are
opened shortly.

The private pipeline that brings fuel from Israel
into the Gaza Strip has not been functioning for the
past five days. Unless the flow of fuel is restored,
supplies are expected to run out this Sunday, 2 July.
The humanitarian consequences of a failure of
sanitation systems and private generators would be
severe, especially given the hot weather. International
efforts are under way to restore the flow of fuel into
the Gaza Strip.

This is a grave crisis. The slightest turn of events
could easily set off another full-scale conflict between
Israelis and Palestinians, bringing greater dangers to
civilians and having serious regional repercussions. All
parties must recognize that, and act with wisdom and
care and in full conformity with international
humanitarian law. Nothing justifies the holding of
hostages. Corporal Gilad Shalit must be released.
Nothing justifies indiscriminate rocket attacks. The
Palestinian Authority must act to stop them. However,
Palestinian civilians should not pay the price of those
actions. Israel must cease the destruction of civilian
infrastructure, ensure that civilians are protected and
allow for humanitarian assistance to get where it needs
to go. We are also extremely concerned at the arrest of
a large section of the elected Palestinian Government.

All concerned parties must step back from the
brink and give dialogue a chance to avert a full-scale
confrontation that will only lock Israelis and
Palestinians in deeper and deadlier conflict.

