The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Peru.

I too thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Mansour
Alotaibi, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their briefings.

I wish to begin my statement by welcoming the
progress made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to consolidate the
post-electoral transition process, which includes in
particular the intensification of bilateral and regional
cooperation and efforts to increase the opening of its
political space. However, we remain concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
following the resurgence of outbreaks of inter-ethnic
violence that have continued to cause fatalities and
forced displacement and to undermine the stability of
the country.

We are of the view that these sensitive
circumstances make the non-military component of the
work carried out by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) even more relevant, especially as
regards the promotion of dialogue between the various
actors in the country. In that regard, we emphasize
the importance of redoubling efforts leading to
disarmament, demobilization and social reintegration
of ex-combatants, since only a genuine reconciliation
process will lay the foundation for sustainable peace
in the country. We also welcome the implementation of
joint missions between MONUSCO and the Congolese
provincial authorities aimed at neutralizing the actions
of armed groups in the east of the country, as well as
the commitments reached to end the recruitment of
children in that area.

The emphasis placed on the cessation of violence
must in no way side-step the urgency ofimmediately and
simultaneously addressing the delicate humanitarian
situation looming over that country, which appears to be
deteriorating on the ground. Around 13 million people
face acute food insecurity, in addition to the serious
ravages among the population caused by the outbreak of
such diseases as cholera, measles and Ebola, the latter
recently having been declared by the World Health
Organization to be a global health emergency.

We stress that the fight against Ebola, due to its high
level of incidence and its having crossed the country's
borders, requires a comprehensive approach in which
the central Government, local authorities, regional
organizations and relevant United Nations entities work
in tandem. In particular, we strongly condemn the acts
of violence perpetrated against Ebola response teams
deployed in the North Kivu region.

We commend the positive measures adopted to
promote respect for the freedom of expression, as
well as the release of 700 political prisoners. That
notwithstanding, Peru expresses its deep concern about
the deplorable health conditions and overcrowding
that are still observed in various detention centres in
the country.

We also welcome the timely implementation within
MONUSCO of a comprehensive action plan to respond
to the increase in sexual violence against women in
conflict zones, the effective implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy and efforts to include women
in the political and conflict-resolution processes in
the country.

We conclude by reaffirming our strong commitment
to efforts aimed at surmounting the humanitarian
crisis, allowing inclusive economic development and
promoting full respect for human rights throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

