Mr. Lowcock: Last week, we released the United
Nations 2018 Humanitarian Needs Overviewfor Syria.
It lays out the continued plight of the Syrian people
after almost seven years of conflict. Some 13.1 million
people urgently need humanitarian assistance and
protection. Ofthose, some 5.6 million are in acute need.
Syria remains the world's largest and most dynamic
displacement crisis, with half of all Syrians displaced
from their homes. More than 6,500 people have been
displaced on average every day in the first nine months
of 2017, while some 2,500 people have gone back home.

The crisis continues to affect the vulnerable most
severely. An estimated 1.75 million children, or almost
one school-age child in three, are out ofschool. One-third
of schools are damaged or destroyed. Fewer than half of
Syria's health facilities are fully operational, leading to
thousands of preventable deaths from injury or disease.
Nearly 3 million people continue to live in besieged and
hard-to-reach areas throughout Syria, including close
to 420,000 in 10 besieged areas. The vast majority of
them - 94 per cent - are in eastern Ghouta. The
remaining 6 per cent are in Fo'ah and Kefraya in Idlib
governorate, and in Yarmouk in Damascus.

I want to touch first upon specific issues of concern,
and then I will update the Council on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

Fighting has escalated in eastern Ghouta and
Damascus. The World Health Organization (WHO)
reports that from 14 to 17 November, 84 people were
killed and 659 were injured, including hundreds of
women and children. Earlier this week, air strikes on
Duma and other areas reportedly resulted in further
civilian deaths. Over the same period, more than 200
mortar shells and rockets were reportedly fired on
residential areas in Damascus, resulting in hundreds of
deaths and injuries.

Against this background, news over the past two
days of a ceasefire in eastern Ghouta would, if true and
sustained, be important. But I am extremely worried
about the food crisis in eastern Ghouta. Despite efforts
made to reach them, only 100,000 people out of an
estimated population of 400,000 in the enclave have
received food assistance this year, and those people are
getting only occasional, one-off deliveries. The closure
of the only crossing point into the area on 3 October,
together with the increase in air and ground strikes, has
resulted in a rapid deterioration of the situation. The
World Food Programme (WFP) reports that agricultural
areas in eastern Ghouta are difficult to access because
of the fighting, and that their output is very low because
of a lack of water for irrigation. I am also deeply
concerned about a growing number of people, including
children, with complex medical cases - now reaching
nearly 500 - who require urgent medical evacuation.

The available evidence suggests that severe
acute malnutrition rates among children in eastern
Ghouta have increased fivefold in the past 10 months.
United Nations staff have seen this first hand through
assessments made during convoys to Kafr Batna and
Duma over the past two months. Children's deaths from
malnutrition are preventable if we get more, and more
regular, aid convoys in. I had constructive discussions
on this in Moscow and Tehran last week, and I hope that
they will result in meaningful progress.

The situation in north-eastern Syria also remains
a cause for concern, as fighting continues down the
Euphrates river towards the border with Iraq. Since
the beginning of the offensive against Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in November last year, airstrikes
and clashes have displaced more than 436,000 people
from and within Raqqa governorate. Another 350,000
people have been displaced from and within Deir ez-
Zor governmorate since August.
The risk from explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices continues to hamper
humanitarian access throughout the north-east,
including to the cities of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. This
is reportedly resulting in trauma incidents and deaths
as civilians return to Raqqa city. New restrictions on
humanitarian access and deliveries in the north-east are
limiting the number of people we had previously been
able to reach with help. Since 9 November, the United
Nations has faced a series of bureaucratic impediments
imposed by the parties in the area. As a result, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance has been curtailed
for much of the past month. This has happened as needs
continue to rise, with 125,000 displaced people moving
north in Deir eZ-Zor governorate so far this month.

At least 30,000 Syrians remain stranded in dire
circumstances on the berm along the Syrian-Jordanian
border. Following my visit to Amman last month, I
remain hopeful that we can find a sustainable solution,
while at the same time enabling immediate life-saving
assistance for these people.

I am also concerned about increasing displacement
in north-western Syria. Nearly 70,000 people have
been displaced to Idlib governorate in recent weeks,
while over 27,000 people have been displaced within
different parts of the governorate in the same period. As
previously, I repeat the Secretary-General's call on all
parties to the conflict in Syria to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure as required under international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and to allow
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need.

Despite the constant challenges that are inherent in
operating in the midst of a violent conflict, the United
Nations and its partners continue to provide life-saving
assistance to millions of people across Syria every
month. In September, United Nations support ensured
that 4.3 million people received food baskets, 1.7 million
people benefitted from water and sanitation assistance,
and 1.7 million received medical procedures.

I will briefly update the Council on United Nations
aid delivery, first to areas controlled by the Government
of Syria; secondly, across lines; and thirdly, through
the cross-border programme.

Assistance to areas under the control of the

Government of Syria continues to represent the majority
of the United Nations response. In October, some
2.8 million people in these areas were reached with food
assistance, delivered through some 1,500 WFP convoys.
WHO treated over 123,000 patients with medical
conditions. UNICEF provided nutrition assistance to
183,000 people. Other agencies - including the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration, the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East - all provided lifesaving assistance through their
humanitarian programmes in areas under the control of
the Government of Syria.

Secondly, cross-line convoys continue to be
heavily restricted. On average, just over a quarter of the
beneficiaries planned to be reached in the bimonthly
plans receive aid. That limited response is despite an
agreement with the Government of Syria on bimonthly
access plans and the creation of de-escalation zones
that cover two of the main areas we attempt to access,
that is, eastern Ghouta and northern rural Homs.

So far in November, only four cross-line convoys
have gotten through, namely, two to northern rural
Homs, reaching just over 200,000 people, and two
to besieged eastern Ghouta, Duma and Nashabiyeh,
in rural Damascus, reaching just 28,000 people. The
convoy to Nashabiyeh, serving about 7,000 people,
reached its destination only yesterday, at the second
attempt, after having to turn back on Monday because
of the fighting. Airstrikes were reported in the vicinity,
despite security assurances from all sides.

Medical items continue to be removed from
convoys. As the Secretary-General has said, improved
access through cross-line convoys is critical to ensuring
that the severe and worsening situation of civilians,
including children, is improved.

Thirdly, the United Nations continues to deliver
life-saving assistance to those living in north-western
and southern Syria via cross-border deliveries. This
month, approximately 800,000 people have received
food assistance. In addition, medicines, educational
supplies and other non-food items are regularly delivered
cross-border to hundreds of thousands of people.

United Nations cross-border assistance is checked
and verified by the United Nations monitoring
mechanism at designated border-crossing points - Bab
Al-Hawa, Bab As-Salam and Al-Ramtha. Every truck
is checked to ensure that it contains only humanitarian
supplies. Deliveries are confirmed by United Nations-
contracted third-party monitors upon arrival at
warehouses inside Syria. They check the items being
off-loaded against the waybill. There is then post-
distribution monitoring, including by independent
third parties and incorporating community feedback.
United Nations cross-border assistance is also subject
to the normal accountability mechanisms between the
donors and the delivery agencies, and that too includes
a verification system.

In the first 10 months of 2017, on average each
month more than 750,000 people were reached through
United Nations cross-border activities. That sustained
assistance is essential for those in need.

It is clear that each of the three modes of delivery
by the United Nations is critical for the people of
Syria, and that there is complementarity between
them. As needs remain high, it is important to preserve
all means of access. Civilians in areas not under the
control of the Government are reached in much larger
numbers, with much greater consistency and with much
more comprehensive support, through cross-border
operations than through cross-line operations. It is for
that reason that the Secretary-General has called for a
renewal of resolution 2165 (2014). As I have told the
Security Council before, the renewal of the resolution
is essential to save lives.

Finally, I want to let the Council know that,
following consultations with the authorities, I plan to
visit Syria in early January to assess the situation and
discuss how we can improve assistance to those in need.

