Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest
developments in Kosovo. I also welcome the presence
of Mr. Dacie, Serbian First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, at today's meeting and
thank him for his remarks. I also thank Ambassador
Vlora Citaku for her statement.

Our position on the issue at hand has always been
consistent and clear. We would like to reaffirm our
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Serbia and the peaceful and amicable resolution of
all outstanding issues between Belgrade and Pristina
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement. We also
welcome the ongoing efforts made by the European
Union in facilitating dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo, as well as in advancing peace and stability in
the region.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the continued
engagement of Belgrade and Pristina in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue on the normalization of
relations. We are also encouraged by their determination
and commitment to resolve outstanding issues through
dialogue and call on both sides to remain engaged in
the process.

The ongoing efforts being made to operationalize
an integrated Kosovo judiciary is a welcome step.
However, we are concerned about the slow progress
on the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo. We therefore
encourage the implementation of all existing agreements
in accordance with the Brussels Agreement.

We also take note of the ongoing discussion by
both sides on the territorial delineation as part of a
comprehensive agreement on the normalization of
relations. It is our hope that leaders in both Belgrade
and Pristina will continue to engage in dialogue and
maintain a positive and constructive spirit with a view
to addressing outstanding issues and disagreements
through peaceful means. That demands that both sides
refrain from actions and statements that could cause
ethnic discord and exert efforts to create an atmosphere
of trust and confidence conducive to dialogue that also
addresses the interests of all segments ofthe population.

Ethiopia fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
has been undertaking in discharging its mandate in
line with resolution 1244 (1999). Its engagement and
support in promoting intercommunity reconciliation
and confidence-building measures in the reporting
period are commendable.

It is our hope that UNMIK will continue to
promote political dialogue and strengthen community
reconciliation, as well as ensuring security and
stability in Kosovo and the region. We also recognize
the significant role of the European Union on matters
concerning Kosovo and commend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force for their
valuable contribution in Kosovo in the area of the rule
oflaw and security.

In conclusion, I would like to state that the security
and stability of Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured once there is political will and resolve on
the part of both sides. In that respect, we once again
encourage both parties to remain committed to dialogue
and negotiation with a view to finding a mutually
acceptable solution.

