Mr. Pressman (United States): I would like to
thank the Ambassador of Spain for his briefing. We
also thank Spain for its leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) in carrying forward its important work.

The Committee's work has been an integral element
of our broader diplomacy. It has helped countries to
implement the four rounds of robust United Nations
sanctions. With the support of its Panel of Experts, the
Committee has investigated sanctions violations and
assembled an important and impressive understanding
of Iran's proliferation networks. It has also helped
crack down on Iran's arms smuggling, stemming the
flow of weapons in a volatile region. Through its active
engagement, the Committee has directly supported
ongoing efforts to address international concerns about
Iran's nuclear programme. As we are all well aware, for
more than a year, the P5+l countries have been engaged
in a serious dialogue with Iran. Secretary Kerry and our
negotiating team met last week in Switzerland with the
P5+1 and their Iranian counterparts. Those discussions
have identified serious and difficult issues.

As President Obama and Secretary Kerry have
made clear, we are working to see if we can arrive at a
political framework by the end of March that addresses
the major elements of a comprehensive deal. But let us
be clear - the only reason we are engaging in those
negotiations is to deny Iran a nuclear weapon. There are
still significant gaps and important choices that need
to be made in the negotiations. As we have said many
times, no deal is better than a bad deal. The negotiations
must find ways to advance our goal of ensuring that Iran
does not now, or ever, acquire a nuclear weapon, and
that Iran's nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful.

The Committee must continue its essential work
monitoring and improving the enforcement of existing
sanctions. Similarly, the Panel of Experts must continue
its vital work, investigating violations and following up
on leads and clarifying sanctions obligations to Member
States. Member States must also continue reporting to
the Committee attempted illicit procurement activities

in their territories in violation of therelevant Security
Council resolutions on Iran. The pace and intensity of
the Committee's work is critical and must continue.
After all, responding effectively to violations is at the
core of the Committee's mandate. Any breach of the
sanctions is a serious matter, violates international
law and undermines the Security Council's credibility.
The Committee's outreach work - advising Member
States, answering questions and ensuring that Member
States are well positioned to ensure the full and
robust implementation of the sanctions - is of great
importance.

