Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Wittig for his excellent work as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2010 and
Ambassador Gasana for the vigour with which he has
taken over the role.

Today we welcome with satisfaction the report of
the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2011/41). The year

2010 was important for the Commission, which saw its
policies come of age and its objectives better defined.
We are pleased to note the interest the Commission
attracts. This year saw the development of an
ambitious reform project led by the Ambassadors of
Ireland, Mexico and South Africa. We wish to reiterate
our support for the implementation of the
recommendations of the report, and in particular the
2011 road map drawn up under Germany's leadership.
We encourage the new chairmanship to examine
possibilities for the Commission to establish new
partnerships with financial institutions, in particular the
African Development Bank.

The appeal of the PBC was confirmed by the
addition to its agenda of Liberia in September 2010
and Guinea in February 2011. We recall our
commitment to those countries and strongly encourage
them to stay the course towards peace and democracy.

Despite these positive developments, we must
keep in mind that the recommendations of the co-
facilitators' report have not yet taken effect and that the
PBC has yet to find its place in the United Nations
system. The Commission is still too often considered
by States emerging from conflict as an additional
donor. However, the true added value of the PBC lies
in its political support and advocacy functions. I stress
that the PBC is first and foremost a political platform.
In this context, if the PBC is to be able to keep
international attention focused on countries emerging
from conflict, host countries should be prepared to
make real commitments, because peacebuilding does
not end with the successful holding of democratic
elections.

The six countries on the Commission's agenda
have thus had to step up their efforts, with the support
of the country-specific configurations of the PBC. For
host countries, being placed on the agenda is the
beginning of a long process that can be concluded only
by the national authorities. National ownership, which
is often highlighted, needs to be embodied in the
ambitious implementation of programmes promoting
good governance, anti-corruption efforts, security
sector reform, the rule of law and national
reconciliation.

Let me take this opportunity to commend the
report of Jean-Marie Guehenno on civilian capacity
development (S/2011/85). The report is an important
step, which we wish to support. Many of its proposals
could be implemented immediately, and we encourage
the Secretariat to be ambitious in implementing it.
Some of the recommendations, however, will have to
be validated by all of the States of the international
community. It will therefore be important to build
consensus that goes beyond the traditional rifts.

The Peacebuilding Commission is the most
representative and legitimate body of the United
Nations for promoting national civilian capacity-
building, triangular cooperation ~ among international
organizations, donor countries and host countries -
and South-South cooperation. In this respect, we
believe that the Organizational Committee of the
Commission should consider adding the evaluation of
that recent, innovative report to its agenda in the near
future.

