Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2310 (2016),
pertaining to the twentieth anniversary of the opening
for signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT), because we believe it to be a positive
initiative for making progress towards the priority
objective of nuclear disarmament and for countering
the threat posed by the existence of nuclear weapons
and their possible use, which would have devastating
consequences for humankind.

Although the Security Council has spoken on this
matter today, we believe that it is up to the Preparatory
Commission and the Provisional Technical Secretariat
of the CTBT to address this important matter in line
with their mandates.

The elimination of nuclear weapons requires
the joint efforts of the States Members of the United
Nations to ensure the effective implementation of
multilateral commitments leading to the elimination
of nuclear arsenals, in line with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, to which my
country is a State party.

Although we welcome the resolution's contribution
in the area of peace and security, we would have
liked the text to include more categorical language
with regard to the commitment that States possessing
nuclear weapons should assume in order to eliminate
those arsenals. We also believe that the mention in the
resolution of the joint statement by the five permanent
members of the Council dilutes the commitment of the
nuclear-weapon Powers when it comes to the goal of
disarmament and adhering to the provisions of the NPT
and the CTBT.

On the twentieth anniversary of the CTBT, we would
like to stress its contribution to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation. In that regard, we urge the eight
remaining annex 2 States, whose ratifications are
needed for its entry into force, to sign or ratify this
legal instrument without further delay.

My delegation reiterates that the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons is a violation of the Charter of
the United Nation and a crime against humanity. It is
also a violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, as was expressed by the International
Court of Justice in its 1996 advisory opinion on
the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex).

In that regard, we call on all States to refrain
from carrying out nuclear tests, including sub-critical
experiments and those carried out via simulation, with
the aim of developing and improving nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction. We believe
that such actions are detrimental to the objectives of
disarmament, the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the provisions ofthe NPT and CTBT, as they weaken the
impact of those instruments as disarmament measures.

The Latin American region has shown its decisive
support for the CTBT, as can be seen in the special
declaration, issued in connection with the twentieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the CTBT,
adopted by the Heads of State of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) at their
Summit held in Quito in January. My country is also
party to the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, which established
the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely
populated area. In addition to those achievements, I
would mention the declaration of the second CELAC
Summit held in Havana, in January 2014, which
declared Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone
of peace.

We continue to encourage the international
community to redouble efforts to give effect to
the commitment agreed to at the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which was
reaffirmed at subseqeunt conferences, with regard to
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. That would be a measure of particular
importance for peace and security in that troubled
region.

In that context, we also need concrete measures
on disarmament and non proliferation on the part of
States that possess nuclear weapons, in line with the
obligations incumbent upon them under article VI of
the NPT and measures adopted at successive NPT
Review Conferences since 2000.

We reiterate the call for the negotiation and
conclusion of universal legally binding instrument on
unconditional security guarantees to all non-nuclear-
weapon States, with a view to achieving the complete
elimination of this category of weapons of mass
destruction, irrespective of its type or geographical
location.

Finally, once again, we urge States that have not
yet done to sign or ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty, the only viable legal instrument for
prohibiting nuclear tests.

