Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for requesting the convening of this
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Yemen, as
well as Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for the detailed briefing that
he just delivered.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
concern stated barely one month ago (see S/PV.8361)
about the hostilities that the Yemeni people are
suffering, hostilities that are increasingly exacerbating
existing vulnerabilities. Three years of uninterrupted
conflict and the consequent economic decline have
exhausted coping mechanisms and the livelihoods of
the population, thereby exerting enormous pressure on
the institutions that provide essential basic services,
causing irregularities and interruptions in salary
payments and interrupting the provision of operating
costs for social facilities.

Approximately 1.25 million civil servants have
not received wages, or have only received them
intermittently, since August 2016. It is estimated that
that wage gap is affecting one quarter of the population,
including public officials and their families, leaving
them without a regular income at a time of scarcity and
rising prices, according to a report by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

There is an urgent need for the international
community to find a support strategy to stop the
continued deterioration of the Yemeni rial, which has
more than halved in value since the beginning of the
conflict, creating more development problems for
the population. In that regard, we trust the words of
Mr. Griffiths, who this month in Abu Dhabi hinted
at a possible master plan entailing a set of concerted
measures among the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the agencies of the United Nations, the
Gulf countries and the Yemeni Government.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
security of airports and ports, which are gateways
for humanitarian aid and goods, is another very
disturbing issue. In that regard, and in compliance with
international humanitarian law, the warring parties
must refrain from carrying out acts that prevent regular
access to those supplies, in addition to guaranteeing
their safe transport to distribution sites, while ensuring
that they reach all those in need.

Since April of last year, very recent data shows
1.2 million alleged cases of cholera and more than 2,500
deaths associated with the disease, making this one of
the worst outbreaks in recent history. In that regard,
the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes and congratulates the joint efforts, supported
by the World Health Organization and UNICEF, that
have just led to the conclusion of a robust vaccination
campaign, vaccinating hundreds ofthousands ofpeople.
We hope that that approach will help to limit the spread
of the pandemic.

Before concluding, my delegation once again
urges the parties to abide by the rules of international
humanitarian law and guarantee the protection of
civilian infrastructure and the rights of civilians, so
that the Yemeni population can find a way out of the
crisis and return to their homes. Moreover, we ask that
all the parties involved in the conflict participate in the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and resume negotiations to reach a political solution,
given that frank and inclusive dialogue among the
parties is the only way to end the conflict.

