Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the important function of directing the
affairs of the Security Council during the month of May.
We also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Fowler of Canada.

We would also like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for the interest which this organ
has demonstrated so far in response to the disturbing
developments in Sierra Leone over the past several days.
We note in particular your two statements to the media,
as well as the presidential statement which you made on
behalf of the Council last Thursday.

Every individual, irrespective of nationality, race or
creed, has an inalienable right to the safety and security
of his or her person. The Government of Sierra Leone,
consistent with its constitutional and moral responsibility,
has always been concerned with efforts to ensure the
safety and security not only of its own citizens, but also
of people of other nationalities - humanitarian workers,
peace observers, Secretariat staff and others - who have
left their own homes and families to assist us in one way
or another to safeguard the welfare of Sierra Leoneans.
This is why President Kabbah has conveyed to the
Secretary-General and to the heads of State of affected
troop contributing countries the sympathy and concern of
the Government and people of Sierra Leone for the tragic
and criminal acts perpetrated by RUF rebels on the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). My delegation would like to reiterate our
shock and dismay at the sad turn of events and to
reassure you, Mr. Secretary-General, and the troop
contributors that the Government of Sierra Leone stands
ready to provide all necessary assistance to ensure that the

 

UNAMSIL peacekeepers who are still illegally detained by
armed rebel elements are released immediately and
unharmed. My Government would like to express its
gratitude to the Governments of troop contributing countries
for their decision to keep their troops in Sierra Leone,
notwithstanding these unfortunate incidents. The people of
Sierra Leone are indeed grateful.

Much has been said about the obvious disappointment
of the people of Sierra Leone at the events of the past days.
Their immediate or initial reaction to those events was not
unexpected. It was based on their perception and
expectation of the role of UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone. As
far as they are concerned, UNAMSIL is in Sierra Leone to
replace the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). I need not
remind the Council that the average person in Sierra Leone,
and in the world at large, does not know the difference
between Chapter VI and VII of the United Nations Charter.
He or she does not know exactly who in the United
Nations, be it the Force Commander on the ground or the
Secretary-General, should give UNAMSIL the green light
to take appropriate action when elements of RUF rebels
decide to take matters into their own hands and resort to
violence.

Much has been said about failures and credibility.
Much has also been said about the impact that these latest
events in Sierra Leone could have on the future of United
Nations peacekeeping in Africa and other parts of the
world. We have also heard and read a lot about who should
or should not be blamed. It is the View of my Government
that it is about time we move ahead. It is about time we
move ahead because the situation in Sierra Leone is still
serious. It is still a threat to international peace and
security. It is a situation that the Security Council must
resolutely address as a matter of urgency.

Today, we would like to appeal to the Security
Council, as the organ primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to take the
lead in ensuring the safety and security of the people of
Sierra Leone and those whom the Council deployed to give
effect to its mandatory decisions on Sierra Leone.

For their part, the heads of State of the Economic
Community of West African States members of the
committee on Sierra Leone, in their communique issued in
Abuja on Tuesday, have, among other things, reaffirmed
that UNAMSIL's presence in Sierra Leone is not only in
accordance with the Lome Peace Agreement, but is also
supported by the Security Council. Therefore, UNAMSIL
must be allowed to freely operate throughout the territory
of Sierra Leone without hindrance.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes current
initiatives to strengthen UNAMSIL through the rapid
deployment of additional troops. We hope that this
process will be expedited in order to avoid any
deterioration of a situation which, we are happy to report,
continues to improve to the extent that civilians can now
go about their business without hindrance. We expect the
Council to consider its options and to take appropriate
and effective measures - I emphasize the word
"effective" - to deal with the new situation that has
emerged in our country. The Government of Sierra Leone
still has faith in the United Nations and in the ability of
the Security Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the
Charter.

In closing, I would like to quote the following
excerpts from the latest official communique issued by
the Government of Sierra Leone earlier today:

"Government wishes to reiterate its continued
commitment to the Lorne Peace Agreement, which
it views as a key step in the achievement of
sustainable peace in Sierra Leone. In the first place,
Government is convinced that the people of Sierra
Leone and the international community are generally
in support of the provisions of the Agreement.
Secondly, the continued involvement of the
international community in Sierra Leone is
contingent upon the implementation of the Lome
Peace Agreement.

"While acknowledging that the RUF has
seriously violated the provisions of the Agreement,
Government still believes that the Agreement is
generally implementable. Government is also aware
that a large proportion of the members of the RUF
were not in support of the abductions of UNAMSIL
personnel and the refusal by Foday Sankoh to
voluntarily disarm his combatants. They are fed up
with war and want the country to move ahead.
Government therefore urges all those RUF members
interested in sustainable peace in Sierra Leone to
take advantage of the amnesty granted them under
the Lome Peace Agreement, and cooperate with
Government in the continued implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. Failure to do so will result in the
amnesty being forfeited. This will result in their
being declared war criminals, with all the

 

consequences flowing from that, including being
hunted around the world. This is in line with the
position taken in Abuja on 9 May by the ECOWAS
heads of State members of the Committee on Sierra
Leone of the Lome Peace Agreement."

My delegation hopes that the Council will find this
statement issued by the Government of Sierra Leone useful
in the Council's current deliberations and in considering
possible options for immediate action to deal with the
situation in our country.

