Ms. Lee (New Zealand): New Zealand is pleased
that your country, Mr. President, is highlighting the
protection of civilians during its presidency of the
Security Council. We know that civilians in your
country suffered terribly in the 1940s and 1950s. New
Zealand stood with you then. We know the strength of
your people, and we welcome your determination to
improve the situation of civilians in future conflicts.

We also welcome the presence with us today of the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). The ICRC is the custodian of one
of the most important developments in human history,
namely, the body of law and practice designed to limit
the terrible impact of war and, in particular, to protect
civilians. That body of law is now almost universally
accepted as binding, not only for participants in wars
between States but also for participants in those of a
non-international character.

Far too often, those rules are not applied. Let us be
blunt - breaches of those rules through the targeting
of civilians, the use of high explosive weapons without
regard to likely civilian casualties and attacks on
medical personnel or facilities are all war crimes. And
war crimes are, in a sense, crimes not only against
the victims, but against us all. Serious war crimes are
subject to universal jurisdiction. We all therefore have
moral and political responsibilities when they are being
systematically committed in a conflict - wherever that
conflict may be.

That is why today's debate is so important. The
members of the Security Council have assumed special
responsibilities with respect to international peace and
security. The Charter has given members of the Council
extraordinary powers to act decisively on our behalf.
And we join others in calling on the members of the
Council to exercise more actively their responsibilities
when civilians are manifestly the targets of armed
attacks.

The Council's thematic work on the protection of
civilians is an important element in that campaign, but
it is not enough. A more active focus on protection in
the Council's work on country specific situations is
what is really needed.

New Zealanders are practical and constructive
people. We know that the Security Council, despite its
wide powers, has real limitations. We know that the
Council's efforts to protect civilians are also dependant
on the actions of peacekeepers in the field. There is a
pressing need for practical and constructive measures
to ensure that United Nations peacekeepers are ready
and able to respond quickly and effectively to emerging
threats. It is not good enough for missions to hide
behind the "within available resources" provisions in
mandates and do nothing while atrocities are being
committed against civilians.

There many examples of United Nations
peacekeepers responding with extraordinary courage
and commitment to defend civilians in times of
crisis, such as the efforts of Ghanaian and Canadian
peacekeepers during the 1994 Rwandan genocide,
whose resolute action saved thousands of civilians. We
must ensure that current and future peacekeepers are
best placed to emulate those brave efforts. The option
of doing nothing can never be justified.

The Council is also reliant on the Secretariat's
being more courageous. The 2000 Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) warned that the Secretariat must tell the
Council what it needs to hear and not what it wants
to hear. Sadly, the Secretariat's recent conclusions
regarding its role during the conflict in Sri Lanka show
that Mr. Brahimi's advice was not taken as much to
heart as it should have been.

We recognize also that the Council is not a legal
body and is not well suited to determining the legal
character of events, especially in the midst ofa conflict.
But the Council can play an important role in building
accountability, as it has done in the past. Referral to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) is one option
available to the Council in that regard. As we observed
to the Council last October, such referrals are not
always the best mechanism, and where they are made,
their timing must be carefully judged, particularly in
situations of on-going conflict. Nevertheless, there are
practical steps that the Security Council can take to
bolster accountability, including extending the mandate
of its working group on tribunals to cover ICC matters.

We also recognize another limitation faced by the
Council, namely, the tension it often faces between its
role in executing its responsibilities to end conflict
and establish peace, on the one hand, and its duties to
ensure that such conflicts are conducted in a manner
consistent with international norms, particularly those
limiting the impact on civilians, on the other hand. Both
dimensions are important, and neither should become
an excuse for ignoring the other.

It is natural that in different situations Council
members will focus more on one dimension than the
other. But Council members have a high responsibility
to the broader membership and to the people we
represent; those differences must not be allowed to
become a reason to give up. We have seen that far too
often - during the war in Sri Lanka and today in Syria.
It is not good enough to say that the Council is blocked
and to move on to other business, as we have seen it do
far too often. If the Council is deadlocked over how to
end a conflict, then all 15 members have all the more
responsibility to find ways to address the protection
needs of civilians.

Finally, it is important to note that not every conflict
is conducted in a manner involving atrocities against
civilians. That is important, because it gives us hope
and shows that some combatants, even in civil wars,
abide by the basic norms of international humanitarian
law. Moreover, it gives us scope for a new practical
focus for the ongoing thematic work of the Council.

The Council will be taking up the protection of
civilians again later this year, and the Secretariat is
producing a new report with recommendations for
the Council's consideration. It would be helpful if the
Secretariat could not only address cases of grievous
breaches of humanitarian law, but also explore cases
where such breaches have not occurred. Serious
analysis of the factors determining why atrocities occur
in some cases but not in others might be helpful to the
Security Council in developing its tools for prevention
and management of conflict, as well as for protection of
civilians in specific cases.

