Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): Despite
enormous efforts by the international community, the
search for an overall negotiated settlement of the conflicts

 

in former Yugoslavia has not yet yielded the desired results.
The evil forces of conflict, hatred and nationalism continue
to haunt the former Yugoslavia.

The situation in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia continues to be endangered by external and
internal tensions. As a manifestation of German support,
Federal Foreign Minister Kinkel will visit Skopje on 11
April. We fully support the continued presence of the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and we expect that it will continue to work in
close cooperation with the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia, which is presently conducting
negotiations between the Government and representatives of
the Albanian parties in the country. In the light of the
previous contribution of the Force to peace and stability, we
are confident that it will live up fully to its new name,
which in our view seems very appropriate.

We are deeply concerned by the steady deterioration
of the overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. While
the Bosnian leadership has made the courageous choice to
negotiate, the Bosnian Serb leadership in Pale remains
intransigent in its defiance of the international community.
It is therefore necessary to maintain the international
political pressure and the isolation of the leadership in Pale.
The Pale leadership must also be held responsible for the
persistent "ethnic cleansing" in the Banja Luka region, a
practice which we again condemn in the strongest terms.
We reiterate our demand that the Bosnian Serbs accept the
peace proposal of the Contact Group and thus open the way
to a peaceful settlement.

The agreements on a cease-fire and on a complete
cessation of hostilities, concluded last December, must be
respected by both sides. During his recent visit to Bonn,
President Izetbegovic stated that even after the expiry of the
four-month cease-fire Bosnian Government forces will not
take the offensive. We demand of the Bosnian side that it
strictly adhere to this commitment. Military actions will not
solve, but only exacerbate, the conflict in Bosnia. What is
needed is a political settlement. The continued presence of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina will help to bring
about the necessary conditions for such a political solution.

The fact that a new mandate for the presence of the
United Nations in Croatia has become necessary is, in our
view, a consequence of the obstructive attitude of the
Croatian Serbs with regard to the United Nations peace-
keeping plan for the Republic of Croatia. The Serbian side

 

has never respected its main provisions concerning, in
particular, the demilitarization of the United Nations
protected areas, the return of the refugees and displaced
persons and the establishment of a precisely defined local
police force. By this persistent non-implementation, the
Croatian Serbs have, in practice, made the Vance plan
largely irrelevant. The Serbian refusal to implement the
Vance plan has thus become the major problem also for
UNPROFOR in Croatia.

Under these circumstances the often-stated
"adherence" of the Croatian Serbs to the Vance plan is
obviously more of a rhetorical and tactical nature. One
can clearly see the intention to freeze the status quo in
Croatia and to further delay a political compromise with
the Croatian Government until a de facto secession
becomes feasible.

We are of the opinion that any political concept of
the Croatian Serbs other than regional autonomy in
Croatia is unrealistic.

We welcome the decision of President Tudjman to
agree to a continued but modified peace-keeping presence
of the United Nations in the Republic of Croatia. We
share the View that the three-phase process of
negotiations - cease-fire; implementation of the
Economic Agreement; political negotiations - is the only
practical path to durable peace. We welcome the fact that
this is also the basic approach underlying the mandate of
the planned United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO), which we fully support.

We agree with the View, expressed in the draft
resolution on Croatia, that UNCRO shall be an interim
arrangement to secure the necessary peaceful conditions
for a negotiated political settlement. Within this
framework, which has been established in accordance
with the European Union action plan, through the Cease-
Fire Agreement and the Economic Agreement, it is now
crucial that the conflicting parties make full use of the
peace plan of the Zagreb Four and enter into genuine and
serious political negotiations on a final settlement.

At the same time, we note with concern the
continued refusal of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
formally recognize the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia within their
internationally recognized borders. This prevents the
convening of the international conference in Paris, with
the participation of the three Presidents, which Foreign

 

Minister luppe, on behalf of the European Union, proposed
and which my Government continues to support. Thus the
lack of readiness on the part of President Milosevic for
mutual recognition of all the States of the former
Yugoslavia within their internationally recognized borders
continues to block the peace process.

We believe that continued close cooperation between
the now three peace-keeping operations - in Croatia, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia - and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) will be absolutely essential. NATO's
support through all phases of these operations, including
necessary measures to ensure the security and safety of
their personnel, is vital.

UNPROFOR's contribution to the international
community's efforts towards peace has been invaluable. The
adoption of the three draft resolutions currently before the
Council will also mean that more than 39,000 men and
women will continue to serve the cause of peace in the
former Yugoslavia. They do so under complex and
dangerous conditions, often in a hostile environment, in
which already 155 Blue Helmets have lost their lives. We
stand with those who pay them a solemn tribute today.

