Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Personally,
returning to Baghdad three years after I completed my
assignment at our embassy there gave me an opportunity
to observe first-hand the progress that Iraq has made on
so many fronts. The first-ever visit to Iraq by members
of the Security Council underscored the strong and
continued commitment of the international community
to supporting Iraq's stability, prosperity, sovereignty
and security as it turns the page to a new chapter.

In our meetings with Iraqi and United Nations
interlocutors, we noted that While much progress has
been achieved, there remain challenges facing Iraq
in the process of its transitioning into a post-conflict
environment, including the delivery of basic services.
We stressed the need for economic reform, attracting
greater inward investment, and regional economic
integration to better address the aspirations and concerns
of the Iraqi people. We noted that while the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) no longer controls
any Iraqi territory, the fight is not over. The enduring
defeat of ISIS requires the stabilization of liberated
areas, building up resilient communities and ensuring
continued security for all Iraqis, recognizing that Iraq's
diversity is critical to its richness and strength.

We also discussed the humanitarian situation with
Iraqi and United Nations interlocutors and underscored
the importance of the safe, dignified and voluntary
return of all internally displaced persons affected by
conflict, including in areas liberated from ISIS.

We thank all members of the Security Council
delegation for their insights, perspectives and
thoughtful questions throughout our many meetings
during the course of our mission. And, of course, we
want to thank our Iraqi interlocutors for sharing with
us the stories of the progress made and the remaining
challenges that they face. We affirm that the mission of
the Security Council to Iraq was a success due to the
extensive amount of the first-hand information that we
obtained in face-to-face meetings with Iraqi and United
Nations interlocutors, gathering a better understanding
of the aspirations and concerns of the Iraqi people as
they begin the process of stabilizing and rebuilding
their country.

We extend our thanks to the Government of Kuwait
for its co-sponsorship of the mission and its generosity
in sponsoring air travel for Council members between
Kuwait City and Baghdad as well as accommodation
in Kuwait City. Kuwait's sponsorship of the mission is
again a positive reminder of the strengthening bilateral
ties between Iraq and Kuwait, which send a great signal
to the whole region.

We also extend our thanks and appreciation to
the Government of Iraq, including the President,
Prime Minister and Speaker's Offices, the Foreign
Ministry and our friend in New York, Iraqi Permanent
Representative Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom, who
joined us for many of our meetings. We also commend
and appreciate the time that President Barzani and the
Kurdistan Regional Government leaders took to join
the delegation in Baghdad from Irbil for our meeting
on the continuing engagement between the Kurdistan
Regional Government and the Government of Iraq to
resolve all outstanding issues in accordance with the
Iraqi Constitution. We thank the brave civil-society
members whojoined us to candidly speak to members of
the Security Council about the challenges confronting
Iraqi society in the present and in future. They are at
the forefront of efforts to realize a better Iraq.

Finally, we wish to convey our thanks and
appreciation to United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, UNAMI Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Alice
Walpole, Resident Coordinator Marta Ruedas and United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) Special Adviser Karim
Khan, as well as all members of UNAMI, UNITAD and
the United Nations country team, the Secretariat, and
in particular the Security Council Affairs Division, for
their hard work in facilitating and implementing this
important mission on behalf of the Security Council.

