Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, the
delegation of Kazakhstan would like to thank the
presidency of the United Kingdom for convening today's
timely debate, which provides a good opportunity
to discuss how to strengthen the role of the United
Nations and the Security Council in mediation and
the settlement of disputes. We express appreciation to
Secretary-General Guterres for his insightful briefing
and commend his determined efforts to enhance the
mediation capabilities of the United Nations. We
would also like to thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and civil-society briefer Ms. Mossarat Qadeem for their
enlightening interventions.

As one of the most representative and authoritative
international organizations in the world, the United
Nations has every right to play a central role in
mediation and dispute settlement. As the highest United
Nations organ entrusted with the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council has a vital role in promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including and
especially by means of mediation.

A regional United Nations presence is an effective
tool for mediating disputes at the disposal of the
Security Council. In that regard, my delegation would
like to recognize the important and valuable role of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA). UNRCCA's
activities certainly contribute to the goal of stability
by implementing measures to prevent destabilization in
Central Asia, which can be caused by various factors,
including the situation in Afghanistan. Likewise,
Kazakhstan has witnessed the successful mediation
efforts ofthe United Nations Office for West Africa and
Sahel (UNOWAS), led by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas, in the Gambia, during the
critical moment of transition in January 2017. Together
with regional leaders and subregional organizations,
namely the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations was able to
ensure the peaceful and orderly transfer of power to
President Adama Barrow. We commend the efforts of
UNOWAS and all other partners that supported the
mediation efforts.

Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in mediation, as indicated in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Kazakhstan founded the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia as an intergovernmental forum to
promote peace, security and stability in Asia, and,
through that, in other continents. Other regional and
subregional organizations, such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the African Union, ECOWAS,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, have
accumulated significant mediation experience. In that
regard, it is of the utmost importance to promote close
collaboration and partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in order to seek
timely and successful resolutions of conflicts. Given
the limitations of the United Nations, cooperation with
regional organizations should be further strengthened.
We are convinced that the regional approach in which
challenges are addressed in a more focused and
coordinated manner is a very useful tool for enhancing
the capabilities of the United Nations and regional
organizations in mediation and dispute settlement. We
must also work on enhancing the national and local
mediation capacities of the various stakeholders.

As very eloquently stated earlier today by the
Secretary-General and our briefers, mediation and
peace processes should seek to increase the meaningful
participation of women, especially at decision-making
levels, as well as religious groups and youth, as
they could bring fresh ideas and push for peace and
effective dialogue.

Kazakhstan has always been in favour of peaceful
dispute-settlement processes. We are of the View
that the main tool for resolving all disputes between
States should be peaceful dialogue and constructive
negotiations, on the basis of equal responsibility for
peace and security, mutual respect and non-interference
in domestic affairs. With that in mind, Kazakhstan
has been hosting peace talks on Syria and the Iran
nuclear deal, acting as an honest broker and unbiased
bridge-builder.

My delegation can only agree with the words and
vision of the Archbishop of Canterbury when he spoke
so clearly about the role of religious organizations in
mediation and pre-emptive reconciliation. For that
reason, Kazakhstan, for the last 15 years since 2003,
has hosted a congress of religious leaders of world
and traditional religions, with wide participation
by representatives of different faiths. This year in
particular, on 10 and 11 October, we will hold the
next forum in Astana under the theme "Religious
leaders for a safe world", devoted to the very subject
we are discussing today, as the Archbishop referred to.
Religious delegations from 74 countries have already
confirmed their participation in the forum, and we are
ready to join hands with everyone else, any organization
or stakeholder, to step up our collective efforts in
mediation and reconciliation.

During its presidency of the Security Council in
January, Kazakhstan, based on its own experience
and record, focused on preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and mediation as important tools to deal
with the complex issues on our agenda. We consistently
stressed the importance of political will and trust-
building in achieving peace and stability in the world. In
that vein, as outlined in the concept note for this debate
(S/2018/586, annex), the Security Council adopted
a presidential statement (PRST/2018/1) during our
presidency. The document highlighted the importance
of mediation as a tool for conflict prevention and
encouraged the Secretary-General to enhance the
use of his good offices, dispatching representatives,
Special Envoys and mediators to help facilitate durable,
inclusive and comprehensive settlements. Kazakhstan
continues to be engaged in that work and in endeavouring
to find further ways whereby the Security Council and
the United Nations can effectively tackle the issues
of mediation, reconciliation and dispute settlement
of conflicts.

