Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wants to welcome Mr. Jacob
Zuma, Deputy President of South Africa. We thank him
for the useful information he has given us in his
statement. We also would like to extend our welcome
to Mr. Rosenthal, President of the Economic and Social
Council, and we thank him for his statement.

My delegation took note of the important
declaration of the heads of State of the Great Lakes
region at the 20th Summit of the Great Lakes Regional
Peace Initiative, held in Dar es Salaam, United
Republic of Tanzania. Syria encourages all regional
initiatives and all initiatives aimed at establishing
peace in the Great Lakes region, and in particular, in
Burundi.

In that regard, we pay tribute to the efforts of
South Africa and above all to President Mbeki, as well
as to the coordinator, Mr. Zuma, and those of the
African Union in support of the Transitional
Government in Burundi. We thank them for working to
implement the agreements signed by the parties, in
particular the Pretoria Protocols, in order to ensure
acceptable power-sharing at the political, defence and
security levels, and so that there may be fair elections
in order to bring the transitional period to its
conclusion.

The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms the
importance of supporting the Great Lakes Regional
Peace Initiative. We pay tribute to the efforts of the
African mission in Burundi, a mission that is working
successfully to fulfil its mandate. That mission has
played an important role in resolving the conflict and
in moving towards the establishment of peace and
security in Burundi. Such regional effort requires our
ongoing support in order to preserve the ceasefire
between the parties and to work towards disarmament,
demobilization and the reintegration of ex-combatants.

My delegation associates itself with all the
preceding speakers regarding the need for the
international community to continue to support the
African mission, and we call on the Council to
contribute effectively and appropriately towards
preserving the peace in Burundi in accordance with the
Pretoria Agreements. The African Mission is playing
an essential role at this stage in the efforts to ensure
peace and security in Burundi. Logistical and financial
support by the international community and by donor
countries will have to be given to this Mission, so that
it can play its role as planned.

