Mr. Ruiz Blanco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As pointed out in the concept note (S/2016/585, annex)
circulated for this open debate, improving transparency,
efficiency, inclusion and accountability in the working
methods of the Security Council is essential if we
want to achieve harmonization between the decisions
taken by the Security Council on peace and security
and the support that those decisions receive from the
entire membership, particularly that of Member States
that are not part of the Council. Those four elements
are essential to creating a culture of decision-making
that is in concert with collective interests. It is
precisely such interactions and constructive dialogue
with non-members of the Council that must serve as
a guide in identifying the practices that have proved
successful, those that require improvement and those
that have not yet been included in the working methods
of the Council.
With today marking 10 years since the adoption of
presidential note S/2006/507 - which has become a
compilation of measures that must guide the Council's
work - and nearly six years since the subsequent
presidential note S/2010/507, which broadened and
replaced that list of practices, I would like to make an
earnest call to ensure its effective implementation and
continued improvement.

In the area of communications, Colombia
recognizes the efforts made since December 2005 by
the various Presidents of the Security Council who,
together with the Presidents of the General Assembly,
have maintained an ongoing dialogue and have
informed Member States in a timely manner about
developments with regard to the process of selecting the
next Secretary-General. That has greatly contributed to
the transparency and inclusiveness of the process. We
therefore wish to explore the possibility of repeating
that practice, so that it can be applied to other matters
of shared interest.

Moreover, in connection with documentation,
Colombia believes that it is essential to ensure that the
annual reports presented by the Council to the General
Assembly have a broad analytical component and
discuss the reasons that have led it to take its decisions,
especially in those situations where action was taken
by the Council. That would ensure that the reports are
truly informative rather than merely descriptive, as is
currently the case. With regard to the programme of
work, it is necessary to continue the good practice
of publishing the monthly forecast by the Council
presidency, keep it updated, make it publicly available,
modify it whenever necessary and distribute it to the
members of the Council with the appropriate changes.

Finally, with regard to transparency, it is
increasingly necessary to move away from the practice
of closed meetings and to hold open or public meetings
more frequently, so that non-member countries may
contribute to deliberations. In that way, Colombia firmly
believes that the continuous improvement and proper
implementation of the working methods of the Security
Council will strengthen and improve the interaction
between it and the other States not on the Council.

