Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
acknowledge the presence here today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, and to welcome him to
the Security Council. We are grateful for the efforts
and commendable work of Mr. Salame and his team on
the ground. We also thank Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for the
information she presented, especially on the impact of
the conflict on the most vulnerable groups. It is at such
times of great challenges that the admirable work done
by organizations such as Together We Build It, which
Ms. Al Tubuly leads, is so crucial.

We note with concern the rapid shrinking of the
public space available for Libyan women and young
people to express their opinions and participate actively
in political processes, as well as the continuing threats,
intimidation and violence, including sexual and gender-
based violations, that they are subjected to. We call on
the Libyan authorities to protect and promote the rights
of women, including those of human rights defenders,
so that they can do their work without fear of reprisals,
and to support their full and active participation in the
public arena and in political processes. In that regard,
we think it is essential to hold systematic consultations
with women, youth and indigenous peoples in support
of the work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.

The Dominican Republic firmly condemns the
acts of violence committed against civilians and
civilian infrastructure in violation of international
humanitarian law, and which disproportionately affect
the most vulnerable groups, especially children.
The humanitarian situation resulting from those
factors remains a matter of concern. According to the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), the
numbers of internally displaced persons have increased
considerably in recent months, following the military
campaign that began in April. We regret the fact that
this situation has created a scenario that has led to an
increase in the number of victims of human trafficking
and enormous challenges for the protection of the
civilian population in general. Although the numbers
of migrants attempting to reach European coasts have
fallen, the mortality rate among those attempting
the journey across the Mediterranean has increased
significantly compared to last year. In that regard, I
would like to take a moment to refer to a study recently
published by the IOM. and the World Food Programme,
which concludes that the main factors driving those
migrants to attempt the crossing include economic
issues, insecurity, conflict, hunger, environmental
degradation and climate-related shocks. We have seen
once again how those factors not only have a disastrous
impact on people but also wider regional effects on an
alarming scale.

We are also concerned about the growing number
of reports of the participation of foreign fighters in
the internal conflict in Libya, which we believe is
exacerbating the already critical situation. Added to
that are flagrant Violations of the arms embargo, as
identified in the report of the Panel of Experts. The
current trend of using increasingly sophisticated and
lethal military equipment, such as armed drones,
guided missiles and more, is disturbing. The strict
implementation of the arms embargo is crucial to the
protection of civilians and the restoration of security
and stability to Libya and the rest of the region.

Finally, we call on the parties to resume
negotiations, without preconditions. There can be no
military solution to the situation in Libya. The key is
and always will be dialogue. We urge all stakeholders in
the conflict and the international community as a whole
to work towards a successful conference in Berlin with
a view to bringing back the peace and stability that the
Libyan people desire and deserve so much.

