Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.

The tenor of the discussion in the Security Council
on the topic of the chemical demilitarization of Syria
does not align with the actual state of affairs and
derives from the persistent anti-Damascus attitudes of
Western members of the Council. The Syrian military
chemical potential was destroyed some time ago under
the monitoring of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The organization in
The Hague also confirmed the destruction of the last
declared production facilities, in accordance with the
Convention on the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC).
We agree with the Secretary-General that that was an
important step towards the implementation of resolution
2118 (2013).

Gaps and inconsistencies in the Syrian declaration
are attributable to the fact that it was submitted under the
pressure of time constraints, against the backdrop of an
acute armed conflict. Subsequently, clarifications were
made in full compliance with CWC rules. Some issues
can no longer be clarified, given the number of years
that have elapsed and must be put to rest. With regard to
other issues, the Government of Syria has provided the
OPCW in good faith with available information, and
such interaction is the only way to resolve remaining
misunderstandings. There is no foundation to allegations
that Damascus allegedly retained elements from stocks
of toxic substances. That is pure propaganda. Suffice it
to recall that OPCW experts have inspected the research
centre in Barzah very thoroughly on two occasions
and found no trace of toxic substances. In April, that
facility was destroyed by missile strikes by the United
States, the United Kingdom and France under the
pretext that it was allegedly producing and stockpiling
chemical weapons, but no chemical traces were emitted
during the attack. That clearly indicates a large-scale
international deception on the part of the participants in
the aggression, of a kind with the shameful adventure
concerning Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. By the
way, for some reason OPCW officials are embarrassed
to mention the fact that the centre's destruction was
caused by the bombing.

A characteristic feature of the conflict in Syria
has been the provocation of militants from illegal
armed entities through their use of toxic chemicals.
For five years, the same primitive machinations have
been used by international elements to discredit the
authorities in Damascus and justify subsequent acts
of aggression against Syria. Assistance in staging
events to provoke an appropriate response is provided
by the supposed rescuers, the White Helmets, who are
living off Western money. They even use children in
staging such events. Following the incident in Douma,
this scheme was revealed when we managed to track
down participants filming events, and they recounted
everything at The Hague.

At present, a new wave of severe threats is being
unleashed against Syria. The alleged intention of the
Syrian Government to use chemical weapons in Idlib
has been presented as fact. Agatha Christie's novel
A Murder is Announced, in which the crime to be
committed - including its time and place - is reported
in the newspaper, comes to mind. The expectations of
those who are curious and visit the address published
by the newspaer are not disappointed. Contemporary
prophets do not bother explaining why Damascus
needs to poison its civilian population with gas in an
environment in which Syria has already been bombed
twice, and new acts of aggression are being hatched.
Do others really believe that Damascus has called on
them to do that? Do they really think that the whole
world blindly believes those stories? Damascus has
no chemical weapons and no plans to use them. We
consider such warnings to be invitations to terrorists
to stage a new chemical attack and accuse the Syrian
authorities of it. The Syrian authorities do not need to
do that, but it is key for terrorists, since it is a sure way
to provoke an act of aggression against Damascus.

We know for certain, and we have provided the
relevant information to the OPCW, that toxic chemicals
and equipment for provocation were brought via
complicated routes into the territory not controlled by
the Syrian authorities; that militants were specially
trained by Western special services; that the White
Helmets and their allies are already present in Idlib;
and that dozens of children in the province have been
kidnapped. At the same time, the military presence
of key Western countries is demonstratively growing
near Syria, and their officials are making aggressive
statements. We spoke about that at a meeting of the
Security Council on 28 August (see S/PV.8332).

In that regard, we have a concrete proposal for
our American colleagues, namely, that they should
provide the list of targets that the Pentagon has
reportedly identified for possible strikes of the troika.
If the United States believes that they are related to the
stockpiling and use of chemical weapons, then it must
demonstrate its respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and inform the OPCW so
that it can conduct chemical inspections pursuant to the
Chemical Weapons Convention. Since the United States
unreservedly believes in the authority and impartiality
ofthe OPCW Fact-finding Mission, its expertise should
allay any suspicions.

I would like to say a few words about the OPCW.
We expect that the new Director-General of the OPCW,
Mr. Arias Gonzalez, will be able to restore the work of
the organization to its normal pathway. After numerous
remote investigations, its authority has suffered a
serious blow. The OPCW was further undermined by
the decision that a division of the Technical Secretariat
would identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, which was pushed through by a minority of
member States. That was not legitimate because it is
not in line with the goals of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and Russia does not recognize it. The sole
purpose of that initiative is the purely political aim of
undermining Syria and Russia internationally. That was
made clear in the parliamentary statement delivered on
5 September by British Prime Minister Theresa May on
the Salisbury-Amesbury incident.

Let us remember that pursuing such provoscation
will lead only to a new exacerbation of tension in the
Near East, which has already been heightened due to
the policy carried out be Western countries, resulting
in disunity. It is not just a matter ofinstability, but also
of serious military conflicts that claim many innocent
victims. It is hardly likely that the West's regional allies
will benefit from that.

There was a point in time when questionable
geopolitical games led to the proliferation of terrorism.
Today, as a result of similar ventures, we are witnessing
a surge in chemical terrorism. It is worth noting that the
role ofthose countries in achieving a political settlement
in Syria, about which they speak so fervently, is not
very high-profile. We highly recommend that they
cease hostilities andjoin in the efforts for peace.

