Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
thank the President for her strong leadership of the
Council this month. You, Madam President, and your
team - Mario in particular - have been excellent,
and the United States thanks you for having guided us
capably and for keeping us on track through a very busy
month of October.

Today I would like to share my delegation's views
on some of the areas where the Security Council has
been productive this month and also look ahead to a
few areas that will require our continued attention in
November and beyond.

But first, I would like to congratulate the Security
Council class of 2015-2016 on their recent elections. We
very much look forward to working with them.

To begin our look back at the month, we must
examine the Council's response to the Ebola virus
crisis in West Africa. The Council has recognized
both this month, during the briefing (see S/PV.7279)
from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response, Mr. Banbury, and at
last month's emergency session (see S/PV.7268), that
the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak has
moved beyond a serious public health crisis. This
highly complex emergency constitutes a real threat
to international peace and security, and it requires all
parts of the United Nations system to work together to
beat back the epidemic. We have so much more work to
do on that front.

Secondly, the Council continued to follow the crisis
in Ukraine. The United States remains committed to
finding a peaceful solution to the crisis and to the
restoration of Ukraine's full sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
We welcome the Ukrainian Government's active
commitment to the Minsk agreements. The Government
of President Poroshenko has taken steps to fulfil the
Minsk commitments, yet the separatists have responded
to those positive steps with a unilateral declaration to
hold their own local so-called elections in November.
That is unconstitutional and completely inconsistent
with Minsk.

On sanctions, we welcomed last week's discussion
on how better to impose and implement those measures
(see S/PV.7285). Because United Nations sanctions
are targeted at those most responsible for diverse
threats, such as terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the
use and recruitment of children in armed conflict
and trafficking in conflict minerals, they minimize
unintended humanitarian consequences. The United
States welcomes the recent major improvements in
the way that the Council imposes targeted sanctions,
including enhancements to the fairness and clarity of
listing procedures. The Council should also recognize
the essential role that national procedures play in
ensuring due process for listed individuals.

We discussed more than once in this Chamber the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The United States remains
fully committed to achieving a negotiated final status
agreement allowing two States to live side by side in
peace and security. That is the only viable way forward.
If the parties choose to go down that path, we stand
ready to support them every step of the way.

Our meeting on women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) underscored the importance of the subject.
We especially welcomed hearing the inspiring words
from Suaad Allami about her work to advance education
and the rights of women in conflict settings. Speaking
of conflicts, this morning we heard from Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Staffan de
Mistura about the humanitarian and political crisis that
continues to plague Syria. Those are areas where the
Council must maintain strong focus.

That leads me to several issues we are going to need
to continue to concentrate on, particularly in Africa.
As I mentioned, Ebola must be foremost in our minds.
Ambassador Power, as you know, Madam President,
was in the region this week to demonstrate United
States support for the three countries most affected
by the Ebola crisis and their efforts to combat this
deadly disease and to drive increased support for the
international response. The upcoming meeting on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia will be a valuable
opportunity to take stock of our response thus far.

The Council adopted a strong resolution on Somalia
last week that included an interdiction for suspected
violators of the charcoal ban (resolution 2182 (2014)).
Despite substantial progress, Somalia risks backsliding
from recent gains as hunger and humanitarian concerns
persist. More than 3 million people are now affected by
drought and insecurity and, as was emphasized, supply
routes are a key constraint to humanitarian access.

In the Central African Republic, we must be
vigilant in the face of attacks on peacekeepers working
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and focus on bringing an end to the violence there. In
Mali, we have lost far too many peacekeepers to violent
attacks from armed groups and we need to ensure that
our peacekeepers have the equipment and capabilities
necessary to carry out their mandate.

Outside of Africa, the threat posed by the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to be felt
across the Middle East, especially in Iraq and Syria.
Foreign fighters and Syrian nationals who have been
recruited and trained to fight in ISIL and other terrorist
groups pose a threat to countries far from the battlefield.

Australia's planned ministerial meeting on counter-
terrorism will provide a much-needed opportunity
to continue our discussion on the practical steps to
implement the most recent major counter-terrorism
resolutions - resolution 2170 (2014), on the threat from
ISIL and related groups, and resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters. We look forward to working
with the Council on those and other issues during
Australia's presidency. We extend our congratulations
and good wishes to Ambassador Quinlan as he takes up
those responsibilities.

