Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his presentation.

While brutal oppression of people, sectarian
and divisive policies, terrorism and humanitarian
catastrophes sweep through the Middle East, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains a major source
of instability. It continues to undermine the prospects
for lasting regional and global peace. Failing to address
the dismal reality of 50 years of occupation deepens
the sense of injustice, breeds desperation and creates
fertile ground for extremist groups to exploit. Turkey
is determined to continue undertaking efforts to
contribute to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
leading to the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is the only way to ensure peace
and security for both sides. In that regard, we have
welcomed recent initiatives to revitalize the Middle
East peace process.
We all know that those steps will make a difference
only if they are fully implemented in good faith.
Resolution 2334 (2016) placed on record once again
the destructive effect of Israel's illegal settlement
activities on lasting peace. The recent, notable increase
in settlement activity not only hampers the possibility
of a viable Palestine, but also eliminates the hope for a
possible future coexistence.

The Paris peace conference in January provided an
opportunity for the international community to reaffirm
its strong commitment to the two-State solution based
on established parameters, including relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Israelis are expected to listen to those calls, take the
hand extended with the Arab Peace Initiative, end the
occupation and step into a future of harmony with their
neighbours. The preservation of the historic status and
sanctity of Al-Haram al-Sharif and the prevention of
provocative steps in relation to Jerusalem are of the
utmost importance to that end.

Fully aware of the dire humanitarian situation in
Palestine, especially in Gaza, Turkey is pursuing its
efforts to improve the living conditions of Palestinians
through development assistance and reconstruction
projects. Currently our technical teams are working in
cooperation with the authorities of the State of Palestine
on possible ways to remedy the grave scarcity of water
and electricity in Gaza. In addition, we are supporting
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in view of its
essential role in the lives of the Palestinian refugees. In
February and March, Turkey, together with Switzerland,
led broad consultations on the financing of the Agency
in response to the Secretary-General's request. We hope
that Member States and key stakeholders will give due
consideration to the recommendations outlined in the
Secretary-General's recent report (A/71/849), which
was drafted based on those consultations.

Since the very beginning of the crisis in Syria,
Turkey has emphasized the need to address the root
cause of the problem, which is the fact that the Syrian
regime has waged war against the Syrian people. The
failure to do so has led to mass atrocities, terrorism
and the forced displacement of millions of persons.
The use of chemical weapons, which constitutes a
crime against humanity and a war crime, has been one
of the most horrendous aspects of the conflict. The
brutal attack in Khan Shaykhun is the latest example.
Despite the previous reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, confirming the regime's
failure to fulfil its obligations, lack of a timely and
decisive response encouraged the regime to continue
its relentless attacks with impunity.

We have been closely following the developments
in the aftermath of Khan Shaykhun. We offered
emergency medical assistance to those affected by the
chemical attack, facilitated the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
mission in Turkey and engaged with the World Health
Organization. In accordance with resolution 2235
(2015), we shared the findings of our national analysis
on the victims of the attacks, which point to the use of
sarin gas, with the relevant United Nations authorities.
We will continue to support the investigation conducted
by the OPCW, as well as steps to prevent the repetition
of such brutal attacks. In that regard, the operation by
the United States targeting the Shayrat air base was
a proportionate and timely response to the regime's
appalling acts.

Turkey has been undertaking intensive efforts to
end the violence in Syria and reach a political solution
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex),
as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). While a genuine
political transition is the only way to end the Syrian
conflict, negotiations to that end will not bear fruit
if the fighting continues. That is why we facilitated
and became the guarantors of a nation-wide ceasefire
agreed with the Russian Federation and Iran. The
Astana meetings, which are complementary and
supportive of the United Nations-led general political
process, aim at strengthening the ceasefire and adopting
confidence-building measures.

However, the process remains fragile and requires
all the relevant actors to assume their responsibilities
and use their influence. It is crucial to maintain the
momentum achieved in the latest round of the Geneva
talks. The regime representatives should not be allowed
to poison the upcoming talks either by violations on the
ground or by using threats at the table.

It takes a multidimensional strategy to achieve
to the dual objectives of eliminating terrorism and
stabilizing Syria. Turkey's resolve to fight Da'esh and
other terrorist organizations in Syria remains firm.
Operation Euphrates Shield - launched on 24 August
2016, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations - was successfully concluded on
29 March 2017. The operation not only eliminated the
strike capabilities of Da'esh in northern Syria, but also
contributed to the preservation of Syria's territorial
integrity and unity. The Free Syrian Army, supported
by the Turkish armed forces and coalition air forces,
cleared an area of 2,015 square kilometres, creating
in practice a terror-free zone. Nearly 50,000 Syrians
returned to areas liberated by the operation. More will
return if their safety can be ensured.

Turkey, together with its partners, will continue
its efforts to address the plight of the Syrian people
and find a solution to the conflict that will meet their
legitimate aspirations.

