Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, and your delegation for organizing this meeting and
warmly acknowledge and thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Carl Bildt, for his comprehensive
and useful briefing on the situation in the Balkans.

My delegation welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the overall situation in the Balkans, bearing in mind the
complexities of cultural, economic, social and political
problems facing the people of south-eastern Europe today.
We note with dissatisfaction that the general situation in
south-eastern Europe was by and large precipitated by the
political instability generated by the events leading up to
and following the break-up of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. In the process, the war that
caused the break-up of the federation destroyed viable
commercial markets, severed transportation links and
created refugee problems unheard of in Europe since the
Second World War. The number of refugees and
displaced persons; the destruction of properties; the
broken families and senseless killings, also known as
ethnic cleansing, have become a telling story in the region
and elsewhere. However, the social history of the region
provides the context in which resolution of these
problems can be envisaged.

In this connection, we concur with the views of the
Secretary-General, the States members of the European
Union and, indeed, the rest of the international
community that a regional framework for the stability of
south-eastern Europe should have its foundation in the
United Nations Charter and relevant international treaties
and conventions.

 

The security situation in the Balkans, punctuated by
the latest events in the town of Mitrovica in Kosovo, begs
the international community to move expeditiously in
addressing the problems of these countries in a regional
framework, taking into account the cultural characteristics
and sensibilities of various communities. We express our
hope that the outbreak of violence in Mitrovica between the
Serbs and Albanians will not escalate further to jeopardize
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). My delegation looks forward to a proper briefing on
that situation.

We believe that, in order to resolve the situation in the
Balkans, a series of regional security conferences ought to
be instituted by the international community to provide a
comprehensive settlement plan which entails, among others,
the following elements:

First, the rights of refugees and displaced persons to
return to their homes and countries of origin with dignity
must be guaranteed and their properties restored. Secondly,
the Stability Pact should be reviewed and adjusted to
include the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Thirdly,
institutional capacity-building, training and socio-economic
programmes should be provided, which would ease the
entry of these countries into the larger economic market of
the European Union.

Whereas the international community provides the
people of the Balkans with the assistance needed to rebuild
social institutions and economic stability, it is equally
essential for the Balkan people to cooperate with the
international community in order to ease their integration
into the larger European economic system. In this regard,
my delegation commends the pledging conference held in
Sarajevo to generate sufficient resources for the region, as
well as the adoption of a common position for the
establishment of the Stability Pact.

Finally, we salute the Member States, the United
Nations agencies and other international organizations
currently participating in one form or another in
maintaining peace and stability in the Balkans.

