Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to congratulate the Mission of Venezuela
for having brought to the attention of the Security
Council an issue that is very important to Brazil.

(spoke in English)

Let me thank the current Chair ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Kamau of Kenya,
as well as Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden and
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal of Guatemala for setting
the right tone for this debate today.

This open debate is timely, as it takes place at the
intergovernmental stage of the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture. We have before
us a unique opportunity to provide the appropriate
normative framework and resources for the United
Nations to fulfil its core objective of sustaining peace.
Because of its universal membership, the General
Assembly should play a leading role in this debate.

As rightly underscored in the concept note
(S/2016/104, annex) circulated for this meeting, the
notion of peacebuilding has evolved since the adoption
of General Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security
Council resolutions 1645 (2005) and 1646 (2005). In
that regard, I would like to acknowledge the valuable
work undertaken by the Chair of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture,
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, which sheds light on the
fundamental debate regarding how to strengthen the
United Nations approach to sustaining peace.

The Advisory Group's report (see S/2015/490)
underscores that the peacebuilding architecture
cannot be understood as exclusively limited to the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. With regard to
the concept of sustaining peace, the report stresses the
importance of a broader and more integrated approach
to peacebuilding, which would require the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council to work in partnership, each within
the particular purview and scope conferred on it by
the Charter of the United Nations. With respect to the

four areas suggested for debate in the concept note, we
would like to highlight the following issues.

Brazil is convinced that the lack of adequate and
predictable financing is a fundamental challenge
to long-term peacebuilding efforts. It is therefore
critical that we agree on the need to strengthen the
Peacebuilding Fund by directing resources to it from
assessed contributions. It is also important to enable
peacekeeping missions to utilize resources from their
budgets to finance programmatic activities.

We also concur that sustaining peace requires long-
term engagement on the part of the United Nations
system. A comprehensive approach to sustaining
peace should address the need for eradicating poverty,
promoting socioeconomic development and gender
equality, building full-fledged institutions, promoting
national reconciliation, improving governance and
developing more inclusive societies. Those strategies
for peacebuilding should be implemented in close
coordination with national authorities, while taking
into account the priorities established and the need for
national ownership at all stages.

Another aspect to be emphasized is the importance
of development in peacebuilding. The United Nations
experience in conflict situations has demonstrated that
sustainable peace requires a comprehensive approach
to security, which involves considering the root causes
of conflict and the social and economic situation on
the ground.

Following the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), we now have a multilateral framework for
promoting sustainable development. We should bear in
mind that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
are of a universal nature. In that sense, Goal 16, which
speaks of promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development and of providing access
to justice for all and building effective, accountable
and inclusive institutions at all levels, is aimed at all
Member States. An interpretation according to which
Goal 16 is directed only at conflict and post-conflict
situations would disregard the universality of the SDGs
and could indirectly lead to the mistaken assumption
that violence and instability exist mainly in poor or less
developed regions.

Brazil is of the view that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a unique role to play in its advisory
capacity to the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, and
is well positioned to serve as an integrative forum
for discussing the development-related aspects of
sustaining peace. It should also be stressed that
sustaining peace is a task that encompasses the three
pillars of the United Nations, which are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. We commend the fact that the
current Chair of the PBC and former Chair of the Open
Working Group on the SDGs, Ambassador Macharia
Kamau, is already bringing his considerable expertise
amassed in the area of sustainable development to the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission.

On the role ofregional and subregional organizations
in peacebuilding, Brazil supports enhancing cooperation
in that area and building on the example of regional
arrangements made for peacekeeping under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Regional and subregional partners
are usually well placed to have a better understanding
of the situation on the ground and could positively
influence it. However, a case-by-case analysis of the
convenience of such arrangements should always
be conducted.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of the
other two review processes launched by the Secretary-
General, namely, that on United Nations peacekeeping
and that on women and peace and security, and the
need to ensure coherence among their outcomes. It is
noteworthy that the three reports on those processes
propose to advance the primacy of politics and conflict
prevention. Brazil fully supports those goals, which we
believe should constitute the basis for revamping the
peace and security pillar of the Organization.

