The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Japan, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ghafoorzai
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table; Mr.
Shah (India), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Kharrazi
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Owada (Japan), Ms.
Arystanbekova (Kazakstan), Mrs. Eshmambetova
(Kyrgyzstan), Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan), Mr. Celem
(Turkey), Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) and Mr.
Vohidov (Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform members of the Council that I have received
a letter dated 15 October 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Guinea to the United Nations, which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, during the Council's discussion of the

I"

item entitled 'The situation in Afghanistan.

 
That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1996/852.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr.
Engin Ansay.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item of the agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to the request contained in
a letter dated 8 October 1996 from the representatives of
Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, document S/ 1996/838.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: 8/1996/810, note
verbale dated 30 September 1996 from the Permanent
Mission of Kazakstan to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; and document S/ 1996/842, letter
dated 9 October 1996 from the Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

The first speaker is the Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Abdul Rahim Ghafoorzai, whom I welcome and on
whom I now call.


