Mr. Al Oyaidi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council. My delegation is delivering
this statement on behalf of the Arab delegations to the
United Nations.

I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. The Arab Group would like to express
its appreciation for this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
This meeting takes place as the Israeli Government
persists in its intransigence and its illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, jeopardizing the entire peace
process.

The Arab-Israeli conflict supersedes all other
issues in the Middle East, as there is no other regional
conflict that more greatly affects international peace.
What exacerbates the situation is the lack of good faith
on the part of the Israeli Government, which, instead of
seriously engaging in the peace process, continues to
confiscate more Palestinian territory, to build illegal
settlements, thereby creating new realities on the
ground, to kill and unlawfully evict Palestinians, and to
confiscate their land and property.

Israeli settlement activities undermine the
establishment of a lasting, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State. That makes it difficult for any
Palestinian Government to function effectively and to
convince its people that peace is achievable. It is
immoral that a nation under occupation must endure
punishment while the occupying Power pursues its
settlement activities with impunity. Peace is the only
way to achieve security for our Palestinian brothers
2

and for the Israelis, but we doubt Israel's intentions
when it shows no sincerity with regard to peace. It
continues to undermine the negotiation process and to
pursue unilateral actions, which will not lead to peace.
It is time for Israel to realize that it is not above the
international standards of behaviour, which are based
on international law.

Most States gathered in this Council, including
the permanent members, have issued separate
statements against Israeli settlement activities. What is
needed is the adoption of a unified position clearly
reflecting that consensus. The Arab States have clearly
affirmed their commitment to peace through the Arab
Peace Initiative, which was initiated by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and later adopted at the Arab summit
in Beirut. The Arab States affirmed their commitment
to achieving a just and comprehensive peace based on
international law, but there was no reciprocal response
or commitment from Israel. There is an urgent need to
revive the peace process and for Israel to sincerely and
seriously engage in it, including an immediate freeze
on settlement construction, and to start dismantling the
settlements instead of expanding them.

The current situation in the besieged Gaza Strip is
another factor that has exacerbated the problem and
turned Gaza into a large prison through the siege
imposed by Israel, the occupying Power, unleashing an
appalling humanitarian disaster. The Israeli occupying
forces continue their barbaric military attacks against
the Palestinian people, the most recent of which took
place in Gaza on 2 April and caused deaths in Beit
Lahia, where many others were also wounded. That
was just the latest in a long list of Israeli violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law.

Through its repeated attacks and crimes, Israel
shows that it considers itself above the law. It
disregards resolutions of international legality and
international law and the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. It
exploits the international community's silence and
reluctance to address Israeli war crimes.

In this context, the Arab Group demands that the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council and
the Quartet, assume its responsibilities, put an end to
the brutal settlement activities and ongoing aggression
against unarmed Palestinian people in Gaza, stop the
11-30799
Israeli siege, open the crossings to and from Gaza, and
enforce the agreement on border crossings.

On the occasion of the annual Palestinian
Prisoners' Day, the Arab Group urges the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to
compel the Israeli authorities to allow Palestinians to
visit their relatives in Israeli prisons and to release the
more than 6,000 prisoners being held there, including
300 who have been in Israeli prison for decades.

The Arab Group urges the international
community to implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particularly those of this Council. It also
demands that Israel withdraw its forces from all Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan. The steps that
Israel is taking or may take in the future to alter the
legal, physical and demographic nature of territories in
the Syrian Golan are null and void, and clear violations
of the United Nations Charter and resolutions of
international legality, including resolution 497 (1981).
The Arab Group also demands the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon's Sheba'a Farms, the Kfar Shuba
Hills and the northern part of Al-Ghajar. The Arab
Group asks that the Security Council strive to achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 497 (1981), the principle of land for
peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

The freezing of the peace process only fans the
flames of extremist tendencies and raises despair and
frustration to a dangerous level. It is most urgent to
take note that the Arab and Islamic public perceives the
international community to be lacking in seriousness
and credibility. We see the Security Council's inability
to implement its own resolutions as a problem resulting
from the double standards in international relations, in
particular the fact that the use of the veto power
incapacitates the Council and makes it unable to assist
affected States. When the Security Council is able to
resolve this problem, the commitment and respect of
all Member States for all Council resolutions will be
assured. Such a change will result in making the
Security Council more credible and capable of
performing the tasks needed to maintain international
peace and security.

In conclusion, the Arab Group welcomes the
efforts of President Barack Obama to achieve a
comprehensive peace and the establishment of a
sovereign State for the Palestinian people, living side
11-30799

by side with Israel, as called for in his statement before
the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly in 2010
(see A/65/PV.11), in which he spoke of the
establishment and recognition of a Palestinian State at
the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, with
borders drawn at the lines of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

