Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to extend my sincere gratitude to Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, for his tremendous efforts in helping
the people and Government of Iraq as head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We wish Mr. Kobler continued success in his future
endeavours and express our appreciation to the entire
team that worked with Mr. Kobler in Baghdad and New
York.

After reviewing the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/408) on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), I would like to
make the following observations. I have the honour to
convey to the Council the desire of the Government of
the Republic of Iraq to extend the mandate of UNAMI
for another year on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The efforts of the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait have been successful in resolving
outstanding issues, especially with regard to missing
persons of Kuwaiti and other nationalities and locating
their remains, as well as the issue of the national
Kuwaiti archives, and has found a legal arrangement
for the continued search for those missing and their
remains in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations. The efforts of
both countries and the United Nations resulted in the
adoption of resolution 2107 (2013).

UNAMI has played a positive and effective role in
Iraq in bringing together the various viewpoints of the
Iraqi political entities and contributing to the success
of the Governing Council elections in Iraq, which took
place peacefully and without incident. The Government
of the Republic of Iraq also hopes for UNAMI's
assistance in providing the logistical means to secure a
sufficient number of observers to ensure transparency
in the parliamentary elections that are scheduled to be
held in the first half of 2014.

In accordance with the democratic approach adopted
by the Iraqi Government, elections for governorate
councils were held on 20 April in 12 governorates, and
on 20 June in the governorates of Ninewa and Anbar.
The elections resulted in the citizens of Iraq choosing
their representatives for local government in a fair and
transparent manner, in accordance with international
standards, in cooperation with UNAMI and under
the supervision of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and representatives of political blocs. The
elections were successful, thus paving the way for the
success of the upcoming parliamentary elections next
year. This will be a further step in the democratic
process drawn up by Iraqis for the peaceful transfer of
power through the ballot box. As a result, newly elected
governors have formed the new governorate councils.

With regard to protests by citizens in a number of
Iraqi cities, the Government has affirmed that peaceful
protest is a right guaranteed to all Iraqis so that they
might peacefully express their views, as stipulated in the
Constitution. The Government has worked assiduously
from the start to meet the legitimate demands of the
demonstrators, has dealt with these demands positively,
in accordance with the Iraqi Constitution, and has in
fact met many of these demands.

With regard to Camp Hurriya, my Government
condemns the recent shelling of the camp by terrorist
groups and militias, which led to several casualties and
injuries. That was part of the wave of terrorism that
struck the entire country. My Government reaffirms the
importance of protecting camp residents and providing
them with the necessary humanitarian aid and health
care. The Government has provided cement structures
to protect residents from any future attacks.

We welcome the decision of the Government of
Albania to resettle 210 residents from the camp, and
welcome the arrival of the first group of 71 individuals
in Albania. We also welcome the offer of the German
Government to resettle 100 residents of the camp.

In line with the Government's intentions to further
develop Iraq's human and social resources, we have
joined the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and annulled our reservation on paragraph
9 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, thus entitling children
born to Iraqi mothers to the right of Iraqi nationality.

In conclusion, I am pleased to convey to the
Council the desire of the Government of Iraq that the
mandate of the UNAMI be extended for one more year,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1770
(2007), in letter and in spirit, and that UNAMI continue
to provide assistance and advice upon prior request by
the Government of Iraq.

