Mr. Sahovic (Yugoslavia): Since this is my first
statement in the Security Council this month, allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
April. I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his detailed and very interesting and
informative briefing.

In View of the character of this meeting, I will
restrict my comments to only some of the issues
mentioned here today. From the briefing and the
subsequent interventions by the members of the
Council, it is evident that the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, the province of the Yugoslav Republic of
Serbia, is still a cause for serious concern due to
continued violence against non-Albanian communities,
primarily the Serb community.

Many outstanding issues remain unresolved -
the lack of security for non-Albanians, the absence of
conditions for the return of displaced persons to
Kosovo and Metohija and the further militarization of
the province, to name just a few. Additionally, we are
particularly interested that the issue of missing persons
be given urgent attention and that concrete steps be
taken to find out what has happened to them. One such
step would be the establishment of a joint committee,
which has been mentioned here by Mr. Guehenno.

On the other hand, we should also point out some
of the significant positive signs as well. First and
foremost, I have in mind the fact that last week
President Kostunica met with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Haekkerup. The visit of the Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to Belgrade, which we warmly welcomed, is a clear
manifestation of the readiness for mutual cooperation
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo. Opening an
UNMIK office in Belgrade - and we are looking
forward to further discussions on the issue of status -
will certainly contribute even further to the promotion
of that cooperation. I believe that this will also provide
encouragement to the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija to
participate in the process of rebuilding everyday life in
the Province.

In that connection, I would like to point out that
the question of participation by the representatives of
the Serb community of Kosovo and Metohija in the
UNMIK Working Group on the elaboration of the legal
framework for the elections in the province has been
resolved. They are ready to give their constructive
contribution. It is of the utmost importance that they be
given proper security guarantees, as well as guarantees
concerning equal participation in the Working Group.
Their number in the organs of local self-government
should also be increased.

The elaboration of the legal framework is crucial
for the holding of the province-wide elections in
Kosovo and Metohija. Indeed, Yugoslavia is interested
in cooperating with UNMIK in organizing those
elections. Yet, as my delegation has pointed out on
many occasions, for those elections to take place it will
be necessary to define properly the structures for which
the elections will be held, to determine the
competencies of the structures, and ensure adequate
representation of Serb and other non-Albanian
communities in these structures.

The return of displaced persons, at least to those
areas where such returns are possible, is also extremely
important. Obviously, this is a difficult process, and it
should be approached very scrupulously and in strict
compliance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), particularly those relative to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Therefore, Yugoslavia wants,
and should play, an appropriate and active role in the
whole process, including the work on the legal
framework.

Allow me also to make some comments on
another issue mentioned in the briefing: the situation in
the ground safety zone in southern Serbia. Violent
incidents caused by Albanian extremist and terrorist
groups in the area, with casualties on the Serbian side,
including among civilians, continue, while the fate of
persons abducted by those groups remains unresolved.
Yet the Government of my country will not be deterred
from pursuing the course of dialogue and bringing
about a peaceful political solution to the problem. In
that regard, we are continuing to work towards the full
implementation of the Covic plan, including further
entry by our forces into sectors agreed upon in contacts
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

Regarding the situation in the ground safety zone
in southern Serbia and in the neighbouring Republic of
Macedonia, I would like to emphasize again on this
occasion the importance of recently adopted Security
Council resolution 1345 (2001) as a constructive
contribution to efforts to end the cycle of violence and
to bring stability to the region as a whole. We are also
encouraged by the recent additional efforts of KFOR
more effectively to control borders and boundaries in
the area.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the position of my
Government: that true and lasting solutions to the
problems in Kosovo and Metohija can be brought about
only by full and consistent implementation of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and through dialogue
and cooperation, to which the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia remains fully committed.

