Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Madam President, please allow me at the outset
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I am convinced that,
given your outstanding talent and rich diplomatic
experience, you will guide the Council's work this month
to success.

I also wish to express gratitude for the condolences
expressed to China for the loss of life in the earthquake
there.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Sir John
Weston of the United Kingdom, for his outstanding
contribution to the complete success of the Council's work
last month.

The open debate on the question of Angola in the
Council today demonstrates the Council's determination to
further support the peace process in Angola and the
international community's readiness to make further efforts
for the restoration of peace and stability there. The Chinese
Government fully endorses these objectives.

The Angolan people have suffered the scourge of war
for 20 long years now. Despite assistance from the
international community, Angola must, in the final analysis,
rely on its own unremitting efforts if it is to close the book
on its painful past and be able to enjoy peace and
tranquillity again.

The Angolan peace process is now at a critical point:
the Angolan Government and UNITA agreed not long ago
upon a new timetable, and the Angolan Government has
taken encouraging initiatives in quartering its forces and
releasing prisoners of war. At the same time, however,
progress in the Angolan peace process is still very slow:
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has been
repeatedly postponed; the two sides still lack mutual trust
and political will; and no further meetings have yet taken
place between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi. A
ship sailing against the current must forge ahead or it will
be driven backwards; now the two sides, particularly
UNITA, must make concerted efforts so that the ship of
the peace process is not driven onto the rocks, and can
sail on to success.

The Chinese delegation is of the view that
negotiation and dialogue remain the only way for Angola
to resolve differences and achieve national reconciliation.
We therefore hope that the two sides, particularly UNITA,
will honour their commitments and, taking into account
the national interest, cooperate with the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and
implement comprehensively the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant resolutions of the Council so as to create
conditions in which progress can be made in the peace
process and national reconciliation can be achieved.

In finding a solution to the question of Angola, we
must also attach importance and give support to the role
of the Organization of African Unity and Angola's
neighbouring countries.
The Chinese Government has at all times firmly
supported the peace process in Angola and has
sympathized deeply with the Angolan people for their
sufferings resulting from the war. It is in this spirit that
the Chinese Government has provided Angola with
humanitarian assistance and production facilities. We will
continue to make our contribution, together with the
international community, to peace and stability in Angola.

