Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the delegation of Cuba, Sir, I wish you
every success in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also take this opportunity to
offer special congratulations to the Permanent
Representative of South Africa and his entire team for
the excellent work accomplished during the month of
April. In addition, I wish to thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information provided at this meeting.

For years, as everyone knows, our country has
been submitting to the Security Council detailed
information about the terrorist actions committed
against Cuba by various individuals and organizations
and about the complicit protection provided to them by
the Government of the United States. On many
occasions, we have spoken in this Chamber and sent
letters to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Security Council, denouncing specific cases of flagrant
violations of resolution 1373 (2001). Unfortunately,
nothing has been done so far.

This very week, 8 May will mark the first
anniversary of the permanent release in the United
States of the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who is
rightly considered to be the most notorious terrorist in
the Western Hemisphere. Despite the fact that the
Government of the United States itself has
acknowledged that he is a dangerous terrorist, and
despite all the evidence of its long relationship with
him at its disposal and provided by Cuba since 1998,
Posada Carriles was charged by United States
authorities with only minor immigration crimes.

The release of that terrorist and former agent of
the Central Intelligence Agency demonstrates that his
insignificant trial in the United States was a farce. One
need only read the news to see that Posada Carriles
freely walks the streets of that country, making press
statements to anyone who will listen, and is honoured
and recognized in Miami for his terrorist acts against
Cuba. Nothing more need be said.

Cuba is appearing once again in the Security
Council to strongly denounce and condemn the
complicit inaction of the Government of the United
States and the protection that it is providing to Posada
Carriles. While it insists on presenting itself as the
leader of its self-proclaimed "war on terror", the
Government of the United States continues to ignore
the request for Posada Carrile's extradition filed on
15 June 2005 by the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

The Government of Cuba demands once again
that Washington return the terrorist to Venezuela or try
him on its own territory, in conformity with article 7 of
the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

The Government of the United States has even
had the nerve to allege that it cannot hand Posada
Carriles over to Venezuela or Cuba because he is in
danger of being tortured. This falsehood is even more
outrageous when one considers that the accusing
Government is precisely the one that is responsible for
the deaths of hundreds of thousands of civilians in
Iraq; that authorized the torture at Abu Ghraib and at
the Guantanamo naval base, a part of Cuban territory
illegally occupied by the United States; and that is an
accomplice in kidnappings, disappearances, secret
flights and clandestine prisons.

While confessed and unscrupulous terrorists walk
free, the Government of the United States holds
hostage in high-security prisons five young Cubans
who were only trying, with great altruism and courage,
to obtain information about Miami-based terrorist
groups in order to prevent their violent acts and to save

the lives of Cuban and United States citizens. Once
again, Cuba demands the immediate release of Gerardo
Hernandez, Ramon Labafiino, Fernando Gonzalez,
Antonio Guerrero and Rene Gonzalez. For fighting
terrorism, our five heroes will have served 10 years of
unjust and cruel imprisonment in United States prisons
on 12 September 2008.

Cuba reiterates its request to the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to urgently
address the detailed information that our country has
provided them and to take all measures necessary
under the relevant resolutions. Double standards cannot
prevail. The Security Council cannot continue to
maintain a complicit silence in the face of this gross
affront to the victims of terrorism throughout the
world. It will be impossible to eliminate terrorism if
some terrorist acts are condemned while others are
ignored, tolerated or justified, or if the issue is simply
manipulated to promote narrow political interests.

Cuba has never permitted, nor will it ever permit,
its territory to be used for terrorist actions against any
State, without exception. As always, we shall continue
to strongly fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As it has always done, Cuba will
continue to abide strictly by Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and will maintain its cooperation with the subsidiary
bodies established pursuant to them.

