Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and your delegation, for initiating the
discussion of this very important subject. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his report and excellent

 

recommendations, which have set the stage for our
deliberations today, as well as for the draft resolution we
plan to adopt. We welcome the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and thank him
for his very important statement.
Today, civilians, especially women, children and the
elderly, are deliberately targeted by combatants and are
constantly becoming victims of indiscriminate shootings,
cruel and degrading treatment, physical and psychological
torture and mutilation. You, Mr. President, have referred to
this phenomenon as the "civilianization" of conflicts, and
we share your view. It is therefore timely for the Security
Council to consider the protection of civilians in terms of
its overall mandate under the Charter of the United Nations.

All the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General warrant serious consideration and implementation
by the Security Council to the extent possible. However, the
recommendations should be implemented in a fair and
consistent manner, and civilians everywhere should be
accorded the same physical protection so as to uphold the
credibility of the Council. Those recommendations relating
to the proliferation of arms and their impact on armed
conflict and to the provision of humanitarian assistance are
of particular importance and interest to my delegation.

The uncontrolled flow of not only small arms but all
types of sophisticated light weapons into areas of conflict
needs to be seriously addressed. Weapon-producing
countries should not transfer arms, including landmines, to
regions where armed conflict is imminent or raging.
Equally important in this regard is the responsibility of
Member States for ensuring that their citizens are not used
as mercenaries.

Furthermore, the recommendations relating to the
special protection needs of women and children are strongly
supported by my delegation, and special arrangements
should be put in place to ensure the protection of such
people against the horrors of armed conflict.

Human suffering as a result of displacement is on the
increase. On the other hand, displaced persons fleeing into
neighbouring countries continue to place a huge social and
economic burden on the host countries, especially in Africa.
The international community needs to continue to provide
significant support to host communities as well as to
refugee populations.

The protection of civilians is closely linked to the
capacity of United Nations peacekeepers to deploy rapidly.
That point was highlighted this morning by the Secretary-
General. As we have stated before, timely deployment,
together with the appropriate mandate and adequate
resources, can drastically improve the plight of besieged
civilians during armed conflict. Again, support by the
international community remains crucial.

The disturbing continuation of attacks against United
Nations and associated personnel should receive the
Council's urgent attention, and adequate measures must be
considered to ensure the security of humanitarian field
workers. In this regard, we support the call by the
Secretary-General for the ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and for the development of an
appropriate protocol to extend the scope of legal
protection to all United Nations and associated personnel.

My delegation concurs with the view that enough
international humanitarian and human rights law
instruments exist to ensure the legal protection of
civilians. What is required is that parties have the political
will to ratify and implement them and that parties to
conflicts respect their provisions. Appropriate steps, such
as those recommended by the Secretary-General, would
therefore play an essential role in heightening awareness
and promoting climates of compliance.

My delegation fully supports the draft resolution we
are going to adopt later today. However, we wish to
reiterate our grave concern over the situation at hand and
would recommend that the Council continue to request
reports from the Secretary-General and review the
situation at regular intervals.

