Ms. Londofio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, I thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his presence and his opening
statement, which raise the profile of today's debate.

I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate, which provides an
appropriate forum in which to express our views on
this issue. I am grateful for the presence here today of
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres; and the Director-General of the World Health
Organization, Ms. Margaret Chan.

When we address the issue of threats to peace and
security, as this Council has done over the years, we
refer to threats both old and new. There are multiple
challenges on the global agenda, but not all negative
global phenomena are, in and of themselves, threats to
peace and security.

To speak of new challenges to international peace
and security is to enter a wide-ranging and vague
territory. There are several sources of instability in the
economic, social, humanitarian and environmental
spheres that may exacerbate existing threats and that
may have a greater impact on situations involving
weak institutions or in conflict and/or post-conflict
settings. It is worth remembering that the World
Development Report 2011 notes that institutional
legitimacy is the key to stability and that, without it,
the likelihood of conflict may increase.

In that context, we must acknowledge that the
global agenda is complex and multifaceted, and that it
occasionally creates problems that affect the conditions
for international peace and security. The latter does not
mean that the Council should address all of the issues
on the global agenda, which would lead to "growing
securitization".

The United Nations system has identified specific
areas for action. As part of efforts to address the range
of global problems, the international community has
built a specialized and distinct architecture, which has
its own areas of competence. Under that framework,
the organs, agencies and entities created over the past
few decades must work together with a view to
protecting the common interests of humankind.

As part of its responsibilities for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council, while dealing with the requirements of
collective security, carries out and must carry out the
important work of promoting substantive initiatives to
prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts. In addition,
the Council has recognized that building sustainable
peace requires an integrated approach that enhances
coherent action in the political, security, development
and human rights areas and that promotes the rule of
law.

As part of a consistent approach and in the scope
of the issues under its consideration, the Council plays
an important role in supporting efforts to strengthen the
rule of law and in building national capacities to ensure
continuity in the functioning of institutions and in the
provision of services during the transition and
peacebuilding processes.

A logical approach would be to channel the
Council's work in two non-exclusive but rather
complementary directions. First, it is possible to build
transparent institutional bridges among the various
international entities and organizations. In that way,
each will be able to develop its own goals and, at the
same time, the bridges will create the synergies needed
for information to flow properly among them and
ensure that all can provide and receive adequate
feedback. That is a topic of crucial importance in
discussions on United Nations reform. In some cases,
this involves structural mechanisms. In others, it
involves procedural matters that we should discuss.

The new challenges, as they are known, have
their own mechanisms and forums in other United
Nations entities and even outside the system. The
Council's analysis of those so-called new challenges
makes sense only when, in certain cases and under
specific circumstances, those challenges may
exacerbate existing threats in situations being
considered by the Council, or when the Council is
carrying out a strategic analysis of conflict prevention.

Secondly, we must remember that the Security
Council's functions are defined in the Charter. In
recent years, the Council has preferred to focus on its
obligations under Chapter VII, leaving behind the very
broad provisions set out in Chapter VI. In that sense, it
would be worthwhile to reflect on how to strengthen
the application of Chapter VI so that Council can
respond to those new challenges in the framework of
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.
That would, in turn, help to identify effective
cooperation mechanisms that would restore confidence
and underpin dialogue in situations involving complex
issues and conflicting views.

The magnitude and complexity of the global
agenda requires comprehensive and coordinated action
by the United Nations and the international community.
In that regard, an effort should be made to highlight the
work of the General Assembly and other relevant
forums, given their universal and specialized nature as
forums for discussion and consensus-building, to
address the issues raised by the so-called new
challenges.

