The President (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Osode
(Liberia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2004/981, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Romania,
Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I would like to draw the attention of the members
to documents S/2004/752 and S/2004/955, containing
letters dated 23 September 2004 and 6 December 2004,
respectively, addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the midterm and final reports of
the Panel of Experts on Liberia.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objections, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1579 (2004).

I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.


