Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I have the honour to brief
the members of the Security Council in my capacity
as the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In my statement, I intend to briefly highlight some
of the findings and recommendations in the final
report of the Group of Experts (see S/2015/19) issued
pursuant to resolution 2136 (2014) and touch upon
the Committee's consideration of the report during
its meeting on 9 January. I also intend to briefly
highlight the activities of the Committee since my most
recent briefing to the Council, on 20 August 2014, in
connection with the midterm report of the Group (see S/2014/428) and set some of out the possible activities
that are being considered by the Committee during the
course of 2015. As the Group of Experts' final report
was made available as a Security Council document on
Monday, I intend to highlight just a few of the Group's
findings here today.

With regard to the sanctioned entity Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Group considers that a
recent military operation significantly weakened but
failed to defeat the ADF. The Group is of the view
that ADF still has the potential to regroup and rebuild,
as it did during similar operations in 2005 and 2010,
particularly since its recruitment, support and finance
networks have not been significantly affected. The
Group also did not find credible evidence that ADF has,
or recently has had, links to foreign terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab or Boko Haram.

With regard to the sanctioned entity Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Group of Experts noted that the armed group's leadership
had failed to demonstrate a genuine commitment to
the disarmament process. The Group documented
the FDLR's involvement in military operations,
recruitment and collaboration with other armed groups
and elements of the national army, the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC).
The Group also established that FDLR leaders and
some of their international political supporters had
been meeting outside the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since at least 2013, and documented FDLR's
engagement in the local-level taxation and exploitation
of natural resources, sometimes in collaboration with
FARDC units.

In the report, the Group also notes that the ADF,
FDLR, Nduma Defence for Congo, led by sanctioned
individual Sheka Ntabo Ntaberi, and other armed
groups continue to recruit, train and use child soldiers
in 2014. Armed groups also committed a variety of
other abuses, including torture, enslavement and sexual
violence. There were mass killings in June in Mutarule,
South Kivu, and in October and November 2014 in Beni
territory, North Kivu.

The Group also observed that, while there had
been progress on traceability and due diligence efforts
concerning minerals in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, smuggling continued. In addition, elements of
the FARDC and some armed groups remain involved
in the minerals trade, potentially introducing conflict
minerals into the supply chains in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring States.
According to the Group, there was virtually no
progress in addressing the smuggling of gold from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2014. The
illegal exploitation of, and trade in, wildlife products,
including ivory, remains a serious problem, involving
armed groups, elements of the Congolese army, local
poachers and armed bands from South Sudan. The
FDLR and elements of the army remain involved in the
production and trade in charcoal and wood in North
Kivu.

Among its 15 recommendations, the Group
of Experts proposed that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and several other
Governments exchange information to ensure that
gold was traded in compliance with international
transparency and due diligence standards, namely, by
requiring full documentation, including a certificate of
origin.

The Group also recommended that the Governments
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi
investigate and prosecute reported acts of sexual
violence and abuse by the Burundian army and/or the
Burundian Imbonerakure militia group in the Kiliba
area of South Kivu, and that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo investigate and
prosecute FARDC officers and soldiers cited in the
report who Violate the mining code.

Intheir consideration of the Group's recommendations
and the proposed actions by the Committee in connection
with the recommendations, the members registered
their preliminary agreement with many of the proposed
actions, such as letters addressed to a number of States
highlighting the Group's recommendation to investigate
individuals identified in the report who were involved in
the finance, material support and recruitment networks
of the ADF. Those draft documents were circulated
on Tuesday to the Committee under the standard
five-day no objection procedure. With regard to several
recommendations where there was no clear agreement
from the floor regarding the proposed actions, such as
a hold, the Chair intends to conduct further bilaterals
with interested delegations to see whether a flexible
approach can be found to the manner in which the
Committee conveys the Group's recommendations to
the relevant Member States.

Since my last briefing to the Council on 20 August
2014, in connection with the Group's midterm
report, the Committee held informal consultations
on 17 September to hear a briefing by Mr. Abdallah
Wafi, Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Rule of Law, on the sanctions
monitoring mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), in particular weapons marking
and tracing, which, in my View, is a key component to
the identification of arms embargo violations. At the
same meeting, the Committee also heard briefings by
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and by Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
at which time both representatives put forward names
for possible sanctions designation. A press release was
issued following that meeting.

In terms of the Committee's possible activities this
year, it would be the Chair's desire to visit the Great
Lakes region, hopefully during the middle of 2015. Prior
to that time, I have asked members of the Committee
for their views in terms of possible interlocuters
who could deepen the Committee's understanding
of the implementation of the sanctions regime. In
that connection, the Committee is taking forward my
proposal to convene a meeting with States in the region
following the publication of the Group of Experts final
report as a Council document. To that end, letters to the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda, the United Republic of
Tanzania and South Africa, in its capacity as Chair of
the Southern African Development Community, will be
transmitted in connection with the proposed meeting
of Friday, 6 March, of the Committee with the invited
States. We also value the engagement of Angola in its
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and a member of the Sanctions
Committee in the Council.

It would also be my intention, with the agreement
of the Committee members, to invite the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator to speak with the
Committee regarding the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also believe
that the Committee would value the insights of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler or the
relevant MONUSCO representative on the Mission's
sanctions monitoring mandate. The Committee could
also consider a possible briefing by the Chair of the
African group of Member States here in New York to
discuss the implementation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo sanctions regime.

The date of 12 March 2015 will mark 11 years since
the Security Council established a Sanctions Committee
to monitor the implementation of the arms embargo. It
is my hope that, during the course of this year, through
the Committee's meetings with the regional States and
their other interlocuters and through my visit to the
Great Lakes region, we may be able to step back and
assess the effectiveness and impact of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions regime and consider
some very important questions. What, for example, can
be done to improve weapon stockpile management and
combat networks that supply arms and ammunition to
armed groups, in Violation of the embargo? How can
we stop the recycling of ex-combatants from one armed
group to another existing or new armed group? What
sort ofimpact is being felt by the 31 individuals and nine
entities whose names are on the sanctions list? What
further information do Member States need in order to
propose additional names for sanctions, including those
who support armed groups through the illicit trade in
natural resources, including gold, wildlife and wildlife

products, as well as those who continue to recruit
children and sexually abuse women?

We must make sure that Member States,
particularly those in the region, are cooperating with
the Group of Experts and the Committee by answering
its letters, facilitating its visits and implementing
its recommendations. I trust that this year we will
collectively acquire a better appreciation for the
commitment given to implementation of the sanctions
regime, and of the action can be taken to address any
gaps or deficiencies. I am aware ofthe challenges before
us, particularly the differences in views in the region
about who bears the greatest responsibility for Violating
the embargo. Let us engage with their interlocutors
by hearing their views and providing assistance
as necessary, and, ultimately, let us strengthen the
implementation of the sanctions regime. The people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
the civilians who have borne the brunt of the suffering,
deserve no less.
