The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his very
informative briefing on the evolving situation in South
Sudan and the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, for
their informative briefings. Those briefings compel
Cote d'Ivoire to comment on various political, security,
humanitarian and human rights issues, as well as on the
implementation ofthe sanctions regime in South Sudan.

With regard to the political situation, my country
welcomes the clear willingness of the South Sudanese
parties to implement the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, the sole frame of reference for a political solution
to the crisis that has afflicted this country for five
years. The appointment by the South Sudanese parties
of their representatives to the various mechanisms and
institutions of the pre-transition phase, as well as the
launch of the work of those mechanisms, is a clear
demonstration of their determination to contribute
positively to the implementation ofthe peace Agreement.

It is now a matter of urgency to ensure that
the parties to the conflict take advantage of the
pre-transitional phase to establish the conditions
for a successful transition leading to the speedy
holding of elections. In that regard, my country, like
the Secretary-General, calls on the parties to make a
firm commitment to drafting a revised version of the
transitional security arrangements and establishing
a transitional Government of national unity. Besides
that, in our firm beliefin the important role that women
play in peace processes, my delegation also encourages
South Sudanese leaders to ensure the meaningful
representation of women in the institutions responsible
for implementing the Revitalized Agreement.

On the security front, we welcome the ceasefire
that is being maintained in some parts of the country,
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1103)
so rightly emphasizes. We also welcome in that regard
the confidence-building measures introduced by the
Government of South Sudan and the opposition groups
following the signing of the Agreement. My delegation
urges both parties to work to consolidate that peaceful
and Virtuous attitude so that peace and stability can
be restored to the regions still affected by armed
clashes and intercommunal violence. In that context,
Cote d'Ivoire believes that the process of national
dialogue, the unification of the South Sudanese army
and the implementation of terms relating to security
arrangements will make a major contribution to the
gradual improvement of the situation throughout
the country. My delegation also welcomes the
multifaceted engagement of the member countries
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in resolving the conflict in South Sudan. We
urge the leadership of IGAD and the United Nations to
rapidly deploy the UNMISS Regional Protection Force
to ensure the protection of civilian populations.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, where there
are large numbers of internally displaced persons and
refugees, food insecurity issues and health risks related
to the outbreak of the Ebola virus in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The situation is aggravated by
continuing deliberate efforts to obstruct humanitarian
assistance throughout the country. Despite repeated
appeals from the international community, humanitarian
workers continue to be victims of violence, assault and
detention in the exercise of their duties, among other
things. C6te d'Ivoire firmly condemns all acts ofviolence
against humanitarian workers and the looting of their
equipment and once again calls on the South Sudanese
parties to create a safe environment that is conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance and the safe
and dignified return of displaced persons to their areas
of origin. We commend the invaluable support of the
World Health Organization to the Government of South
Sudan in strengthening its national capacities for Ebola
preparedness and response.

Regarding the human rights situation, we are
pleased with the significant drop in human rights
Violations and acts of Violence by the parties to the
conflict since the signing ofthe Revitalized Agreement.
However, we strongly condemn the continuing sexual
and gender-based Violence against women and girls
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers by
parties to the conflict. We urge the South Sudanese
leaders to implement the principle of accountability
in order to bring the perpetrators of such acts before
the appropriate courts. We therefore call for the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan to be established as
soon as possible, in accordance with the terms of the
Revitalized Agreement.

With regard to the sanctions regime in South
Sudan, we would like to commend Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka's remarkable work and reiterate our support
to her as she carries out her duties, and we encourage
the Government of South Sudan, the countries of the
region, the Sanctions Committee and the Panel of
Experts to collaborate further in order to support the
ongoing peace efforts.

In conclusion, my delegation commends the work
done by UNMISS in extremely difficult circumstances
and reaffirms that only a genuine commitment on the
part of the South Sudanese authorities and continued
support from the United Nations, the African Union
and the international community can bring this crisis
to a definitive end.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.

