Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the President of the
Security Council for putting forward for consideration
at this month's wrap-up meeting of the Council the
topic of conflicts in Africa, with a view to the dispatch
to that continent of two Council missions. Our
discussions have made clear the great practicality and
usefulness of such an action. The exchange of views
that took place today will certainly help members of
the Security Council in their work during the course of
their trip to Africa.

Russia agrees with the general conviction as to
the link between peace and development. We support
the elaboration of a comprehensive and thorough
approach to the settlement and prevention of conflicts
and to the elimination of poverty, with a view to
ensuring development and the strengthening of
democracy on the African continent. We believe that
priority should be accorded to the use of political and
diplomatic methods and to the overcoming of obstacles
that could contribute to the emergence and continuation
of conflicts. There can be no doubt that the Africans
themselves must play a key role in this respect.

Russia is actively participating in peacekeeping
efforts in Africa; Russian representatives are involved
in all United Nations peacekeeping operations on the
continent.

Africa has not been spared new challenges and
threats. It is important that in its approach to these
problems, the Security Council act with the same
determination and serious-mindedness as it does in
other regions. Double standards are inadmissible. This
idea has already been expressed in this Chamber by the
representative of Malaysia, and we support it.

The planned Security Council missions will have
to cope with and evaluate a fresh threat to the African
continent: the spread of illegal armed groups. Often
these groups pose a threat to the constitutional
foundation, and even the very existence, of sovereign
States. This was stated eloquently earlier in the
meeting by the representative of the Congo,
Mr. Ikouebe.

In many cases, these groups have no programme
whatsoever, save their desire to seize power at any
cost. The price for this can be many tens of thousands
of peaceful African lives. Since these groups plunder
and rape and kill the civilian population, how do they
differ from terrorists? Today's statement by the
Permanent Representative of Burundi, Mr. Nteturuye,
shows that the Africans themselves hold such views.

Quite frequently armed groups are manipulated
from abroad and become an extension of the interests
of neighbouring countries. This phenomenon has
become regional in nature, and poses a threat to
international peace and security. With a view to
averting the worst-case scenario, Governments must
engage in contacts with these armed groups and make
compromises within the framework of an intra-national
dialogue. This is explainable and understandable, and
each situation requires individual consideration.
Nevertheless, such an approach leads to the
legalization of the rebels and to a situation whereby,
instead of resorting to constitutional means of
resolving internal problems, a choice is made in favour
of violence.

The question of border security requires a fresh
approach. For historical reasons, African borders have
always been porous. This has allowed them to retain
the ethnic linkages of tribes and has helped in border
cooperation.

Now, however, the permeability and vulnerability
of borders has in many cases become the reason for the
spillover of conflict situations, unrestricted flows of
illegal arms, smuggling, trans-border crime, the illegal
export of natural resources and the movement of armed
groups and mercenaries.

The Security Council missions should draw
attention to this problem, which could lead to further
destabilization in various African regions. Russia
supports the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
to strengthen Africa's peacekeeping potential and the
establishment of an effective partnership and of
cooperation in the area of the maintenance of peace.

Of great promise is cooperation among the
African peacekeeping structures with the Group of
Eight. We agree with the views expressed in this regard
by the Ambassador of Germany, Ambassador Pleuger.
We note with satisfaction the intensification of
peacekeeping efforts on the part of the African Union
and such subregional organizations as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Inter-Government Authority on Development
(IGAD).

We welcome the major contribution to
peacekeeping made by a great number of African
States. However, we are concerned that, in some cases,
the assessments of the Security Council and African
institutions do not coincide. As well, the requests of
our partners in Africa do not always find support on the
Council.

In that connection, we agree with the proposal
made by the Chairman of the Group of African States,
the Permanent Representative of Mauritius,
Mr. Koonjul, to hold consultations between the
Security Council and the African Union. We support
the views expressed by the representative of Angola,
Mr. Gaspar Martins, on cooperation with subregional
organizations. We should heed the view of the
Economic Community of Central African States on the
mandate for the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as expressed
today by the representative of the Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Ikouebe.

A number of delegations referred today to
sanctions as a way of dealing with those who violate
international peace and security. Sanctions are a very
powerful weapon, and sanctions regimes can be
imposed by the Security Council alone. Such regimes
are inadmissible when, as one group of United Nations
experts recently reported, those targeted are unaware
they are the object of sanctions. The Security Council
must carefully follow up on the implementation of its
own resolutions. During its trip to West Africa, the
Security Council will be able to see to what extent its
sanctions regimes have been effective in the case of
certain States of the region.

The Security Council regularly examines post-
conflict recovery situations in various African States.
We are concerned about the gaps and complications
that have arisen in some cases: the military coup in the
Central African Republic and difficulties in the post-
conflict process in Guinea-Bissau. We hope that in the
latter case the Security Council mission will be able to
make a constructive contribution to a smooth
continuation of that process. We believe that the
Security Council missions to Central and West Africa
will be able to get a first-hand view of the humanitarian
situation in conflict zones.

The information coming in shows that in those
areas, there exists heinous, merciless cruelty towards
the civilian population. Senseless killings are being
carried out with machetes, which have become a
weapon of mass destruction. We are observing a
phenomenon that is incompatible with civilization in
the twenty-first century. Child combatants are drawn
into endless violence. Security Council missions must
send a clear signal to the parties concerned: those who
commit crimes against humanity will inexorably be
brought to justice. The guilty will be punished for the
crimes they have committed. We support the statement
in that regard from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Ileka. The
blood and ashes of innocent victims make this our duty.

Virtually all African conflicts have a regional
dimension. The positions of neighbours and other
regional factors to a great extent determine the success
or failure of international efforts to settle those
conflicts. Russia proposes that during the Security
Council mission to Central Africa we sound out the
views of the States of the Great Lakes region on the
idea of adopting a declaration on good neighbourliness,
which could then be transformed into a good-
neighbourliness pact. As we see it, work on such a
document would promote mutual understanding among
the States in that part of the African continent, help to
solve ongoing problems and strengthen trust among the
States. It could be an important step in preparing for
the international conference on the Great Lakes region.

There are no quick fixes for the enormous
problems of settling African conflicts. We need
multifaceted, painstaking efforts both from the friends
of Africa and, first and foremost, from Africans
themselves. We hope that the forthcoming Security
Council missions to the continent, in accordance with
the mandates approved, will help to formulate solutions
to those conflicts and to face new challenges and
threats to Africa.

