Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the United Kingdom
presidency for putting this item on the agenda and the
briefers for their contributions here and the work that
they do in their respective organizations with regard to
this very important issue.

The destruction, looting and trafficking of cultural
heritage not only inflict damage on the places and the
peoples in the affected areas, but also untold damage
is wrought on the understanding of our common
history and shared humanity. The end result is that the
knowledge, beauty and diversity of our world are all
diminished for everyone. The destruction of the ancient
city of Palmyra, the mausoleums and manuscripts of
Timbuktu and the mosques of Mosul, among others, are
wanton and needless acts of vandalism. Such iconoclasm
has been seen before in all parts of the globe, yet the
most recent wave is all the more cynical as it is often
a front for the looting of artefacts for sale on the black
market and for garnering publicity for those carrying
out those barbarous actions.

Our primary concern, of course, in situations of
conflict must be the protection of the life and dignity of
civilians whose lives are destroyed because of war and
instability. We must also look towards the post-conflict
phase and how to rebuild peaceful societies based on
trust and mutual understanding. In that regard, the
destruction and disappearance of culture heritage
can have profound and unanticipated consequences
by obliterating unique historical and cultural values
essential to providing us with an understanding of our
past, present and future. The fact that armed groups
and, in particular, terrorist groups in ongoing conflicts
finance their activity through the illegal trafficking of
cultural property is of great concern. The sheer number
of illicitly trafficked cultural objects confiscated in
countries neighbouring ongoing conflicts in 2016 alone
is a clear illustration of the extent of the problem.

The destruction, looting and trafficking of culture
heritage in situations of armed conflict are not a new
phenomenon. The protection of cultural property in
armed conflict is firmly rooted in the Second Protocol
to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and
customary international humanitarian law wherein
under certain circumstances the intentional destruction
of such cultural heritage may amount to war crimes.
States therefore have a duty to investigate attacks
against cultural property and bring perpetrators to
justice. With that in mind, we welcome the recent
judgment by the International Criminal Court in the Al
Mahdi case. Moreover, UNESCO has agreed a range
of conventions related to those issues, which together
with the Convention on Transnational Organized
Crime, provide important tools to address them. Our
common measures against terrorism, including against
the financing of terrorism through the illicit trade of
cultural property, also play an important role.

Sweden is in the process of adhering to the
Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and we encourage others to do the same.
We also support the ongoing work of the Council of
Europe in that area. We have taken a number of actions
to implement resolution 2199 (2015), which condemns
trade in cultural property from Syria and Iraq, such
as setting up a national coordination function across
relevant Government agencies. We have also reinforced
national police capacity in the field of cultural
heritage and launched a public awareness-raising
campaign in line with UNESCO's global Unite for
Heritage campaign.

We underline UNESCO's leading role in the
protection of cultural heritage. We support the Strategy
for Reinforcing UNESCO's Action in the Protection
of Culture and the Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in
the Event of Armed Conflict, and we look forward to
the action plan to implement it. UNESCO, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL,
the World Customs Organization and States, as well
as various institutions and individuals, contribute in
valuable ways to preventing the destruction of and
illicit trade in cultural heritage. It is essential that their
actions support and complement each other.

We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
2347 (2017), introduced by France and Italy, which
we were pleased to co-sponsor. The resolution is
an important step forward in the fight against the
destruction, looting and trafficking of cultural
heritage in conflict situations. We further commend
the initiative taken by France and the United Arab
Emirates to create safe havens for cultural objects, and
we are studying with close interest ways in which that
and other initiatives may complement each other.

A holistic approach will bring new perspectives.
Sweden looks forward to the report of the Secretary-
General as we look into how the Security Council
can continue to address that important issue. Our
cultural heritage is integral to our shared humanity.
Its destruction in any part of the world leaves us all
poorer. We owe it to our future generations to do
everything within our power to protect our common
cultural heritage.

