Ms. Elman: I am grateful for the invitation to brief
the Security Council this morning.

I am from Somalia, a State that collapsed
devastatingly in 1991 and remains somewhat trapped
in a spiral of prolonged violent anarchy and warfare to
this day. The first attempt at reconciliation was actually
at the height of the conflict in 1991. During the early
days of the war, a manifesto was produced and was
supported by many of the rebel leaders. However, since
not all of the rebel leaders were signatories, the process
failed. Since then, countless attempts at ending the
conflict and building peace humanitarian initiated and
continue to this very day.

Somalia, as an example ofa country in a protracted
conflict, is certainly not unique. Past efforts in my
country, which proceeded from the assumption that
political and diplomatic methods could be grafted unto
existing systems and attitudes, without first developing
new social and economic foundations for change, were
part of an unfortunate norm in the crises and conflicts
the Council and member States are committed to
solving. It therefore gives me encouragement that,
under the United Kingdom's presidency, we are now
debating the toughest and, arguably, most important
part of the peacebuilding cycle - reconciliation.

I am reminded of a terrible clash between forces
loyal to Galmuldug and Puntland forces in Somalia,
in the city of Galkayo, where I was doing some work
recently on disarmament programmes. Fifty thousand
people were displaced. There were many civilian
casualties and countless militias, armed to the teeth,
were stationed at the front lines of a city whose
border was literally divided by just a single rope. The
international community stepped in immediately to
de-escalate the tensions and the leaders of the two
regions were taken out of Somalia for peace talks. The
signing of the agreement was celebrated abroad and
echoed in national media. The very day the leaders
returned, devastating fighting erupted once more,
leaving more innocent people dead.

Yet, when the women, young people and religious
leaders of that very community are asked what it would
take for the young men on the front lines to drop their
weapons, the answer is simple - just talk to them.
They are accessible. If offered a chance at peace, those
with the most to lose will participate. We know that a
reconciliation process that almost exclusively involves
political parties, with voters often left out of the talks,
will most likely not succeed. We know that to achieve
true reconciliation, the process must embrace a long-
term, nationwide solution. The most urgent task is often
rebuilding public trust in institutions - formal and
informal alike. Such trust is worryingly lacking in the
conflicts we hope to solve today.

Violence will continue to ensue if people no longer
believe that they can solve their problems through
trusted channels, such as Government institutions.
Reconciliation is a process; it is not a single event and
it cannot be a process that is exported outside of the
country. I witnessed at first-hand every day what the
lack of a legal framework for reconciliation means. It
means the absence of certainty for potential defectors
from the parties to the conflict regarding the fate they
expect if they risk their lives to escape from groups
like Al-Shabaab, for example; the impact of high
corruption and the lack of adherence to international
human rights laws by Somali Government institutions;
the lack of parallel efforts to disarm and transform clan
militias; persistent clan conflicts and discrimination
and the country's prevalent politics of exclusion and
marginalization. Such problems permeate traditional
justice mechanisms. In addition, the biased treatment
of women and discrimination against minority
clans perpetuate grievances. Yet, efforts at trauma
healing, forgiveness and reconciliation among former
combatants, local communities and clans have been led
for years by Somali non-governmental organizations.

Successful strategies for peacebuilding and national
reconciliation must involve as many sectors of the
population as possible. Most important, such strategies
must seek to build consensus. Women-led civil society
groups all over the world that are able to speak to
the underlying drivers of violence and significantly
influence the reconciliation process are systematically
excluded. There are countless examples of women's
peace and reconciliation efforts, in Somalia, Northern
Ireland, Liberia, the Balkans, Bosnia and more. The
evidence speaks for itself.

After 20 years of celebrating resolution 1325
(2000), I urge the Council to not just symbolically
celebrate the document but to utilize it to advance
women's inclusion in adjusting the challenges to
reconciliation and mandate that there is inclusive
gender decision-making in the design, implementation
and monitoring of reconciliation strategies. That means
consulting women from the beginning, including
those that are displaced and with disabilities; taking
the steps necessary to increase the number of female
staff in mediation, observation and the negotiation of
peace agreements; and adjusting the protection needs
of all humanitarian workers and women human rights
defenders, who are increasingly targeted, disappeared
and abducted for getting involved in those very
processes. Although women, in particular young
women, are more likely to become victims during war,
they have created pathways to peace through advocacy
and informal networks and, with new technology, have
even created viral movements.

However, the lack of financial assistance to
complement peacemaking and the culture of human
rights is one of the biggest setbacks for peacebuilding
today. Outside of my work with the Elman Peace and
Human Rights Centre in Somalia, where I focus on the
disarmament, rehabilitation and reintegration of young
men and women who are involved with armed groups,
I also have the extreme honour of serving as an adviser
to the Secretary-General's Peacebuilding Fund - a
testament to his commitment to including women, in
particular young women, and those from the Global
South in decision-making processes in peacebuilding.
In that process and through such work, we have
countless times heard from the people of fragile States
and countries in conflict, directly appealing for more
support for reconciliation. That is the reason those
countries request funding.

I leave Council members with a thought and a
request that the President and the members of the
Council consider working with the mechanisms that
exist within the United Nations family today. The
Peacebuilding Fund, with the Council's support,
can invest in reconciliation in the countries we
are discussing.

