Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to thank Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his
briefing on the human rights situation in Ukraine and
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs. We appreciate the efforts
that they, together with the Secretary-General, are
making in that country.

The report before us describes the human rights
situation in eastern Ukraine in a worrying way. The
dramatic increase in violations of the rights to life,
liberty and security now affecting civilians in Donbas
underscores the need to restore the rule of law and to
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 68/262 and international law. The
recent reports indicating the possible use of cluster
bombs in eastern Ukraine are of particular concern.
They must be investigated. If they are proved to be
true, those responsible must be brought to justice. As
we have pointed out in various forums, we condemn
the use of such weapons. We call on those countries
that have still not signed and ratified the Convention on
Cluster Munitions to do so in the near future.

We reiterate that accountability for all human rights
violations and abuses committed in Ukraine must be
guaranteed. It is equally critical that the authorities
conclude the investigation, that those responsible for
the deaths of 48 people in Odessa on 2 May be brought
to justice and that there be clarification as to why the
security forces did not act in a timely and decisive way.
We are also concerned about the human rights situation
in Crimea, in particular with regard to discrimination
against Ukrainian nationals and the Tatar minority.

On the humanitarian front, we are concerned
about the situation of internally displaced persons in
eastern Ukraine, who, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, now total more
than 400,000 people, mostly women and children - a
clear sign of the severity of the crisis. In that regard,
we commend the recent adoption by the Ukrainian
Parliament of the law on the rights and freedoms of
internally displaced persons on 20 October.

Ahead of the elections scheduled for this weekend,
we would like to reiterate that an inclusive political
process, based on dialogue, is essential to a stable and
democratic future for all the Ukrainian people. To that
end, we welcome the ongoing steps by the Ukrainian
Government to implement the provisions of the Minsk
protocol, in particular those relating to the ceasefire,
the release of all prisoners, the withdrawal of armed
groups and the disarmament of those groups.

Finally, along with the repeated call to urgently
ensure full respect for the rule of law, democracy
and human rights in Ukraine, including the rights
of all minorities, we also reiterate our support for
the work of the human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine, together with the monitoring mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

