Mr. Henry Alfredo Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates that
full compliance with international law - as expressed
in the principles of non-intervention; respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of States; and the peaceful settlement of
disputes - is fundamental to maintaining international
peace and security. While advocating a peaceful solution
of the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we support the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace because we believe that it is the outcome of
a political consensus among the parties involved. We
therefore encourage the High Representative to work
impartially, transparently and constructively so as to
ensure a balanced and prudent approach in which the
opinions and views of the stakeholders are reflected.

We believe that the international community must
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
implementation of the Peace Agreement, and to that
end we call for a guarantee of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
primary responsibility for the full implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement lies with the Government
and the people of that country, an obligation that must
be exercised in full sovereignty, with the support of the
international community.

We welcome the fact that the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable until 21 April.
We note with regret the terrorist attack on a police
station in the city of Zvornik in Republika Srpska in
late April, which has given rise to fresh political and
social tensions.

The European Union military mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has carried out its work under the
mandate assigned to it, in cooperation with the national
authorities, so as to provide a safe environment for
citizens of all ethnic groups in that country.

We express our solidarity with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and our support for its firm commitment
to peace and stability for the benefit of its citizens.
To that end, we welcome the policies adopted by the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to prevent the
recruitment of its nationals by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front to participate as
foreign terrorist fighters in the armed conflicts in Syria
and Iraq.

On the political front, we welcome the formation of
the new Government following the elections of October
2014, which is an encouraging sign for the new leaders,
who must now continue to work to tackle the country's
main challenges. We call on all parties to redouble their
efforts with renewed political resolve and courage so
as to promote trust and joint work in the framework of
international law, which are necessary components of a
political, just and lasting solution in the interests of the
parties and the entire region.

