Mr. Schwaiger: Let me first thank Under-
Secretary-General Amos for her first presentation to
the Security Council. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and Yves
Daccord, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their participation in
the debate today.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement. In the
interest of time, I will deliver an abridged version of
our statement.

Like other speakers today, we are alarmed that
civilians continue to account for the majority of
casualties in conflict and by the historically high
numbers of displaced persons. As a key humanitarian
donor worldwide, the European Union (EU) is deeply
concerned by the frequency and gravity of attacks
against humanitarian personnel, as well as by problems
of safe and timely humanitarian access, particularly for
vulnerable groups.

We share the concern about the humanitarian
impact of explosive weapons, particularly when used in
densely populated areas, and we note the growing
recognition of the indiscriminate harm they can cause.
The suffering of hundreds of thousands of civilians in
the midst of conflict requires our rigorous attention,
strengthened resolve and decisive action.

The European Union commends the work
conducted within the United Nations on the protection
of civilians and the increased attention paid by the
Security Council to those issues. Resolution 1894
(2009) of last November has been rightly hailed as a
landmark development. We also wish to recall
important resolutions related to women and peace and
security and to children in armed conflict, and the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

The European Union fully supports the Secretary-
General's call to address protection-of-civilians
situations in a comprehensive way, to undertake further
action to address the five core challenges, and to
improve the coherence and mainstreaming of
protection. We support the systematic use of practical
tools, such as the aide-memoire of 2002, which has
now been updated. We commend the work of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians.

Like many speakers today, we believe that the
systematic monitoring of and reporting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is highly
important and that indicators could play a very useful
role in that regard. We also support the use of clear
benchmarks for peacekeeping missions, in particular
when it comes to their drawdown.

The European Union is grateful for the strong call
to improve accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in situations of
armed conflict, including for the deliberate targeting of
civilians and their use as human shields, indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks, and delays or denials of
humanitarian access. Together with targeted measures,
accountability would help to improve compliance.

We encourage the Council to further explore the
Secretary-General's recommendations, including
referrals to the International Criminal Court, support to
national-level investigation and prosecution, and
increased use of commissions of inquiry or fact-finding
missions. We believe that such measures would also
help to contribute to prevention, which has recently
also been debated in the context of the responsibility to
protect.

Moreover, we welcome the initiative of the
current Security Council presidency to invite Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for a horizon-scanning
briefing at the beginning of the month. We encourage
incoming presidencies to do likewise.

Obviously, United Nations peacekeeping and
other operations have a significant impact on
enhancing protection on the ground. In view of that,
the comprehensive contribution on the protection of
civilians by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in its 2010 session was a significant
achievement. We welcome the development of
designated protection-of-civilians strategies by certain
United Nations peacekeeping missions and encourage
the engagement by senior mission leadership with
protection issues. We look forward to a more consistent
and systemic consideration of such issues in reports of
the Secretary-General as guidelines are under
development.

We also welcome the fact that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) carries work
forward on a strategic framework for mission-wide
protection and training modules, as well as for an
assessment of resources and capabilities, which will
help to improve the situation of civilians in armed
conflict and to develop a culture of protection.

Lastly, I would like to mention that the European
Union has reviewed its own guidelines in this area. On
25 October, EU Foreign Ministers adopted revised
guidelines on the protection of civilians in EU
Common Security and Defence Policy missions and
operations. They were developed in consultation with
the United Nations, notably, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO, as
well as the International Committee of the Red Cross.
The document provides practical guidance for
planning, conduct and subsequent lessons-learned
processes of our missions. In the future as well the
European Union will cooperate closely with the United
Nations and other relevant organizations.

