Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Australia, as President of the
Security Council, for organizing this timely and
important debate today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Chairs of the two
Committees for their insightful briefings. Slovenia is
fully aware of the severity of the threat that terrorism
and violent extremism pose to the global community,
and in that context we are grateful for their dedication
in tackling this complex threat in a comprehensive and
inclusive manner.

Allow me to note that Slovenia aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier today by the observer of the
European Union (EU).

Slovenia has already adopted the necessary
normative and operational measures and has
implemented relevant best practices in the area of
preventing and countering terrorism. Together with
some EU actors, we are now also seeking the best
possible way to strengthen the judicial response
to terrorism, and are trying to explore additional
measures needed to support the implementation of
the recently adopted resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014). Furthermore, we believe that the current need
to effectively tackle the rapidly expanding phenomenon
may also provide a new momentum for exploring ways
to find a compromise on the comprehensive convention
on international terrorism.

To effectively counter violent extremism, we have
to work with a broad range of partners in order to gain
a better understanding of the behaviours, tactics and
other indicators that could point to potential terrorist
activity and the best ways to mitigate or prevent that
activity. At the same time, we must respect fundamental
rights, including the right to free speech and the right
to privacy. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, for instance, which promote extremist
ideologies, represent a threat to moderate Islamic
countries, and one of the most effective ways to combat
that extremist ideology is with counter-ideology. To
that end, the Slovenia-based Euro-Mediterranean
University is planning to establish a centre for Islamic,
Arab and Middle Eastern studies.

Slovenia is actively contributing to global efforts
in countering terrorism and violent extremism,
primarily within EU bodies and institutions and at
the regional level, and therefore advocates the prompt
conclusion of negotiations on the EU Passenger
Name Record Directive and improving control of the
external borders of the Schengen Area. We see further
possibilities for improving the quantity and quality
of criminal intelligence exchanged. Slovenia has, in
cooperation with nine other EU member States, also
put forward a non-paper regarding the EU initiative
on sharing best practices on national counter-terrorism
arrangements with the Western Balkans countries. As
part of that initiative, Slovenia has proposed to use
an integrative and complementary approach that will
reduce overlaps and duplications, streamline existing
and planned activities, and link them with identified
priorities, taking into account available funding. This
initiative was also one ofthe prime topics at last week's
ministerial meeting of the Salzburg Forum, which
Slovenia is currently chairing.

Mr. Quinlan took the Chair.

As one of the concrete activities of the initiative,
in October Slovenia hosted a Western Balkans
counter-radicalization workshop co-organized by the
European Union and the United States. Furthermore,
we have been doing outreach to the region in the field
of policing since 2008, when the secretariat of the
Police Cooperation Convention for Southeast Europe
established its headquarters in Ljubljana, the capital
of Slovenia. At the operational level, Slovenia is a
promoter of a counter-terrorism initiative based on the
declaration of members of the initiative for international
police cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism.

We believe that a broader approach is required to
prevent and counter radicalization. These efforts must
engage the whole of society and the media, including the
Internet, and should not be focused merely to prohibiting
or removing illegal Internet content. Positive and
carefully focused messages need to be spread widely
enough to offer vulnerable users an easily accessible
alternative to terrorist or violent extremist propaganda.
Those efforts should also include cooperation with the
experts from the relevant industries.

In the context of voluntary and self-regulatory
measures, we should consider creating tools for
Internet users to anonymously report Web content
related to radicalization, violent extremism and
terrorism. In Slovenia, we have already established
a so-called hotline Web eye, which enables Internet
users to anonymously report hate speech and child
sexual abuse images. The main goal is to reduce the
amount of such content, in cooperation with police,
Internet service providers and other governmental
and non-governmental organizations. We believe that
similar strategies could also aid in detecting content on
radicalization and recruitment.

