Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to reiterate
our gratitude and support for Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas and his entire team for their good offices and
ongoing efforts to bring about lasting peace in West
Africa and the Sahel. We would also like to thank him
for his briefing on the situation in the region, based on
the comprehensive and detailed report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2018/649).

It has been exactly six months since we addressed
the situation in the region of West Africa and the Sahel
for the first time as non-permanent members of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8156). It is with great regret
that we note that the peace and security landscape
remains bleak, owing primarily to instability and the
increase in the number of terrorist threats and attacks
in the region, which fuel criminal activities and
transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in
human beings. Such activities are a source of serious
concern and pose a threat to economic, social and
political stability in the Gulf of Guinea region, and this
to Equatorial Guinea.

Threats from groups such as Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad basin - which, incidentally, just attacked
and occupied a military base at the northern tip of
Nigeria near Lake Chad - and the growing number of
security challenges faced by Mali and its neighbouring
countries must not be viewed as isolated threats or
problems of concern only to areas directly affected;
they must be addressed holistically as a threat to the
entire African continent. That is why it is essential
that national parties and international partners pool
their efforts and generate synergies in the quest for a
lasting solution. It should be recalled that the violence
of the terrorist group Boko Haram has unleashed an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis in the area that has
resulted in millions of forced internal displacements
and caused many to leave their homes. The crisis has
led to an increase in the number of people who are
severely food insecure and deserves the full attention
of the Security Council.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to a
situation that is also of concern to my Government.
The violent clashes between nomadic pastoralists in
northern Nigeria and sedentary farming communities
in central and southern Nigeria have intensified in
recent years and are spreading southwards, threatening
the security and stability of the country. Such clashes
are becoming as dangerous as the Boko Haram
insurgency itself in north-eastern Nigeria. Equatorial
Guinea therefore urges Nigeria's central Government
and local Governments in the areas affected to work
together to take immediate steps to bolster the security
of pastoralists and farmers, enhance mediation,
conflict resolution, reconciliation and peacebuilding
mechanisms, and initiate long-term efforts to reform
livestock management practices.

The political tensions that various countries of
the region are experiencing, in some cases as a result
of internal disagreements or electoral disputes, must
always be addressed by prioritizing a peaceful solution
through inclusive, constructive and objective dialogue
between the warring parties, and, if necessary, with
the mediation of international institutions. \

The Council must also reiterate its full support for
the communique issued at the ministerial meeting of
the African Union Peace and Security Council on the
situation in Mali and the Sahel, held on 27 June. The
communique highlighted the following, inter alia: first,
the importance of achieving an early resolution to the
crisis in Mali through efforts to ensure lasting peace
and security in the Sahel; secondly, the importance of
seeking a lasting solution to the long-standing Libyan
crisis as a key element in responding to the situation in
the Sahelo-Saharan region; and thirdly, its appreciation
for the initiatives of the international community, in
particular the regional economic communities, the
United Nations, the European Union and other bilateral
and multilateral partners, and their sustained efforts to
promote peace, security and development in the Sahel.

Moreover, my country welcomes the collegial
efforts of the entire United Nations system to
recalibrate the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and further advance its implementation
with a more integrated and cross-cutting cross-pillar
approach. Such efforts will undoubtedly help marshal
additional resources for the Sahel and ensure that
the assistance of the international community is well
coordinated and that it complements and supports the
countries of the Sahel.

In conclusion, I should like to welcome and
congratulate Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw of Mauritania on
his appointment as Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General for the Sahel. Equatorial Guinea highly
appreciates his efforts in drafting the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel, whose main objective is to
change narratives in the Sahel and mobilize additional
resources and support for the immediate and long-term
needs of the region, in line with the United Nations-
African Union Framework for Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In that regard, we strongly call on the
international community, the United Nations and all
private economic actors to become fully involved and
respond by investing in the Sahel.

