Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): As this is the first time
that my delegation has taken the floor in the Security
Council this month, we would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency for
the present month and by thanking you for calling this
meeting on the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia.

We would also like to thank the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judge Erik Mose, and Prosecutor Hassan Jallow for
their statements and their report (S/2005/336, enclosure) which outlines the completion strategy of
the ICTR based on the most current information. We
commend the President, the Prosecutor and the
Registrar of the Tribunal for their work over the past
six months and for their efforts to ensure the successful
completion of the Tribunal's work by 2008.

Rwanda remains hopeful that the Tribunal will
deliver justice to those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the 1994 genocide. We pledge our
continued support to ensure that the Tribunal's work
runs as smoothly as possible.

According to the report before the Council, the
trials of 25 persons have been completed, while the
cases of a further 25 are in progress and 16 are
awaiting trial, of whom five have been identified for
transfer to national courts. A further 14 indicted
persons are still at large, four of whom the Prosecutor
intends to transfer to national courts. Eight other cases
have been investigated and submitted for confirmation,
four of which will be transferred to national
jurisdictions for trial. On the basis of that information,
the Tribunal expects to have completed trials involving
65 to 70 persons by 2008.

Rwanda is the country in which those horrific
crimes were committed. It is in Rwanda that more than
one million of our people needlessly lost their lives at
the hands of those genocidal killers. It is in Rwanda
that more than half a million children were orphaned
by those tragic events. It is in Rwanda that thousands
of women were widowed and thousands more were
repeatedly gang-raped and subsequently contracted
HIV/AIDS. It is in Rwanda where the desire for justice
is most acutely felt and therefore where the success of
the Tribunal's work will ultimately be judged.

While we welcome the assessment of the
expected output of the Tribunal by 2008, we regretfully
recall that a few years ago the Tribunal had targeted for
trial as many as 300 suspects who bear the greatest
responsibility for the genocide. That figure was revised
downwards over the years, until today we are talking
of only 65 to 70 individuals - less than one quarter of
the original figure.

It is our assessment that while the number of
persons targeted for prosecution has gone down,
serious accusations remain against some of the
suspects who are no longer being considered for
prosecution. Of those still targeted for prosecution,
many remain at large and are being provided a safe
haven from international justice by States Members of
the Organization. We appeal to the Prosecutor to
enforce the relevant provisions of the Tribunal's
Statute to ensure that all States cooperate and hand
over those fugitives.

My Government appeals to the Council to
seriously consider this matter with a view to ensuring
that no suspect evades justice. As we said at this time
last year, the Tribunal's completion strategy should not
be viewed as the international community's exit
strategy with respect to its obligation to bring all
suspects of the crime of genocide to trial at the ICTR,
in Rwanda or elsewhere. The serious nature of the
crime of genocide requires us to ensure that there is no
impunity.

As the Tribunal works towards the completion of
its work, we should ask ourselves what impact it has
had on justice and reconciliation in Rwanda - the
principal reasons for which it was established in the
first place. We believe that the impact of the Tribunal
on those processes in Rwanda has been constrained
because of the geographical distance between Arusha
and Rwanda and because of the management and
ethical problems that plagued the Tribunal in its early
life. It would be most unfortunate for the Tribunal to
complete its work without impacting Rwandans as was
envisaged when the Tribunal was established.

Since the establishment of the Tribunal in 1994,
my Government has strongly advocated the transfer of
some cases for trial in Rwanda. It is a widely accepted
principle that trials should always take place as close
as possible to where the crimes were committed. The
crimes presently before the ICTR were committed in
Rwanda. It is my Government's belief that trials,
especially those targeted for transfer, should all take
place in Rwanda. That would address the problem of
the impact of the ICTR on Rwanda and advance the
cause of justice, while also combating impunity, as not
only will justice be done but it will be seen to be done
by Rwandans in Rwanda. We also believe that the
transfer of trials will promote national reconciliation
and healing. It is in that context that the Rwandan
Government welcomed the transfer of 15 case files
from the ICTR to Rwanda.

On the two issues raised with respect to Rwanda's
capacity to handle such cases, first, on several
occasions we have informed the ICTR that a
moratorium on the death penalty has been in force
since 1998 and that, in any case, the Government
would be willing to enter into an agreement with the
Tribunal not to apply the death penalty in any of the
transferred cases. The necessary amendments to
existing laws to that effect are being carried out.

Secondly, on the question of the capacity of the
Rwandan judicial system to handle such cases, given
the large load of thousands of local cases, we wish to
bring the following points to the attention of the
Council.

First, the strain of cases on the ordinary courts
was lifted with the commencement of the gacaca
community trials earlier this year. The vast majority of
cases are expected to be tried by the gacaca community
courts and the appeals process within the gacaca

system. That has freed up the ordinary courts, which
will now be able to handle the cases transferred by the
Tribunal and the handful of cases that may be referred
back to it by the gacaca courts.

Secondly, since 1994 the Rwandan Government
has embarked on an intensive programme to build a
strong and respected judiciary. In the past 10 years, we
have trained several times the number of lawyers and
investigators that were trained in the three decades
preceding the genocide. With the assistance of a
number of friendly countries, we have transformed the
infrastructure, particularly courtrooms, and have
provided judges and prosecutors with the resources that
have made them more effective.

For those reasons, the Rwanda Government
believes that it has the capacity - and most important,
Rwanda has the will. We are willing to handle all the
cases transferred from the ICTR, and we hope that at
the appropriate time the Tribunal's Prosecutor will
make the decision to transfer all those cases to
Rwanda.

This is not to say that everything is perfect. It is a
process, and naturally we would welcome international
support to enable us to further enhance our capacity, in
the same way that the States of the former Yugoslavia
are being supported in this process. In the transition
from the international process to national judicial
processes, Rwanda also hopes to be facilitated in the
same way.

We also believe that it is critical that sentences be
served inside Rwanda. That is another point that the
Rwandan Government has advocated since 1994. Here
again, both common sense and natural justice require
that sentences be served where the crimes were
committed. That would also advance the cause of
justice, combat impunity and promote national
reconciliation.

In that context, we have welcomed talks with the
ICTR on that issue. We would like to remind the
Council that a new detention facility, which meets the
standards of the United Nations, was completed more
than a year ago and has been inspected by ICTR
officials. We call for the conclusion of the agreement
as soon as possible so that the sentences can be
administered in Rwanda in the very near future.

In closing, we would like to put on record our
appreciation of the continued improvement in the
performance of the Tribunal, including specific
measures being adopted for enhancing witness
protection. We believe that improvement is the result
of reinforced mechanisms of communication between
ICTR officials and the Rwandan Government.

