Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Ukraine for
presenting us with a working document that challenges
us to evaluate our performance in meeting the
objectives which our heads of State and Government
set for us at the Security Council summit on 7
September 2000. This review by the Council, and
having non-members of the Council express their
views in this open debate, cannot but help the Council
in fulfilling its mandate and broaden the support of the
wider membership for its actions.

Mr. President, you posed a number of questions
related to the declaration adopted in resolution 1318
(2000), the answers to which can serve as a measure of
our commitment to implement the decisions taken.
While it is not possible to give detailed answers to each
of the questions in the time allowed, my delegation
wishes to take this opportunity to highlight briefly
those areas in which the Council's record since the
summit demonstrates the will or lack thereof to be
responsive to resolution 1318 (2000).

The time that has elapsed since the summit has
been an extremely busy period for the Security
Council. We have continued to be challenged by a
number of conflicts and other issues which threaten
international peace and security, as well as the social,
political and economic well-being of the global
community. The humanitarian situation in many
countries has been exacerbated by armed conflicts and
natural disasters. We have seen an increase in the
number of refugees and internally displaced persons,
which strains the ability of the international community
to relieve the suffering of a vast majority of those
affected. Women and children have borne the brunt of
these humanitarian disasters, and the needs have far
exceeded available resources. The international
community has been seeking ways to meet the
challenge of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which the
Security Council has determined to be a serious threat
to international peace and security.

The Security Council's declaration affirmed its
determination to give equal priority to the maintenance
of peace and security in every region of the world and
made a commitment to "ensuring an effective role for
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, particularly in
Africa". (resolution 1318 (2000))

In the course of the Security Council's summit
debate, Jamaica's Prime Minister, The Right
Honourable P. J. Patterson, advanced Jamaica's
position on the key issues of Security Council reform;
the role of the United Nations in protecting the most
vulnerable - refugees and internally displaced
persons; the need to generate the requisite international
political will to act against gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian laws; the
requirement that the Security Council take action to
make its actions more effective, particularly in the
design and implementation of sanctions; the role of the
United Nations in the illicit traffic in small arms;
conflict prevention as paramount in the maintenance of
international peace and security; and the indispensable
role of regional and subregional organizations in peace-
building efforts.
Important steps have been taken by the Council to
address many of these issues, but these must be
followed by further concrete action. Some of the
actions taken clearly demonstrate the Council's
recognition of some of its weaknesses and give
evidence of its efforts aimed at achieving better results
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

First, the Council undertook a comprehensive
review of the recommendations of the Brahimi report
on United Nations peace operations, which resulted in
the adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November
2000, setting out a doctrine for United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The Council was unanimous
in recognizing the need to improve the way
peacekeeping operations are designed and implemented
and the need to engage all the relevant actors in a
meaningful way for successful peacekeeping. Some of
these recommendations have been implemented, but
while resolution 1327 (2000) established a doctrine on
peacekeeping operations, the Council must now
establish the modalities and mechanisms to implement
institutional changes.

Second, the Council followed up with an
examination of the need to explore exit strategies when
considering the establishment of peacekeeping
operations. Jamaica supported the conclusions that the
Council must seek to ensure that peace agreements
which require United Nations involvement in
peacekeeping provide for a clear political objective;
that they meet minimum conditions for United Nations
peacekeeping operations; and that such agreements
incorporate practical, designated tasks and time-lines
for implementation, and criteria for final
disengagement. The Council pledged to scrupulously
seek to avoid a repeat of past mistakes by defining its
exit strategies in the future. Only time will tell whether
or not we can fulfil this undertaking.

Third, in January of this year the Council took a
pragmatic approach to engaging troop-contributing
countries in an examination of the relationship between
them, the Secretariat and the Council itself. Troop-
contributing countries and other members of the United
Nations community were given an opportunity to share
their views with the Council on ways to improve that
relationship and in so doing improve the possibility of
success in peacekeeping operations. This was in
keeping with the doctrine established in resolution
1327 (2000). The troop-contributing countries provided
the Council with a number of important
recommendations aimed at enhancing peacekeeping
operations and involving the troop-contributing
countries in a collaborative effort. As a result of these
discussions, and of the determination to find ways to
enhance its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, on 31 January this year the Council
established a Working Group on peacekeeping
operations, which is now examining as a matter of
priority the recommendations offered by troop-
contributing countries.

Fourth, in an open debate that included
participation by the wider United Nations membership,
the Council examined the importance of pre- and post-
conflict peace-building measures in preventing
conflicts from occurring in the first place and from
recurring once a peaceful settlement has been achieved.
In this context, peace-building was recognized as an
important tool in the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development. While this is true for every
region of the world, and has been an integral element
of the peace processes in the Balkans and in East
Timor, the Council recognized that this approach must
be inherent in all peace operations. The Security
Council invited participation by other organs of the
United Nations, the international financial community,
regional and subregional organizations and other key
participants in peace-building in examining specific
cases such as Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic. The Council recognized peace-building as an
important and indispensable conflict-prevention tool. It
also recognized that the involvement of regional
organizations is key to finding and bringing lasting
solutions to these conflict situations.

Fifth, the Council has been fully engrossed in
seeking solutions to specific conflicts, particularly in
Africa, with the conflicts in Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo being given high
priority on its agenda. Others have referred to the
meetings held with representatives of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Political
Committee of the Lusaka peace process, and to the
pledge of cooperation and collaboration made by the
Council in seeking to bring lasting peace to those
regions. Working with those subregional groups, the
Council has sought to advance the peace process in
these areas, and there are now visible signs of progress.
It is imperative that the Council remain fully engaged
in these issues. Other conflicts, such as the war
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, are reaching desired
resolutions.

The one area in which it has been difficult to act
is that of the protection of civilians affected by
conflict. One case in point is the current situation in the
Guinea-Sierra Leone-Liberia region of West Africa,
where the lives of thousands of civilians are at risk.
Tomorrow, the Council will discuss with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees just what the
international community can do to help those who look
to us for assistance. I wish to thank those Members
States in Africa and elsewhere that have, at great
economic and social cost, provided safe haven to large
numbers of refugees. Unfortunately, we have to urge
them to continue to do so.

Sixth, the debate on the subject of women and
peace and security sharpened our focus on the
important role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflict and in peace-building. We
recognized the importance of women's equal
participation and of their full involvement in all efforts
for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security. The Council urged the Secretariat to
incorporate a gender perspective in peacekeeping
operations and to expand the role and contribution of
women in United Nations field-based operations,
especially among military observers, civilian police
and human rights and humanitarian personnel. As we
look towards tomorrow's observance of International
Women's Day, we look for further action by the
Security Council on these issues.

Seventh, the Security Council has been
undertaking a critical evaluation of the general issues
related to sanctions, and a number of areas in which
consensus has already been achieved have been
reflected in the recently adopted sanctions regimes.
This is one area in which the full support of the entire
membership is crucial for effective implementation.

Later this year, the Security Council and the
General Assembly will have an opportunity to receive
and to act upon the Secretary-General's report on
conflict prevention, which the Council requested in
July 2000. The Secretary-General's report will afford
us the opportunity to give due consideration to the role
of conflict prevention in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and will also allow us
the opportunity to examine the negative effects of
conflicts on the economic, social and political
developments in Africa and elsewhere. It will allow us
the opportunity to institutionalize conflict-prevention
measures, which will enhance sustainable economic
growth and sustainable development. My delegation
believes that this opportunity should not be lost on the
members of the United Nations. We look forward to
support for a proactive approach to conflict prevention
as an important tool in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to thank you
again for organizing this debate. Our heads of State and
Government have entrusted the Council with a major
responsibility. It is up to us to deliver the results.

