Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to welcome Mr. Boris Tadic',
President of the Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Skender
Hyseni, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. I thank
them for their important contributions, and
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
What emerges from all that we have heard this
morning, and especially from the report of the
Secretary-General, is that the overall situation a year
after the independence of Kosovo has remained stable
at the political as well as the security levels, although a
number of minor incidents persist, in particular in the
northern part of the territory.

We welcome the efforts of the Kosovo authorities
in the field of nation-building, as well as the
determination they have shown to build a stable
Kosovo that is fully integrated in the European Union.
As noted, the issue of the status of Kosovo remains at
the heart of those problems, and unfortunately there
has been no sign of compromise, as demonstrated by
the fierce opposition to the setting up of the
International Civilian Office, as provided for by the
comprehensive proposal for resolving the issue.

With regard to that fundamental problem,
Belgrade and Pristina must continue the political
dialogue to arrive at a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution. We also urge the two communities
involved to facilitate in good faith the integration
process under way, and we encourage the United
Nations to further develop activities aimed at freedom
of movement and the intermingling of communities.
We should also further encourage and develop
opportunities for cooperation at the regional level in
the fields of culture and education in order to promote
long-term reconciliation between peoples and
hopefully rebuild the region on the basis of common
European values.

We welcome the progress achieved in the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
thank it and all its partners for their efforts despite the
difficulties faced, and we remain convinced that it will
continue to spare no effort to contribute to the
prosperity of Kosovo in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999).

We also welcome UNMIK's efforts to ensure that
Kosovo participates in international and regional
economic initiatives, inter alia, regional transport
meetings, activities in the framework of the Regional
Cooperation Council, and the administration of
customs services. We welcome the progressive
assumption by the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo of operational functions in the field of the rule
of law, particularly with the assent of Pristina and
Belgrade.

We have already stated and would like to reiterate
here that the establishment of dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina remains of fundamental
importance. That is why we welcome initiatives to
follow up the provisions of the report of the Secretary-
General of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692), which
have consisted of maintaining ongoing contacts at the
highest political level with the authorities in Belgrade
and Pristina. We also welcome the appointment of a
Coordinator and the creation of a team tasked with
considering technical aspects of issues with both sides.
We hope that all of these initiatives will lead to
consensus solutions.

Finally, I should like to voice our hope of seeing
Kosovo become a safe place for all of its inhabitants,
where the norms of democracy, rule of law, protection
of human rights, protection of minority rights, as well
as good governance, are fully implemented. To that
end, I congratulate and encourage all actors working in
the field for the stability of Kosovo.

