Mr. Martin: Although it was only a week ago
today that I briefed the Council on the situation in
Libya, it is a privilege to do so again in the presence of
the Prime Minister of Libya, Mr. Abdurrahim El-Keib.
I do not need to repeat aspects of my last briefing,
since the Council has the Prime Minister to inform it of
the latest developments and their context, although I
will of course be pleased to update my own assessment
in informal consultations.

I will open by referring to just one sad event of
the past week. On 3 March, an international colleague
from the non-governmental organization Danish
Church Aid, an implementing partner of the United
2

Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), was killed
while carrying out mine clearance operations near
Daphnia. This tragic incident demonstrates the hazards
that will still be faced by the Libyan people for a long
time to come, as well as the courage of the mine action
teams that are working diligently to reduce this
contamination.

Since the Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
on 2 December last year for an additional three
months, UNSMIL has engaged in a comprehensive
planning process, following the integrated mission
planning guidelines that include consultations across
the United Nations system and with the Libyan
authorities, civil society organizations and international
partners. The results of this process are outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General that is now before the
Council (see S/2012/129). The planning process and
the consultations with Libyan interlocutors reaffirmed
the continuing relevance of UNSMIL's mandate, as set
out in resolutions 2009 (2011) and 2022 (2011), but it
has also helped to define the areas in which we need to
engage more deeply in the coming 12 months.

From the outset, we have pursued a phased
approach and have not sought to apply any template.
This has helped us to explore in Libya and with
Libyans what the United Nations should do and how
we should do it. I believe that we are thus now well
able to recommend a mission concept tailored to the
needs of Libya and to its uniqueness. I have
highlighted this uniqueness in previous briefings.
Libya is a country rich in resources and does not need
traditional donor support. It is a country with skilled
personnel ready to lead their nation in many fields.

But 42 years of dictatorship and long periods of
international isolation have left Libya weak in the
institutions of a modern, democratic State. The people
of Libya now look forward to free elections, a
democratic constitution, transparency, accountability,
and the rule of law, including security forces subject to
civilian control and protecting the people, not a regime.
They are determined to maintain national ownership of
their future, but they are hungry to learn of
international experience and best practices. The role of
the United Nations must be to support their efforts,
where and when needed, in a flexible manner that does
not impose a heavy international presence.
12-25357
The Secretary-General's report proposes that in
the coming 12 months, UNSMIL should focus on five
areas: the democratic transition and electoral
processes; public security; arms proliferation and
border security; human rights, transitional justice and
the rule of law; and coordination of international
assistance. Those proposals are fully consistent with
the request of the transitional Government of Libya, as
set out in the letter to the Secretary-General from
Prime Minister El-Keib.

Our support to Libya's democratic transition
would focus primarily on the organization of the June
2012 elections for a national congress and the
subsequent constitutional process, which is to
culminate in a referendum. This will require sustained
and predictable support from UNSMIL's integrated
electoral section, with the participation of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
United Nations Office for Project Services, not only in
technical areas, but also in order to ensure civic
awareness and informed participation in the elections.
This support began already in 2011, and it must not
only be continued but increased as we get closer to the
elections.

UNSMIL's support would then be extended to
Libya's subsequent electoral and constitutional
milestones. The electoral staff thus needs to constitute
the largest component of UNSMIL for the next 12
months. At the same time, UNSMIL would provide
support to reconciliation efforts at the national and
local levels, when requested.

As regards public security, UNSMIL would
support Libyan efforts to develop an effective and
accountable security sector that respects human rights,
upholds the rule of law and has the confidence of
Libya's people. To this end, the Mission's role would
include the provision of strategic and technical advice
to national stakeholders on security sector-wide issues,
including those pertaining to the integration or
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, the
control of weapons, and civilian oversight and
management.

One of the critical tasks over the year ahead will
be to establish an accountable and professional police
service throughout the country that performs a range of
policing functions in accordance with human rights
principles and that enhances the confidence of the
Libyan people in the State's ability to provide security
12-25357

and justice. To that end, by deploying a range of
specialists and police experts, UNSMIL would provide
strategic and technical advisory services to the
Ministry of the Interior on issues of oversight and
management, command and control, strategic and
operational planning, training, the integration of
ex-combatants into the police, and elections security.

Stability within Libya and the region also hinges
on the ability of the Libyan authorities to account for
and control the large quantities of arms, including
heavy weaponry, man-portable air defence systems and
related materiel, and to address the threat of arms
trafficking and proliferation through close
collaboration with neighbouring countries, as well as
the relevant regional and international institutions and
mechanisms. UNSMIL would therefore continue to
support them in their efforts to counter arms
proliferation. In this regard, the Mission would
continue to facilitate the engagement of international
bodies, such as the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the International Atomic
Energy Agency. UNSMIL's work against arms
proliferation would be implemented through an
integrated United Nations structure, leveraging
expertise in UNMAS, UNICEF and UNDP.

Preventing arms proliferation is of course closely
linked to the security of Libya's borders, but the issue
of border management cannot be reduced to this aspect
alone. Working with the European Union in particular,
UNSMIL would therefore support the implementation
of a comprehensive border management approach that
would involve several ministries and require
cooperation with neighbouring countries. Since the
Council gave UNSMIL a specific mandate to undertake
this work, a senior adviser has spearheaded our efforts,
and it would be important to intensify cooperation with
Libya's neighbours, which the Government is seeking
to promote through the regional security conference it
will convene in Tripoli next week.

As outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General, moving from the 42 years of human rights
violations in Libya to the full protection of human
rights will be a major indicator of success of the
democratic transition. Recent events and reports have
demonstrated that this is a task that requires strong
support and constant vigilance. UNSMIL therefore
plans to give high priority to supporting the Libyan
authorities and civil society in ensuring that the
transition, including the transitional justice process, is
anchored in solid rule of law systems, institutions and
practices, and in respect for human rights.

This support would be provided by an enhanced
component of the Mission, as well as through the
mobilization of specialized expertise. It would include
building the capacity of the Libyan institutions in the
judicial and corrections system, with UNSMIL
addressing the most immediate issues in partnership
with longer-term capacity development through UNDP
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
Our plans are fully consistent with the specific
recommendations for the role of UNSMIL made in the
report of the International Commission of Inquiry on
Libya (A/HRC/19/68), with which we have had a
continuing dialogue in the course of its important
work.

Finally, the past months have demonstrated the
need for the coordination of international assistance to
Libya in all those and other areas. While I have
reiterated the uniqueness of the Libyan context, as in
other transitional contexts, multiple offers - and
especially multiple visits - can present significant
transaction costs for national authorities. The Libyan
Government is under acute pressure to meet urgent
priorities. In all of its mandate areas, UNSMIL would
continue to support Libyan efforts to coordinate
international engagement with a view to ensuring that
offers of assistance are focused on Libyan-defined
needs and implemented with minimum demands upon
Libya's already stretched capabilities. Where
appropriate and as the Government requests, UNSMIL
would facilitate the development of partnerships
between Libya and international actors, including in
areas where the United Nations lacks the mandate or
the comparative advantage to respond directly to
Libyan needs. The imminent establishment of
representation in Libya of the African Union and the
League of Arab States will be helpful in drawing upon
regional expertise.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize two
points that cut across all the proposed future activities
of UNSMIL. First, it is important that the involvement
of women in the revolution translate into fuller
participation in the democratic transition. UNSMIL
would have a dedicated capacity to support women's
empowerment in all areas of the mandate. Secondly,
one must remember that the Libyan revolution, like all
the movements of the Arab Spring, was the expression
of the aspirations to change of the youth of the country.

The young people of Libya expect to be fully involved
in the transition, and this would be a constant concern
of our efforts over the next 12 months.

In delivering this proposed mandate, UNSMIL
would maintain a light footprint, aiming to provide
flexible, responsive and high-quality expertise to
support the democratic transition and help the Libyan
authorities to navigate the challenges associated with
it. We recommend that this support be provided in the
form of a structurally integrated mission to maximize
the impact of the entire United Nations system.

The proposed structure of UNSMIL would be
based on a relatively small, high-level core staff, who
would have advisory and coordination roles in their
respective areas and would be able to mobilize
additional support when needed. The additional
expertise mobilized throughout the year would come
from several sources, including Member States,
regional and other organizations, and of course the
United Nations country team. However, it would also
be important for UNSMIL to have its own capacity to
meet short notice requests for deployment. It is our
intention to build on the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (8/2011/527) to design new and
more flexible ways to mobilize civilian expertise in
support of the Libyans. Maintaining a capacity to
respond to emerging needs is a key part of our mission
concept.

The year ahead will be one of the most important
in Libyan's history. The first time I addressed the
Council as the Secretary-General's Special Adviser to
coordinate post-conflict planning for Libya, last June, I
said that it was clear that, despite Libya's financial and
human resources, the post-conflict challenges would be
substantial after decades in which it had been a matter
of policy not to develop any of the institutions of a
democratic, accountable State; and that the legacy of
human rights violations and the absence of the rule of
law would be a heavy one.

The Council is about to hear from the first Prime
Minister who has assumed the responsibility of
addressing those challenges. It is a privilege for me and
my colleagues to work with those Libyans who have
committed themselves to building the future of their
country, and I ask for the support of the Council in
agreeing to the Government of Libya's request and the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate
of UNSMIL be extended for 12 months in the manner
set out in the report.

