At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian presidency of the Security Council this month. I appreciate your efforts to lead the Council's work in the light of the many challenges facing the international community, particularly the repercussions of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I am also grateful for the briefing given by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of | Arab States. The Palestinian question is one of the most prominent issues addressed by the United Nations in the 75 years since its establishment. The justness of that cause, however, has not enabled the Palestinian people to enjoy its legitimate rights, or the Middle East region to enjoy peace. It remains a central issue for all peoples of the region. Over the decades, there have been many developments in the Palestinian issue. A process was put in place with a view to finding a peaceful solution based on the internationally recognized resolutions. Numerous negotiations took place, agreements were signed and initiatives were taken. Yet the result that had been hoped for, namely, an independent State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, has not been achieved. The Arab States had hoped that the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, would have improved in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, which created new challenges for all States of the world, including the Palestinian people. Instead, it has deteriorated: Israel's actions have intensified since the outbreak of the pandemic. Everyone had hoped that the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire in all international crises would have been heeded so that peaceful solutions could be sought and the pandemic addressed. The Arab States have repeatedly stressed that there can be no path to peace in the Middle East without the Palestinian people exercising its legitimate right to an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Israeli practices that undermine the prospects for peace, particularly settlement construction, must come to an end. The occupation authorities have confiscated more land, displaced Palestinian citizens and demolished their homes, and announced plans to build more settlement units, including, most recently, a plan to build 5,000 new units. Israeli settlers have continued to violate the rights of the Palestinian people in the West Bank. Holy sites, particularly in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have been subjected to practices that undermine the status quo in the holy city. Unilateral measures will cause the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, to deteriorate further, and the prospects for peace to recede. They will also have a negative impact on the security and stability of the region as a whole, give succour to hard-line and extremist voices and undermine the prospects of an independent, contiguous and viable Palestinian State. The Group urges Israel to cancel any plan to definitively annex Palestinian territory in the West Bank, as such plans are a clear breach of international humanitarian law and the internationally recognized resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). The Group of Arab States stresses that it remains committed to its long- standing position that the Palestinian people has a legitimate right to an independent State on the borders of 4 July 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the internationally recognized resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle of land for peace on the basis of the two-State solution. The Group of Arab States will continue to work for peace, security and stability in the occupied Arab territory, including East Jerusalem, and across the Middle East region. The Group values the ongoing efforts of King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, Custodian of Islamic and Christian Holy Sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to achieve peace and preserve the historical and legal status quo in the holy sites, particularly the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The Group also appreciates the ongoing efforts of King Mohammed VI of Morocco, who chairs the Al-Quds Committee. The Group welcomes the fact that, on 30 March 2019 in Rabat, King Mohammed VI and Pope Francis signed the appeal for Jerusalem calling for Jerusalem to be a city of peace, fraternity, tolerance and coexistence among followers of the three monotheistic religions. Peace can be achieved in the Middle East only once the Palestinian people can fully exercise its legitimate and inalienable rights, the Israeli practices in the occupied territory come to an end and the blockade on the Gaza Strip is lifted, with a view to creating an environment conducive to negotiations on the basis of the internationally recognized resolutions and the agreed terms of reference. The Group appreciates all international efforts towards that goal, particularly those of the Quartet. We also cannot fail to commend the ongoing efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its new leadership to provide the necessary support for Palestine refugees and meet their financial burden, which has increased owing to the pandemic, not to mention the considerable work that has been done to develop the Agency's working methods. The Group is therefore grateful to all donor States and calls on them to continue providing multi-year funding so that UNRWA can continue to fully discharge its mandate to help Palestine refugees pending a just solution to the Palestinian question in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). The Group looks forward to the day when the Palestinian people can exercise its right to self-determination and an independent State with East Jerusalem as its capital. That outcome would bring an end to the decades-long suffering of the Palestinian people and enable the people of the region to enjoy security and peace.
