Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): By
adopting this draft resolution today, the Security Council
takes a clear stand against terrorism and those who support
it by providing safe haven to terrorists. The international
community's resolve to fight terrorism is clear. Criminal
acts of terrorism can never be justified. Terrorists must not
receive sanctuary anywhere, anytime.

We call on all Afghan factions, particularly the
Taliban, to abide by this and earlier resolutions and ensure
that all indicted terrorists on their soil are brought to
justice.

Afghanistan-based terrorism has become a plague.
Terrorists trained or based in Afghanistan have been
responsible for incidents in all corners of the globe. This
was brought home to us tragically by the bombing of our
embassies in Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam last August.

We have publicly condemned the killing of the Iranian
diplomatic staff at the Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif.
This criminal act must be investigated and the perpetrators
punished. We fully support an international investigation
into these deaths and once again remind all Afghan factions
of the special protected status of diplomats under
international law.

We join in the draft resolution's demand that the
Taliban immediately inform the United Nations of the
results of their investigation into the deaths of United
Nations workers in Kabul and Jalalabad.

Concerns about the safety of international and
humanitarian personnel hamstring programmes that seek
to relieve the suffering of the Afghan people and rebuild
the country. The Taliban must implement the necessary
safeguards for the return of United Nations and other
international personnel.

We are pleased that this draft resolution supports
human rights initiatives in Afghanistan, including an
investigation into reports of mass killings and the
stationing of human rights monitors throughout the
country.

Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is the foundation of a long-term solution
to the conflict. The Taliban in particular must respect the
rights of the Afghan people, especially women and girls,
as well as minorities.

We are particularly gratified that this draft resolution
recognizes and encourages the work of the group of "six
plus two". We believe that the "points of common
understanding" adopted at the group's first ministerial-
level meeting on 21 September constitute a solid basis for
resolving the conflict in Afghanistan. The points set clear
markers as to what the international community desires
from both the Afghan factions and Afghanistan's
neighbours.

Finally, the United States would once again like to
express its deep appreciation to Special Representative
Brahimi. Ambassador Brahimi has truly made an
outstanding effort to bring peace to Afghanistan. His
recent visit significantly reduced regional tensions,
advanced the cause of human rights and laid the
groundwork for the full resumption of aid activities in
Afghanistan.

