Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghanajoins previous speakers
in thanking the Equatorial Guinean presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
silencing the guns in Africa, a theme that underscores
the shared agenda of both the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations in building a peaceful, secure and
stable Africa. We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Mr. Vasu Gounden for their
briefings and useful insights into that important subject.

Ghana associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Benin on behalf of the Group of
African States.

The fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration
adopted by African Heads of State in May 2013 spelled
out the framework for achieving Africa's vision of an
integrated, stable, peaceful and prosperous continent.
The fourth aspiration of the African Union Agenda
2063, on silencing the guns, pledged to end all wars in
Africa by 2020, thereby reaffirming peace and security
as critical enablers for sustainable development and
socioeconomic transformation.

My delegation is pleased to note that the African
Union, through consistent and collaborative efforts
with the United Nations and in keeping with its Master
Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa by 2020, has made progress in ridding the
continent of a significant number of conflicts and in
the management of others. While we applaud those
achievements, we recognize that much more needs to
be done to put Africa firmly on the path to achieving
its targets in peace and security. Africa continues to
grapple with existential threats, including extreme
poverty, the debilitating effects of climate change,
violent extremism and the growing menace of terrorism,
the illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
transnational organized crime, poor governance,
inequality and marginalization, human rights violations
and poor justice institutions. Those must be tackled if
we are to consolidate the gains made so far.

The illicit manufacture and trade in small arms and
light weapons is, perhaps, one of the biggest threats to
peace and security in Africa. Addressing that challenge
will require commitment to multilateral instruments,
good practices, codes of conduct and standard operating
procedures on illicit small arms and light weapons.
We require new funding mechanisms and synergies in
the implementation of the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition;
the Arms Trade Treaty; and regional instruments, such
as the Economic Community of West African States
Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and Other Related Materials, in order
to effectively address the illicit transfer, diversion,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons and their ammunitions.

Strategic and operational partnerships between
the United Nations and the AU remain crucial to
dealing effectively with the multidimensional nature
of conflicts and threats to peace and security. In that
regard, we welcome the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, the Framework for Implementation
of Agenda 2063 and 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the joint declaration on cooperation
in peace support operations. The convening of annual
conferences, joint field visits by senior officials, regular
consultations and coordinated action are welcome and
must be further enhanced.

Ghana calls for support for the ongoing efforts
of the African Union and subregional organizations,
within the framework of the African Peace and
Security Architecture, to strengthen capacity for peace
support operations on the continent, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly the African Standby Force and its Rapid
Deployment Capability.

The lack of predictable, sustainable and flexible
financing for AU-led peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council remains a concern.
Adequate resourcing of the peacebuilding components
of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions is critical to the continuity
of peacebuilding activities and the sustenance of peace
in countries coming out of active conflict.

We wish to reaffirm the role of women in conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. The
impact of the African Women Leaders Network and
FemWise-Africa on those efforts is being increasingly
recognized and must be supported as one of the
concrete areas of collaboration andjoint action between
the United Nations and the African Union. The positive
contribution of youth in Africa to peace and security
must be given due currency in conflict prevention
and conflict resolution through capacity-building and
participation in peacebuilding.

The centrality of the rule of law, good governance
and functional democracy as a preventive tool and
in addressing the root causes of conflict cannot be
overemphasized. Ghana is of the firm belief that
measures to strengthen the rule of law, democracy and
good governance, building accountable institutions,
access to justice and respect for and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms should be at
the core of our efforts.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the commitment of
the Government of Ghana to peace and security within
its borders and to playing a key role in subregional,
regional and international efforts in mediation, the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding.
We see this as an important prerequisite for the
socioeconomic transformation of Africa and to enable
the continent to realize its potential and take its rightful
place in global affairs.

