Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to add its voice to those
of the speakers who preceded it in paying tribute to all
women on this day that is dedicated to them. The fight
for the full recognition of their rights is appropriate and
valid.

Regarding the topic that brings us together, my
delegation would like to commend the briefers on the
quality of their briefings, namely, Mr. David Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), and Ms. Angelina Nyajima
Simon Jial, Founder and Executive Director of Hope
Restoration South Sudan. Their briefings call for
comments on the peace process, the security situation,
the humanitarian issue and, finally, the implementation
of the UNMISS mandate.

With regard to the peace process, my country once
again welcomes the signing, on 12 September 2018,
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and commends
the signatory parties for the measures taken to establish
and strengthen trust. Cote d'Ivoire urges them to make
a firm commitment to the success of the political
process.

This is an appropriate time to welcome the holding,
during the current pre-transition phase, of the various
meetings of the peace agreement's implementation
organs, which were attended by several opposition
leaders. However, three months into the transitional
period, my country notes with concern the delays in
achieving several important goals planned for the
pre-transition phase.

My country therefore calls on stakeholders to
proceed expeditiously with the substantive issues
related to the implementation of the relevant provisions
of the agreement - the inclusion of the provisions
of the agreement in the Transitional Constitution,
the establishment of the Independent Boundaries
Commission, the formation of a transitional
Government and the establishment of transitional
security arrangements, as well as defence and security
sector reform.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire would like to acknowledge
the efforts of Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for South
Sudan, to reach out to the non-signatory parties to the
peace agreement with respect to their participation in
the process. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the aspiration of the South Sudan United Front/Army
to participate in the peace process and encourages the
signatory parties and the Government of South Sudan
to respond favourably to that request and to all other
similar requests.

With regard to the security situation, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the decline in the level of violence and the
overall respect for the cessation ofhostilities agreement.
However, my country notes with regret the resurgence
of crime, community clashes and conflict-related sexual
violence. My delegation strongly condemns those acts,
which are encouraged by the presence of militias,
widespread impunity and the absence of transitional
security arrangements. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls for
the urgent disarmament of ex-combatants, followed by
their social integration and reinsertion.

Security sector reform is also an important measure
to bring about the unification of the belligerent forces
with a view to creating a disciplined army that conducts
itself in accordance with international standards. In
addition, since transitional justice bodies must also be
set up to fight impunity in the country, Cote d'Ivoire
reiterates its call for the diligent establishment of the
Hybrid Court of South Sudan and its operationalization.

On the humanitarian front, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the improvement of the general security conditions,
which has allowed the voluntary return of a large
number of internally displaced persons to their areas
of origin. Yet despite that encouraging development,
the estimated numbers of internally displaced persons
and refugees remain high, at 1.8 million and 2.2 million
persons, respectively. My country therefore urges the
South Sudanese authorities, with the help of United
Nations agencies and regional and international
partners, to create the necessary conditions for the
voluntary, sustainable, safe and dignified return of
those persons.

My delegation also remains concerned about the real
risk of famine and the health situation in South Sudan.
Since the beginning of the year, about 5 million people
have been considered food insecure. In addition, a
measles epidemic was recently confirmed in Mayom, in
former Unity state. In response, the Ministry of Health,
with the support of the World Health Organization, the
International Organization for Migration and the United
Nations Children's Fund, launched a campaign to
vaccinate approximately 40,000 children. My country
also urges the authorities and armed groups to ensure
free and unhindered access for humanitarian workers
to vulnerable populations so that they can provide them
with the assistance they need.

With regard to the implementation of the UNMISS
mandate, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support for this
United Nations force, which is essential in overcoming
the crisis and resolving the conflict in South Sudan. My
country would like to echo the Secretary-General's call
for the renewal of the UNMISS mandate, but also for it
to be strengthened and made more flexible.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire, based on its recent
experience, calls on all parties to the conflict to
give priority to dialogue for the settlement of their
disputes. It also calls on the Government to foster
strong national ownership of the post-crisis process in
order to ensure its success. Furthermore, we urge the
international community, including the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, to maintain its support for the
Government of South Sudan with a view to restoring
sustainable peace and stability in that country.
