Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the French
presidency for having convened this very timely meeting
to address the inhuman, brutal attacks committed
against children and their recruitment as soldiers by
non-State actors during armed conflicts as well as in
States with chronic instability and simmering tensions.

The international community has been shocked by
the sudden proliferation of the diverse non-State actors
that have emerged domestically within a country and
also those acting transnationally over 80 countries,
thereby internationalizing their threat. My delegation,
keeping in mind time constraints, therefore suggests
the following measures.

First, we must recognize the fact that non-State
actors are not monolithic. While some commit horrific
crimes and are often beyond negotiation, such groups
vary widely. To work with them, we need to understand
their degree of extremism, political and religious
motives, structures, tactics and amenability to dialogue.

Secondly, we endorse UNICEF's "Children, Not
Soldiers" initiative and the signing of action plans for
the release of children - to be rigorously implemented
by the 59 non-State actors listed in the annex to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339).

Thirdly, we should encourage concerned Member
States, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
human rights commmissions to facilitate contact
between the United Nations and non-State actors to
get them to agree to and sign action plans aimed at
ensuring broad and effective protection for children.
Such contacts should not prejudge the political or legal
status of those non- State actors. We therefore need child
protection criteria in the renewal or establishment of
the relevant sanctions committees, with specific child-
protection expertise in the subsidiary organs and expert
groups of the Council. The Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict should be
made more effective through greater unity among its
members.

Fourthly, it is critical to have child protection
included more clearly in all mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and peacebuilding missions, and to ensure that those
operations and missions are appropriately resourced
with personnel and funding. We strongly encourage
troop- and police-contributing countries to include
child protection in their predeployment training. We
recommend closer cooperation between the Secretariat
and the United Nations system and its partners so as to
ensure swift implementation, monitoring and reporting.

Fifthly, we should mobilize the machinery of
the NGO community, especially the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Save the Children
Alliance and the Geneva Call, with its Deed of
Commitment, which non-State actors have signed with
a view to protecting children's rights, since non-State
actors cannot be signatories to Conventions.

The donor community has to address the funding
gaps for implementing action plans, ensuring the
sustainable long-term reintegration needs of children
and child soldiers and guaranteering adequate
monitoring and reporting. Funds will also be required
to integrate former child soldiers into normal life by
providing them with education and by showing better
understanding so that they do not return to their
recruiters. Investing in development, providing better
living conditions and meeting socioeconomic needs are
ways to stabilize troubled societies and help them move
forward.

My country is seriously engaged in combating the
rise of non-State actors in many ways. Kazakhstan
ratified the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child in July 2011,
and, accordingly, soon thereafter adopted its national
children's rights act. Subsequently, it introduced legal
measures to prohibit the enlistment ofpersons under the
age of 18 years, or their use as mercenaries. The criminal
code of Kazakhstan provides for initiating proceedings
in such cases. The emphasis is also on interreligious
and inter-ethnic education aimed at forming a national
identity of shared human values of tolerance in a global
civilization, and thus preventing terrorism and religious
extremism. Kazakhstan is taking measures to protect
Afghan child refugees and afford them the help they
need with education and health care.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan joins the international
community in ensuring overall child security in times
of conflict.

