Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me
first congratulate you, Madam President, for having
taken the initiative to hold a thematic debate on this
important and tragic subject.

I wish to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for having produced a broad-ranging
report on war-affected children which faithfully
reflects the multifaceted character of this problem and
hence dictates the multifaceted nature of what must be
our response.

During the open debate on war-affected children
last year, where we adopted the landmark resolution
1261 (1999), I underlined that children are at the heart
of our global community and at the core of human
security.

Sadly, as we have seen in the Secretary-General's
report and in reporting from a number of civil society
organizations, the tragedy of war-affected children
continues to challenge the international community.
Children continue to suffer the effects of various forms
of armed conflict in areas as diverse as Sierra Leone,
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia and Sri Lanka. In his report the Secretary-
General correctly emphasizes the need to be both
sensitive and creative in devising solutions for each
situation on the ground. I must, however, emphasize
the importance of recognizing that children are more
than simply victims; they are also actors in armed
conflict and in its aftermath.

(spoke in English)

All that said, we can point to progress in several
areas. First, resolution 1261 (1999) on children in
armed conflict, buttressed by resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, have propelled us to work more diligently to
incorporate the rights and well-being of war-affected
children into all the work of the United Nations. The
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, whose presence I warmly welcome, has
worked with Governments and non-State actors to
include the rights and protection of children on the
agendas of ongoing peace negotiations. The Security
Council has specifically incorporated the needs of
children into the mandates of peace support operations
in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My delegation welcomes plans to deploy
systematically senior child protection advisers with
peacekeeping missions. The United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) already have the benefit of such
expertise. We are also encouraged by efforts to deepen
training on children's rights for United Nations staff
involved in peace support missions and the provision
of humanitarian assistance, and in supporting peace
efforts more generally.

Other than in the "mainstreaming" of children's
perspectives, a second area of progress is in
international standards. The Secretary-General rightly
points to the important achievement of the agreement
on the text of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict. By addressing issues of
recruitment and deployment, and thus keeping children
out of conflict, it has great value as a preventive tool.
Canada was pleased to be the first State to both sign
and ratify the Optional Protocol, a testament to our
strong commitment to the standards it sets out.

I would also like to signal the increasingly strong
support for addressing the needs of war-affected
children in other international organizations and
groupings. I would especially in this regard highlight
the work of members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). Last April Canada
and Ghana co-hosted in Accra a landmark Conference
on War-affected Children in West Africa. During two
days of discussion we considered a comprehensive
agenda, and West African participants adopted a
Declaration and Plan of Action covering the full range
of issues, including the creation of a child protection
unit within ECOWAS; military education and training
for all ECOWAS members; a proposal for a West
African week of truce for war-affected children; and
the issue of abducted children and a call for their
release. We were inspired by the commitment and
energy that participants brought to the meeting and to
the follow-up. The actions to which participants
committed themselves coincide with many of the
actions proposed in the Secretary General's report.

Other organizations are also doing their part. The
Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) recently adopted decisions that will require
concerted follow-up. Likewise, we are extremely
pleased that Foreign Ministers and leaders of the Group
of Eight (G8) have recognized the issue of war-affected
children as critical to the conflict prevention agenda.
G8 Foreign Ministers, in their Miyazaki initiatives for
conflict prevention, pointed to war-affected children as
one of the most disturbing human security issues facing
the world today.

The continuing work of civil society on this issue
deserves special tribute. Yesterday, we had a very
useful exchange of ideas with many of the leading non-
governmental organizations working with children, in a
meeting chaired by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia.
We must continue to collaborate with such
organizations, which, at the field level, are on the front
line in trying to meet the protection and assistance
needs of affected children and their communities. One
of the most pressing and troubling issues raised
yesterday afternoon was that of children, some as
young as seven years old, abducted by non-State actors
to serve as soldiers, sexual slaves and spies. This is an
issue on which we would encourage further efforts to
stop such abductions and to see abductees returned to
their families. We will continue to urge urgent
collaboration between the Council and other bodies of
the Organization, civil society and Governments to this
end.

Governments must also work directly with young
people, especially war-affected children, on these
issues. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Otunnu, has offered us some excellent
examples of what can be achieved through his own
stalwart efforts.

Many of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General build on and refine elements in resolution
1261 (1999), and we are prepared to move ahead with
them. For example, I would highlight the need to
ensure that attention in the United Nations system
continues to be paid to girls' experiences of armed
conflict, highlighting the need for sex-disaggregated
data. I also note the ongoing importance of gender
awareness training for peace support personnel and of
ensuring that rehabilitation activities focus on
assistance programmes which help not only war-
affected children, but also their families and their
communities, as they recover from armed conflict.

Other recommendations, however, will require
more extended discussion, since they challenge us to
look at new approaches on such issues as conditionality
for development assistance, corporate behaviour,
interaction with non-State actors and practical ways to
effectively engage young people in peace processes
and agreements.

Finally, Canada firmly believes that the time is
ripe for consolidating global efforts to protect and
support children who have been trapped in the midst of
conflict, and remains committed to working
energetically and creatively on this set of issues. But,
because of their complexity and sensitivity to local
conditions, it is essential that we collaborate closely to
share experience and best practices and to strengthen
our resolve. For that reason, we are encouraging
Foreign Ministers and other Ministers, particularly
those attending the ministerial general debate in the
Millennium Assembly, to join together in Winnipeg on
16 and 17 September with non-governmental
organizations, the business community, the United
Nations and young people to build a lasting and
sustainable partnership with all those who have a part
in safeguarding the rights, welfare and protection of
war-affected children.

The objective of the Winnipeg International
Conference on War-Affected Children, which will take
place from 10 to 17 September, with Ministers
attending only the last two days, is to take stock, since
Mrs. Graca Machel submitted her ground-breaking
study on the impact of armed conflict on children, in
1996, and together map out a consolidated agenda for
war-affected children which can be taken to the special
session on children in 2001. The September conference
will examine the many ways in which children are
affected: refugee children, children who are internally
displaced, children who have been sexually exploited
and otherwise traumatized by armed conflict, child
soldiers and the gender dimensions of conflict.

The conference will be co-hosted by our Foreign
Minister, Lloyd Axworthy, and our Minister for
International Cooperation, Miss Maria Minna. As Carol
Bellamy has indicated, it enjoys the vital and
enthusiastic support of both the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and Mr. Otunnu. Mrs.
Machel has graciously agreed to be the honorary
conference Chair. We very much hope that the
Governments of all those countries represented at this
table and in this Chamber will come and exercise
leadership in the growing movement to protect the
children of today and tomorrow from the brutality of
war and ensure that the next century is one in which
the rights of children are methodically and specifically
upheld.

I thank you, Madam President, most particularly
for your deep and abiding personal commitment to the
welfare of children, which is evident in so much of
your energetic involvement in children's rights issues
across the spectrum of United Nations activities.

