Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2453 (2019) today and the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP). I would just like to thank all members of
the Security Council for their support in bringing these
negotiations to a successful conclusion. We continue to
be strong supporters of a just and lasting settlement to
reunite Cyprus based on the internationally accepted
model of a bicommunal, bizonal federation, and we
endorse the Secretary-General's view that prospects
remain alive for a comprehensive settlement. Through
the unanimous adoption of this resolution today we are
sending a clear message to all sides to work towards the
resumption of talks through constructive engagement
with the United Nations consultant, Ms. Jane Holl Lute,
and her work to reach agreement on terms of reference
for resuming talks within a foreseeable horizon.

UNFICYP plays an important role in supporting
the settlement process, through its contribution to peace
and stability on the island and in creating the conditions
for settlement talks. At the same time, it should also
support a return to normal conditions on the island.
We therefore welcome the emphasis in resolution
2453 (2019) on enhanced dialogue and cooperation
to build trust and mutual understanding between the
communities, including our collective call for the sides
and relevant parties to develop new mechanisms to
achieve that end. We also support the continued focus
on the important contribution of women, youth and civil
society in the role of education in promoting a culture
of peace and reconciliation.

I took note of the Russian representative's views
on the language in paragraph 18 of the resolution, on
cross-cutting peacekeeping issues. We tried very hard
throughout this process to take all delegations' views
into consideration and find a way through. As Council
members are aware, the language that we have used in
this resolution is an exact replica ofthe language agreed
upon by the Council in other peacekeeping mandates,
including resolution 2445 (2018) on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei, which we adopted
unanimously in November 2018 (see S/PV.8400).

The language in today's resolution needed
updating since our last discussion six months
ago to reflect the important developments on the
integrated performance-policy framework for all
peacekeeping operations, including resolution 2436
(2018) on peacekeeping performance, which was
adopted unanimously by the Council in September
2018 (see S/PV.8360). Our language closely mirrors
that of resolution 2450 (2018) on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) on under
which was also adopted unanimously in December 2018
(see S/PV.8436), and on which the Russian delegation
jointly led negotiations.

We do not accept the argument that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) must
approve, endorse or authorize any new developments
in peacekeeping policy before the Secretariat can
implement it. The C-34 plays a vital role in scrutinizing
peacekeeping policy and making informed, strategic
and balanced recommendations on a range of policy
issues in its reports. However, as our Russian colleagues
have rightly pointed out, the C-34 is mandated to
"comprehensively review" all aspects of cross-cutting
peacekeeping policy. That does not imply that the
C-34 has a right of veto over policy implementation
or that it can obstruct the Security Council's ability to
make decisions on matters of international peace and
security. We would not want to see the C-34's functions
exceeding the terms ofthe powers prescribed in Chapter
IV, Article 10 of the United Nations Charter.

Let me take the opportunity to express our thanks
to Special Representative Spehar and her team for
their work on the island during the last six months,
to the Secretary-General for keeping his good offices
at disposal of the parties, and to Jane Holl Lute for
her ongoing consultations. The United Kingdom will
continue to support the sides in their efforts to achieve
a settlement, and we stand ready to play our part in any
future talks.

