Mr. Kok: We started our meeting today with the
minute of silence to remember the victims of militia
violence in Timor. The Council through its President
called upon Indonesia to live up to its responsibilities. I
appeal to the Indonesian Government to exert its
authority in Timor as in the Maluccas, or wherever a
need may arise, to prevent a recurrence of such
violence.

The Millennium Assembly has brought us
together here in New York, marking a renewed effort to
bring prosperity, social justice and full respect for
human rights to all the citizens of the world. It also
signals our continuing determination to free this world
from the scourges of conflict and destruction.

This is what the Members of the United Nations
decided over half a century ago to be the main task for
the Security Council. What does this mean for our
responsibility with regard to the numerous local
conflicts of today and the havoc they bring to millions
of people and to our development agenda?

A major shift has occurred from global big-Power
confrontation to internal conflicts, often based on
ethnic and religious divisions, particularly in Africa.
This requires a change in the way the Security Council
deals with international peace and security. The
Netherlands welcomes the recommendations in the
Brahimi report on how to improve the way the Council
handles today's conflicts. Let the Council draw lessons
from past experiences and step up its efforts to do
better.

Enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peace operations requires political courage. If and
when necessary, the Member States should allow the
United Nations to deploy rapidly and under a robust
mandate. The Member States should be prepared to
make sufficient resources available. They should
provide adequate support to peace-building strategies
that work and take another look at the application of
the principle of impartiality when dealing with local
parties to a conflict.

Let us fulfil our moral obligation to future
generations by eliminating the causes of conflict and
sparing them the man-made humanitarian calamities
that plague our world today.

Improving the quality of peace operations will
contribute towards realizing those ambitions. But more
is needed, more in the way of conflict prevention to
avoid human suffering and to save the enormous cost
of military action and of rebuilding societies. I agree
with the Secretary-General that prevention is a
challenge of political leadership. Member States should
enable the Secretary-General to initiate actions in this
regard, including the dispatch of fact-finding missions
and the establishment of an effective early-warning
capacity.

Most armed conflicts today are between the poor.
Broad-based economic growth helps to reduce poverty
as a root cause of conflict and must, therefore, be part
of conflict prevention strategies.
Effective integration in the world economy is
needed. African countries must be enabled to benefit
more from the opportunities that globalization
provides. Only then will the people of Africa be able to
escape from the extreme poverty afflicting it. Likewise,
African Governments should be willing and able to
confront the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in
sub-Sahara Africa, which the Council has rightly
recognized as a risk to stability and security.

So let us work together towards achieving peace
and prosperity for the peoples and countries of Africa
and elsewhere. We must join hands to improve respect
for human rights, protect minorities, establish truly
representative and participatory political systems and
improve health and education standards. Through
strength and solidarity, the Security Council can help
us in making our common dream of worldwide peace
and prosperity come true.

