Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, Mr. President, allow
me to convey the regrets of my Foreign Minister, Mr.
Taro Aso, who was newly appointed to the portfolio in
a Cabinet reshuffle earlier today in Tokyo, for not
being able to attend this important meeting.

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1636 (2005). I would like to express
appreciation to the three sponsors for taking the lead.

In an earlier resolution, resolution 1595 (2005),
the Security Council established and tasked the
International Commission to assist the Lebanese
authorities in the investigation of an extremely serious
incident, the assassination of former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri. The Commission has since demonstrated
remarkable professionalism in carrying out its mission.
Japan sent a forensic expert team to the Commission to
make its own contribution to the investigation.

As the latest report of the Commission and the
briefing to the Council by Commissioner Mehlis have
clearly indicated, the approach taken by the
international community, through Council resolution
1595 (2005), was the right one. As the Commission's
report makes clear, the investigation is yet to be
finished.

In order to facilitate prompt and effective work
aimed at the early conclusion of the investigation, two
essential points needed to be adequately addressed:
first, to extend the mandate of the Commission and
strengthen the support required for the effective
discharge of its mandate, and secondly, to ensure
serious full cooperation with the investigation, as the
Commission has revealed that such cooperation will be
the main focus in order to complete the investigation.

In our view, the resolution just adopted
appropriately addresses those essential points. It gives
adequate consideration to ensuring the fairness as well
as the credibility and integrity of the investigation,
including due consideration to the principle of the
presumption of innocence. It is firm in requesting the
Syrian Government to extend its cooperation to get to
the bottom of the heinous terrorist incident. The
resolution is prudent, and it is balanced in dealing with
the sensitivities involved in the context of the current
complex Middle East situation.

In that regard, we note that, at the suggestion of
my delegation and others, appropriate amendments
have been incorporated in the final text, including with
regard to operative paragraph 12. We earnestly hope
and expect that under the resolution, Syria will extend
the full cooperation that is expected of it, and the
investigation will make rapid progress and establish the
truth in this matter as early as possible.

In that regard, Japan takes note of the recent
Syrian assurances regarding cooperation and its efforts
in taking such initiatives as the establishment of a
special judicial committee to deal with the
investigation of Syrians, in cooperation with
International Independent Investigation Commission.
We hope those efforts will also contribute to the early
establishment of the truth.

