Mr. Annabi: The report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Tajikistan that you just mentioned, Sir,
describes developments in Tajikistan since last November.
Apart from the presidential election, which was held
on 6 November last year, the key event during the
reporting period was the holding of elections to the newly
established Assembly of Representatives, the lower house
of Parliament, on 27 February. According to the Central
Commission on Elections and Referenda, the national
elections commission, the ruling People's Democratic
Party won a majority of seats, followed by the
Communist Party. The Islamic Revival Party won two
seats. On 12 March, run-off elections were held in 12
constituencies where no candidate had received the
majority of the vote. According to the central electoral
Commission, seven were won by the ruling People's
Democratic Party and three by candidates running as
independents. The results in the remaining two
constituencies, both of which are in Gorniy Badakshan in
the south-east, have not yet been announced. On 16
March, the central electoral Commission established a
special commission to examine the results of the second
round of voting in these two constituencies.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) jointly monitored the
election. The United Nations-OSCE Joint Electoral
Observation Mission noted the significance of the
inclusion of former warring parties and others in the
electoral process and the fact that Tajikistan had held its
first-ever multiparty election in an atmosphere free from
violence.

The Joint Electoral Observation Mission, however,
also pointed out that the electoral legislation had failed to
ensure the independence of the election administration
commission, and that the transparency of the process did
not meet minimum standards. The observers also reported
widespread proxy voting and voting without proper
identification.

Despite its shortcomings, the parliamentary election
is the final act in the transition period foreseen under the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan, which was signed by
President Rakhmonov and the United Tajik Opposition
leader, Mr. Nuri, in June 1997, under the auspices of the
United Nations. After years of fighting, this period of
transition has been a difficult one, and several serious
crises have occurred along the way. Nevertheless, the

 

Tajik parties managed to overcome the obstacles and to put
their country on the path to national reconciliation and
peace.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, the
successful completion of this transition period marks a
significant achievement in which the United Nations and
UNMOT have played an important part. At the same time,
it must be recognized that much remains to be done to
consolidate the process of national reconciliation in
Tajikistan. President Rakhmonov, in discussions with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Petrov,
confirmed the need to establish a post-conflict peace-
building office following the withdrawal of UNMOT upon
the expiration of its mandate on 15 May. President
Rakhmonov emphasized that the United Nations job-
creation projects were an example of how the international
community could contribute to peace consolidation, as it
had done in the Karategin valley, by shifting attitudes and
mentalities from confrontation to reconciliation. President
Rakhmonov also stressed the need to reduce the strength of
the armed forces through demobilization programmes,
which could be supported by the international community
through the proposed post-UNMOT presence.

