Ms. Sison (United States of America): On this last
working day of the first month of the year, it is a good
time to take stock and look ahead to the issues that we
will need to focus on in February and beyond. I would
like to take this opportunity to talk about three top
priorities, Syria, Burundi and North Korea, and also
to say a few words at the end about an aspect of our
working methods.
First, on Syria, the world has truly been shocked at the
appalling conditions and starvation in Madaya - images
of suffering with which we are now only too familiar.
While the Council repeatedly discussed the situation
in Madaya over the past few weeks and raised the
alarm about the need for more assistance, especially
medical care, we still face obstruction by the regime
and ruthlessness on the part of the forces on the ground,
which prevent the people of Madaya from getting what
they need. And as we know now, Madaya offers us only
a glimpse of the terrible suffering that is taking place
in communities across Syria. Earlier this week, during
its briefing to the Council (see S/PV/7612), the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted
that it had increased the number of besieged areas in
Syria from 15 to 18, and the number of people in those
besieged communities from 393,700 to 486,700. That is
an increase of more than 90,000 people trapped without
access to humanitarian assistance. With all the major
indicators going in the wrong direction, we simply must
find a more effective way to change the humanitarian
situation on the ground. Especially in the face of this
horrendous situation, it is all the more important that
the peace process move forward, and we strongly
support Special Envoy De Mistura in his continuing
efforts to convene the parties in Geneva.

On Burundi, after much negotiation and difficult
planning, we managed to start the year with a trip,
on which we found an extremely tense and dangerous
situation. We heard from civil-society members who
had witnessed murder and from women who spoke
about sexual violence and rape. Local journalists
pleaded for the freedom to report, and the United
Nations briefed us on reports of mass graves and
ethnic violence. We urge the Government of Burundi
to conduct a serious dialogue with all stakeholders,
including the armed opposition. In terms of next steps,
we are closely following the African Union (AU) Heads
of State Summit set to take place this weekend. We
heard from the AU Peace and Security Council that it
is determined to ensure that the force of 5,000 that it
has already authorized is accepted in Burundi and then
actually deployed. Action is needed.

On North Korea, as we said in our press statement,
the Council strongly condemned the nuclear tests
conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
on 6 January, which is a clear threat to international
peace and security. In that statement, we recalled the
need to take further significant measures, and we now

must impose real consequences. Our agenda is packed
with many other priorities.
We had a positive moment just last Monday, when
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), on Colombia, the
Security Council's response to the joint call made by
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia for United Nations
engagement to help end the conflict. And, of course,
we will need to stay focused on Yemen, South Sudan
and many other locations.

But looking at the working methods of the Council,
we are in fact encouraged by one important aspect:
flexibility. In addition to the meetings listed on the
monthly programme of work, in 2015 the Council held
56 briefings under "Any other business", more than
one a week and more than double the total in 2014.
We also had 17 Arria Formula meetings, more than in
2013 in 2014 combined. Now, of course, that number of
meetings does not equal the number of crises solved, or
even averted. We know that. We wish more meetings
would translate into more solutions to crises. But I
think that these figures do nonetheless show that the
Council is seeking to resolve the pressing crises that we
face today in a more timely way, often trying in a more
innovative manner to address these issues.

I would like to thank the delegation of Uruguay for
its leadership of the Council this month and to offer
our support to the incoming presidency of Venezuela.
I would like also to congratulate the Director of the
Security Council Affairs Division, Movses Abelian, for
his recently announced promotion and to thank him for
his steady stewardship of the Council over the past five
years.

