Mr. Mbanefo (Nigeria): Mr. President, I bring
you warm greetings from your colleague, Mr. Alhaji
Sule Lamido, Foreign Minister of Nigeria, who is
unavoidably absent from this meeting. I wish to thank
you on behalf of the Nigerian delegation for your
initiative in organizing this important workshop. It
affords the Security Council an excellent opportunity to
fully address the menace posed by small arms and the
use of mercenaries in the West African subregion. We
look forward to a successful and fruitful conclusion of
the workshop under your able guidance - and that is
already near.

The problem of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is of particular concern to Nigeria
because it constitutes a major impediment to peace,
stability, security and economic development in many
developing countries, especially in Africa. These arms
continue to have devastating consequences on the
African continent, considering their capacity to fuel,
intensify and prolong conflicts. Sir, you are no doubt
aware of the millions of lives lost, as well as the
humanitarian crisis created in the region, as a result of
their illicit use. I need not mention the destruction of
catastrophic proportions of economic and social
infrastructure on the continent as a direct result of the
illicit use of these weapons. We know how long and
how expensive it often is to put up such structures.

The West African subregion has more than its fair
share of these conflicts. These conflicts have been
fuelled by the illicit and free circulation of these
weapons in the subregion.

The greatest difficulty in the control of the
proliferation of small arms is their easy accessibility to
non-State actors. That was an issue that dogged the
outcome of the General Assembly debate on small
arms and light weapons in 2001. My delegation
therefore believes that for an adequate and effective
control of the proliferation of this class of weapons,
efforts must be made to legally control the sale of these
weapons to non-State actors.

The illicit trade in small arms has always
obstructed the implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Security Council. The recent
establishment of an independent panel of experts and
monitoring mechanisms by the Council to promote
compliance with arms embargoes is welcome.

While in West Africa this measure will be useful
in controlling the illegal cross-border movement of
small arms into conflict areas, it will be, however,
ineffective in controlling and eliminating those arms
that are already inside the areas of conflict. We
therefore emphasize the need for effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
mandates that include weapons collection, disposal and
destruction.

In order to trace the flow of small arms and light
weapons from their sources, it is necessary to identify
the points of diversion into illicit networks. Tracing the
movement of these weapons will help to promote
awareness and accountability in arms transfers and will
deter their illicit transfer to non-State actors. We
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to develop an international instrument to enable States
to identify and trace illicit small arms and light
weapons that enter their countries so that they can
effectively control such inflows. We hope that the
ongoing work of the group of experts on tracing small
arms will ultimately lead to a legally-binding
international agreement on the subject.

As an additional measure in ensuring success in
this regard, it is important that licensed manufacturers
apply appropriate and reliable markings on each small
arm and light weapon as an integral part of the
production process, as stipulated in the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons. Efforts
should be put in place to ensure that the United Nations
Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, which was successfully
concluded in 2001, will complement the Programme of
Action in this vital area when it enters into force.

Recent studies have shown that arms brokering
plays a significant role in the illicit arms trade. The
establishment of an effective international regime to
control the practice has therefore become necessary.
We call on Member States to fully abide by their
commitment to enhance international cooperation and
the exchange of information as a prelude to the
establishment of such a regime. That position was
underscored in the 2000 Bamako Ministerial
Declaration containing Africa's common position on
small arms and light weapons.

This is connected with the issue of licensing and
end-user controls. We believe that developing effective
national, regional and international controls on export
licensing and end use are crucial elements in ensuring
that this trade remains under Government control and
is not diverted to illicit markets or end users. In that
regard, my delegation urges the Security Council to
encourage States that have not already done so to
introduce the use of authenticated end-user certificates
as a means of monitoring the export and transit of
small arms.

It is equally important for the Council to intensify
efforts to investigate and to identify the link between
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
illicit exploitation of natural and other resources. The
determination of this linkage and the efforts to control
the use of proceeds from illegal resources to fund the
illicit arms trade have significantly brought the
conflicts in the West African subregion to a successful
end. Such investigation should of necessity apply to all
areas of conflict in the West African subregion, where
there is often interlinkage between one conflict
situation and another.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa has been in existence since
1998, following its renewal two years ago. ECOWAS
member States will continue their best effort to ensure
the success of the Moratorium. It is unfortunate that
conflict situations have persisted in the West African
subregion in spite of the Moratorium. ECOWAS
member States need the cooperation of the
international community to implement the Moratorium.
My delegation therefore wishes once again to call on
the international community to support the
implementation of the Moratorium. In order to succeed,
it is important that the Moratorium is fully respected by
all States, both within and outside the subregion. We
also urge other regions to follow the example of
ECOWAS by imposing similar moratoriums in their
respective regions.

Nigeria has always believed in conflict
prevention measures and the pursuit of negotiated
solution to conflicts as the most effective means of
solving the small arms problem. The international
community should pay particular attention to the need
to adopt these measures as the best strategy for peace.
Connected to this is the need for the creation of a good
political atmosphere that will enhance harmonious
relationships in our countries and a sense of belonging.
The emphasis in this regard should be on promoting
structures and processes that strengthen democracy,
human rights, the rule of law and good governance, as
well as economic recovery and growth as a means of
eliminating conflicts and guaranteeing durable peace.
The task of the Security Council in this regard is quite
enormous and calls for genuine commitment and
concerted action on the part of the Council.

I cannot conclude this statement without
expressing our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
his bold initiative in establishing the Coordinating
Action on Small Arms (CASA) as a mechanism for the
harmonization of the activities of United Nations
agencies to promote the implementation of the
Programme of Action. CASA has a special role to play
in promoting and coordinating assistance to West
African States, especially those most severely affected
by small arms proliferation.We also note with
satisfaction the recent establishment of the Small Arms
Advisory Services to provide advisory services and
formulate programmes on small arms for
implementation. As these two bodies rely on
extrabudgetary resources to fund their activities, we
call on Member States in a position to do so to make
voluntary contributions to enable them to fulfil their
mandates.

