Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to express the gratitude of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for his participation in this meeting,
which underscores his valuable commitment to this
issue. I would also like to thank Sir John Holmes for
his valuable briefing.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.

Being deeply concerned about the situation of
millions of people trapped in conflict situations around
the globe, we fully support the continuing efforts to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts, especially of women and children, in
accordance with existing international norms. In that
respect, we fully support the implementation of the

commitments made in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document, as well as the implementation of
the Council's resolutions, including 1674 (2006) and
1738 (2006).

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, contained in document S/2007/643, and can
support the recommendations made in the
aforementioned report.

The information provided from conflict regions
clearly shows serious gaps in the practical
implementation of the existing legal instruments for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in particular
the Hague Conventions and the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols. Despite the joint efforts
of the entire international community and all the
important steps towards improved protection taken by
this Council, including through its latest resolutions on
the Sudan/Darfur, Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion, we are witnessing continuous and
deliberate attacks against civilians, not excluding
attacks against humanitarian personnel, rape and other
sexual violence - used often as a weapon of war -
abductions and the use of child soldiers in many
conflict situations.

We fully share the Secretary-General's view that,
where we cannot prevent armed conflict, the protection
of civilians is, and must remain, an absolute priority
for the whole international community.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the peacekeeping troops, who very often face mortal
risk in their struggle to provide protection to people in
conflict areas. Slovakia also commends and supports
the tireless work of the United Nations and other
agencies, especially the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF, as well as
non-governmental organizations and other humanitarian
organizations, which do their best to provide assistance
to populations in conflict regions, including to nearly
10 million refugees and over 24 million internally
displaced persons.
In this regard, I would like to stress that denial of
humanitarian access is unacceptable. Deeply concerned
about the wide scale of restrictions imposed on
humanitarian organizations in many conflict situations,
we reiterate our call upon Governments and other
parties to conflict to lift restrictions and to facilitate the
work of humanitarian organizations.

Our deepest concerns continue to be linked with
widespread and often systematic sexual violence, in
particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Reports of more then 4,500 cases of rape during the
first six months of 2007 in South Kivu province alone,
and especially those reports about the involvement of
some elements of the governmental forces in these
crimes, are truly alarming.

Slovakia strongly condemns such crimes and
fully supports the use of all available means to end
impunity for the perpetrators, including, where
necessary, through the engagement of the International
Criminal Court and targeted measures by the Security
Council. In this respect, we also reiterate our full
support for the zero tolerance policy in respect of
crimes committed by United Nations personnel.

We believe that national authorities and the whole
international community must respond more effectively
to crimes against civilians, including rape and other
forms of sexual violence, in armed conflict. Measures
by Governments, the United Nations system and all
other actors working on the ground should be based on
effective, reliable and better focused monitoring and
analysis.

Slovakia, therefore, supports the Secretary-
General's proposal to establish a Security Council
working group on the protection of civilians.

