At the outset, allow me to welcome President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz. We have closely studied their reports; however, today we wish to address the issues that are not reflected in the reports, rather than those that are. The status of the province of Kosovo has not changed since the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999); however, the reports lack any mention of that fact when referring to Kosovo. We therefore request that such a reference be added and an official corrigendum to the report be issued. Moving on, in resolution 2529 (2020) the Security Council indicated the need to uphold the rights of persons held in custody, including the right to medical attention. Nevertheless, the report fails to inform us on how those rights are being implemented. The health of General Ratko Mladic is of particular concern. We have learned from media reports and statements by Serbian representatives that Mladic's defence lawyers and family members are literally fighting for his life. The Mechanism's leadership and judges are rejecting all their petitions, claiming that they do not fall within the interests of justice, thereby impeding access to medical records and ignoring medical conclusions provided by independent doctors. Meanwhile, Ratko. Mladi¢e himself has no opportunity to implement his right to consult with a doctor of his choice under rule 48 of the rules of detention. That is not only a matter of the health of an accused individual in custody. Rather, the question is: how long can the Security Council turn a blind eye to the use of inhumane methods of treatment by one of its subsidiary bodies? Is the aim to deliver a definitive guilty verdict against yet another Serb by all possible means, regardless of human rights standards and considerations of humanity? Unfortunately, almost all of the verdicts pronounced by the predecessor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals - the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICT Y) - and for that matter by the Mechanism itself, were predetermined in advance. Let us preserve at least a shred of dignity and not breach the rights of detainees. We continue to hear reassurances that Mr. Mladie has been provided with all the necessary medical attention and health care and that he is supposedly capable of appearing in court. If that is the case, then what is the problem with having him undergo an independent medical examination before those court sessions are scheduled? Russia has continuously advocated for expediting legal proceedings, but not at any cost. In that context, Judge Nyambe provided a very telling dissenting opinion regarding the decision of the Appeals Chamber dated 14 August. Judge Nyambe stated: "T would thus vacate the Appeal Hearing as scheduled, and adjourn the proceedings such that an international team of medical professional expert doctors can come to The Hague to examine Mr. Mladic at a medical facility for such amount of time and manner as is needed to reach a professional conclusion as to his medical and mental state so as to be able to generate a report and participate in a Competency Review Hearing to determine his ability to meaningfully participate in further legal proceedings, and give an assessment of his medical and mental state for purposes of establishing his fitness and capacity for legal proceedings." We therefore strongly urge the Mechanism's leadership to grant Mr. Mladic access to independent doctors of his own choosing in order to undergo a complete medical screening and examination, including an assessment of whether he retains his cognitive functions. The Mechanism's predecessor, the ICTY, has a very poor reputation when it comes to observing the rights and upholding the health status of accused and detained Serbs, 12 of whom died either during their trials or while serving their sentences. We hope that the Mechanism will not inherit the cruel practices of the ICTY.
