Mr. Benomar: At my last briefing earlier this month
, the Security Council requested that I report on the
implementation of resolution 2201 (2015), which was
adopted unanimously on 15 February. I had reported,
regrettably, that many of the Council's demands had
gone unmet. The one new and positive development I
have to report is the release from house arrest of Prime
Minister Bahah and four cabinet ministers.

We as the United Nations stand for the peaceful
resolution of conflict through negotiated political
settlements. Furthermore, the Security Council has
entrusted to me the mandate of facilitating inclusive
negotiations in order to reach a consensus solution
in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference,
and the Peace and National Partnership Agreement
and its security annex. As such, I have reiterated time
and again to all sides that such a solution is the key
to unlocking the prevailing political impasse. As the
saying goes, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound
of cure. This is why, for many weeks now, and taking
serious risks in precarious security circumstances, I
have continued meeting with the 12 political parties,
including the Houthis. I have also been in close contact
with President Hadi, including through two visits
to Aden. I am working with all sides in the hope of
resolving the current standoff and to avert civil war in
order to get the political transition back on track.

Nevertheless, the events of recent weeks and days
seem to be leading Yemen yet farther from a peaceful
settlement and towards the edge of civil war. Since
President Hadi arrived in Aden, he has declared Aden
as Yemen's temporary capital; started expanding the
so-called popular committees loyal to him, which
have now taken control of Aden; and accused former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh and the Houthis of
launching a coup against him. The Houthis, in turn
have rejected President Hadi as the legitimate leader
of Yemen, and have continued to occupy Government
institutions and to expand into other territories, despite
the Security Council's repeated demands.

In early March, President Hadi took a decision
to replace the Central Security Forces (CSF) chief in
Aden, who is alleged to be loyal to former president
Saleh and the Houthis, with a replacement who was
seen as a controversial choice. However, the CSF chief
refused to cede the post, leading to several rounds of
fighting between his troops and military units against
the popular committees loyal to President Hadi.

The stage was then set for what transpired next.
On 19 March, heavy clashes took place between the
Central Security Forces and the popular committees in
and around Aden international airport. In a dramatic
move, Air force jets from Sana'a were deployed to Aden
and dropped bombs on Al-Maasheeq, the presidential
compound. Fortunately, the President was not injured
and moved to a secure location. Air force jets have
reportedly continued flying over Aden since the attack.
Consistent with the Security Council press statement
of 20 March (SC/11826), I also condemn the attack
on the airport and the airstrikes, which constitutes an
unprecedented and dangerous escalation.

On 20 March, terrorists in Sana'a detonated
explosives at two mosques, killing as many as 140
people and wounding over 350, which I also condemn
strongly, and I offer my condolences to the families
of the victims. The next day, the so-called popular
committees seized a key military installation in Lahj,
in the south, displacing troops. In response, the Houthi
Revolutionary Committee issued a call for all military
units in the North to mobilize in preparation for a
campaign in the South.

On 21 and 22 March, Houthi militias, backed by
units of the Yemeni army, appeared in rising numbers

in Taiz, a northern industrial hub in the south-east and
the gateway into Aden. Earlier today, it was reported
that the Houthis have seized control of Taiz airport and
other parts of the city. Also in Taiz, soldiers reportedly
dispersed protesters using tear gas and live ammunition.
As in Taiz, anti-Houthi demonstrations have taken place
Sana'a and other cities. I am extremely concerned about
the use of arbitrary arrest and detention, abduction and
violence, and call for the human rights of peaceful
protesters and journalists to be respected fully.

It would appear that the Houthis, backed by
members of the Yemeni armed forces, are now moving
further south, towards both Lahj and Aden. There is a
prevailing sense among Yemenis that the situation is
on a rapid downward spiral. Many are also concerned
that the conflict is taking on worrying sectarian tones
and deepening north-south divisions. Fears exist that
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula will exploit the
current instability to cause further chaos. Following the
suicide bombings and fighting, emotions are running
extremely high, and unless a solution can be found in
the coming days, the country will slide into further
violent conflict and fragmentation.

I have been engaged with all sides to call for
restraint and to de-escalate the situation. Some have
questioned the utility of our presence in Sana'a and
continuing the United Nations-facilitated negotiations
against the backdrop of the new developments. This
leads me to repeat the question: What alternative do we
have? It would be an illusion to think that the Houthis
could mount an offensive and succeed in taking control
of the entire country, including Mareb, Taiz and the
south. It would be equally false to think that President
Hadi could assemble sufficient forces to liberate the
country from the Houthis. Any side that would want to
push the country in either direction would be inviting
a protracted conflict in the vein of a combined Iraq-
Libya-Syria scenario.

There are extremists on many sides who would like
these negotiations to fail and who have been actively
trying to undermine them. I should reiterate thatpeaceful
dialogue is the only option we have. As mediator, I must
protect the integrity of the negotiations. I must have the
space to engage in dialogue with all parties, including
those responsible for using force to disrupt the political
transition. We have been able to play a constructive role
so far because the United Nations has engaged with all

parties on an impartial basis, in the belief that it is in
Yemen's best interests that we do so.

A final power-sharing deal to enable the transition
to be completed can materialize only if we engage all
sides in the political process, including the Houthis and
President Hadi. Both are now crucial to the solution. The
United Nations continues to engage with all the parties
in a manner that neither legitimizes those who have
used force to disrupt the political process, diminishes
the legitimacy of the President and Government or
harms the impartiality of the United Nations.

I have just concluded my second visit in 10 days
to Riyadh. I thank the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques for the assistance that has been offered to the
victims of the recent violence in Yemen. 1 have also
had consultations with the Government of Qatar in its
capacity as GCC Chair, as well as with Mr. Abdullatif
Al-Zayani, Secretary General ofthe GCC. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the GCC have played a major role
in supporting the Yemeni people over the years. I am
confident that the Security Council, the GCC and the
United Nations will continue to work closely together
to help the Yemenis put their transition back on track.

In conclusion, I urge all sides, in this time of rising
tensions and inflammatory rhetoric, to appreciate the
gravity of the situation and to de-escalate by exercising
maximum restraint, ceasing all hostilities and refraining
from provocation or using violence to achieve political
goals. Peaceful dialogue is the only way forward.

