Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Sir, we should
like to commend your work as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and to thank you in particular
for the very informative and comprehensive briefing
that you gave the Council this morning. We also
welcome the fact that you convened this meeting in
your capacity as President of the Security Council for
the month of January, and we commend you for
upholding the principle of transparency on this
important issue.

Liechtenstein is fully committed to the global
fight against terrorism. It has ratified all 12
international conventions related to the fight against
terrorism and has implemented a comprehensive set of
measures aimed at combating the financing of
terrorism in particular. On 22 October 2003,
Liechtenstein's Parliament adopted a package of anti-
terrorist legislation that entered into force on 10
December, further strengthening the current regime of
criminal law in particular.

In addition, Liechtenstein cooperates actively
with the 1267 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee; it has fulfilled all its reporting obligations
to both Committees and has engaged in a dialogue with
them. The issues under discussion today are given the
highest possible attention by the competent authorities
in our capital, as well as by our Permanent Mission in
New York. Since the adoption of resolution 1455
(2003), members of both the Monitoring Group and the
Sanctions Committee itself have been received by
officials of those authorities. Full and constructive
cooperation was extended to them on those occasions,
and we are particularly pleased, Mr. President, that you
expressed your satisfaction to our authorities in the
follow-up to your visit in December 2003.

Resolution 1455 (2003) extended for a further
year the sanctions regime imposed against the Taliban
and Al Qaeda and its associates, and that mandate is
thus up for renewal at the end of this week. To our
mind, it is clear that such a renewal is necessary and
that the implementation of the sanctions imposed by
the Council needs to be further enhanced. The record
of implementation so far is a rather mixed one, and it
appears that some States do not use the relevant
Security Council resolutions as the basis of their efforts
to combat terrorism. In connection with the renewal of
the mandate, we wish to express some thoughts, a
number of which we have already voiced on earlier
occasions.

While the Security Council has taken steps to
improve the effectiveness and precision of the
sanctions and to address humanitarian concerns, as
well as concerns regarding transparency and due
process, much work remains to be done. In that respect,
we believe that the Council should take a balanced
approach. A further strengthening of the sanctions
regime - as has been suggested, and as seems
necessary- must be supplemented with measures
aimed at preserving the rule of law. The stronger the
impact of Security Council decisions on the rights of
individuals, the stronger the need for avenues that will
allow individuals to address concerns stemming from
such decisions. States must not be put in a difficult
position with regard to their judicial and constitutional
standards because of their commitment to implement
measures imposed by the Council.

Furthermore, the Council should look at potential
implementation problems before certain measures are
decided upon. For example, we are of the View that
important practical aspects of the travel ban imposed
by the Council have been neglected and that the
effectiveness of measures imposed by the Council
would benefit from more in-depth consideration of
such practical problems. It is therefore noted with
gratitude, Mr. President, that you identified that
particular area in your briefing this morning.

With regard to the work of the Monitoring Group
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1455 (2003), we have already shared some thoughts
with the members of the Sanctions Committee. The
Liechtenstein authorities have cooperated in a
proactive and constructive manner with the Group in
order to facilitate its task, and have provided it with
important information. However, we believe that such
cooperation should be reciprocated by the Monitoring
Group. The Group's case-based investigative work has
not always been conducted with a view to ensuring
enhanced implementation of the measures imposed by
the Council. Furthermore, we noted once again that the
report prepared by Group was leaked to the press
before it was received by the States concerned. We
expect that that situation will not reoccur in the future.
In that connection, I should like to associate myself
with the comments just made by the representative of
Ireland. We hope that the future mandate of the
Monitoring Group will address those concerns with a
view to improving the quality of its important work and
to ensuring continued full cooperation by Member
States.

Notwithstanding our concerns regarding the
working methods of the Monitoring Group, we
recognize the value and importance of its work, and we
remain committed to full cooperation in that respect.
As far as the recommendations contained in its report
are concerned, we should like to refrain from specific
comments at this point. However, we caution in a more
general manner that the use of unequivocal
terminology and of clearly defined concepts is
indispensable if States are to implement such measures
in a consistent manner, as should be the case.

In closing, I should like once again to assure you,
Mr. President, of our continued full cooperation in
implementing the sanctions regime and of our
commitment to the fight against terrorism. I wish you
and all of us the best of success in our work.

