Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States thanks the Chairman for his report on the
actions taken by States in fulfilment of their
obligations under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007)
and 1803 (2008) to take measures to counter the
proliferation and development of nuclear technology
and ballistic missiles by Iran. 1 must note that Iran
continues to defy the continued demands of this
Council to suspend its uranium enrichment programme
and activities related to its heavy water reactor and has
failed to cooperate with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) investigations.

The United States believes it essential that
Member States fully implement the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
We encourage all States to take actions that are
complementary to those explicitly required by those
resolutions, to achieve the international community's
ultimate objective of persuading Iran to make a
strategic decision to abandon its pursuit of a nuclear
weapons capability. Full implementation of the
resolutions will maintain pressure on Iran to change
course.

We would like to call special attention to the need
to implement the provisions of the Council's
resolutions regarding Iran's financial institutions. The
goal of those provisions is to ensure that lran's
financial sector is not used to fund proscribed nuclear
proliferation or missile programmes.

As was mentioned by the Chairman, to help
ensure that, on 1 August the United States, France and
the United Kingdom distributed to the Council a list of
banks domiciled in Iran, which included their branches
and subsidiaries abroad. We hope that the sharing of
that kind of information will assist other countries in
carrying out their obligations under those resolutions.
We note that those resolutions apply to all types of
financial institutions, including banks and insurance
providers.

The United States seeks to aid the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
08-50335

1737 (2006) in carrying out its mandate to examine
information regarding alleged violations of imposed
measures and to seek information from all States
regarding actions taken by them to implement the
imposed measures. It is in that vein that the United
States provided a briefing to Council members on
10 September about our own efforts to implement the
provisions of the Iran sanctions resolutions related to
financial institutions, in particular paragraph 10 of
resolution 1803 (2008).

By sharing best practices, we seek to assist other
States in deciding how to carry out that vigilance,
particularly because we have encountered a number of
attempts by Iran to avoid sanctions through the use of
deceptive financial practices. Vigilance is a matter for
each Member State. We would encourage other
countries to share their experiences so that we may
help each other implement the provisions of those
resolutions more effectively.

Finally, the United States objective remains a
diplomatic resolution to this issue. Iran must fully and
verifiably suspend its uranium-enrichment-related
reprocessing and heavy-water-related activities and
cooperate fully with the IAEA, as required by the
Security Council.

