Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
express our gratitude to those who have expressed
condolences and sympathies to my Government and
the Turkish people at this time of loss and suffering
following the devastating earthquake in Turkey. We
have felt the solidarity of the international community
with us. We also want to extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Saudi people for the passing away of Crown Prince
Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

As the Security Council holds another open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, a long-
awaited transformation and restoration process is under
way in the region. The quest for democracy in the
region may delayed, but it cannot be reversed. As the
advocate of democracy, pluralism, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the region, Turkey will not
waver in its support for those who are peacefully
demanding change.

We welcome the conclusion of the rightful
struggle of the Libyan people for freedom, justice and
democracy with a decisive victory. The fate of the
autocratic regime that prevailed for more than four
decades constitutes a bitter lesson that should be taken
into account in all its dimensions within the context of
the ongoing change and democratic transformation
movements in the region. We strongly believe that the
3
political process in Libya will be completed in unity
and solidarity through an inclusive approach embracing
all segments of that society.

Meanwhile, we welcome resolution 2014 (2011)
on Yemen, adopted unanimously by the Security
Council, as a timely, constructive and positive step
taken by the international community with a view to
bringing an end to the clashes in that country. Turkey
fully supports the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.
We reaffirm our wish that the crisis in the country be
overcome through peaceful means as soon as possible.

In that context, Turkey is extremely concerned
about the developments in Syria. We observed with
great concern the ongoing violence against civilians in
Syria. Violence is not the effective to follow. Sectarian
and ethnic divides must be avoided at all cost. The
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people should be
respected.

While many in the region aspire to a better future,
Palestinians in their millions - whether in Gaza, the
West Bank or the refugee camps across the region 4
continue to suffer a disastrous fate not of their own
making. This anomaly must be addressed as a matter of
utmost urgency. Turkey rejects violence in any shape
or form, and by any party, as unacceptable and
unjustifiable. We also believe that there can be no
genuine alternative to a negotiated settlement.

There is no doubt that meaningful engagement
that inspires confidence in both Palestine and Israel
cannot begin while settlement activity continues day in
and day out, including in occupied East Jerusalem.
Indeed, Israel's continuous settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its deliberate
choice for settlements of the regions that separate the
Palestinian territories destroy the basis for peace. We
once again call on Israel, based on its Road Map
commitments, to cease all settlement activity and
return to direct negotiations with the Palestinian side
on the basis of the 1967 borders. That is currently the
only way that will open the path towards the realization
of a two-State solution based on the well-established
principles whereby Israel and Palestine can live side by
side in peace and security.

Palestine has submitted its application for
membership to the United Nations. That historic step
was long in coming. Turkey believes that it is high time
for Palestine to become a Member of the United
Nations and to be recognized by all nations, based on
its 1967 borders, as a full-fledged Member State within
the international community.

The very notion of a two-State solution, reaching
as far back as 1947, is the firm and clear basis for that.
Common sense and good conscience dictate that, as
Israel did 63 years ago, Palestine should become a
Member of the United Nations. That will also help
direct negotiations, since it will create political
equality between the two parties. Ultimately, beyond
all the legal or political arguments, it is simply not fair
to hold the State of Palestine hostage to Israel's
continued intransigence.

Turkey welcomes the recent prisoner exchange.
This is a humanitarian issue and, irrespective of other
developments, Turkey has played its part to support the
talks and to ensure that a fair deal could be struck that
would also help create a positive atmosphere for
addressing other issues.

Meanwhile, the situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be an embarrassment to the international
community. The inhumane and illegal practices there
must end. Unfortunately, Israel's unlawful blockade of
Gaza continues. The international community must
ensure that there is accountability both for the blockade
and for Israel's attack on the humanitarian aid flotilla
last year that left nine civilians dead in international
waters. That is why we envisage mobilizing the
relevant platforms, with the support of Member States,
in order to refer that issue to the International Court of
Justice.

On the other hand, having welcomed the unity
agreement among the Palestinians, Turkey hopes that
the process of national reconciliation can be concluded
soon with the formation of an inclusive and
democratically representative Government that will
take the Palestinian nation to free and fair elections.

In conclusion, let me reiterate once more
Turkey's strong support for the realization of a just and
lasting comprehensive peace in the region, based on
the two-State solution, as well as our determination to
assist our Palestinian brothers and sisters in attaining
their long-delayed goal of a viable, peaceful and
prosperous State of Palestine that is a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations.

