Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank the Polish presidency for organizing
what is a very timely open debate given the truly
disastrous current international situation in various
regions of the world. We are being forced to discuss
the issue thanks to a lack of action on the part of States
themselves, and first among them the members of the
Security Council, in preventing international conflicts,
in which civilian populations are the primary victims.
The Security Council is the key and the sole organ
within the United Nations system with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Today, unfortunately, it has become a forum
for geopolitical confrontation where genuine conflict
resolution is sacrificed to the promotion of individual
States' interests.

Dozens of Palestinians, including children, died
in clashes on the border between Gaza and Israel last
week, and hundreds of people were injured. We have
still not received convincing evidence of the use of
chemical weapons in Douma, and yet declarations that
have been made about that here in the Security Council
have been used to justify acts of criminal military
aggression against Syria. To use an expression that
has become commonplace in this Chamber, it is highly
likely that we are dealing with open provocation in that
regard. In a different time, a similar excuse was used to
start a war against Iraq.

As a result of shelling, people continue to die in
south-eastern Ukraine. To date, four years after the
brutal incineration of more than 40 people during
clashes outside the Trade Union House in Odessa, that
crime has gone unpunished. The suffering of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable groups, during armed
conflict is a direct consequence of States' unwillingness
or inability to sacrifice their political ambitions for the
sake of preventing and resolving conflicts.

I would also like to draw the Council's attention
to a vulnerable group of professionals who are
always on the scene in danger zones - translators
and interpreters. In extremely high-risk situations
of armed conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding,
translators and interpreters are in serious danger, since
their professional work means that they have to help
establish a dialogue between parties to conflicts and
with civilian populations. In our view, it is long past
time to formulate an international instrument, whether
in the form of an international treaty or a Security
Council or General Assembly resolution, that would
affirm the special status of translators and interpreters
in dangerous situations and improve their protection.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Republic of Belarus has never avoided international
efforts to maintain peace and security, especially in
a regional context. Belarus continues to consistently
support a peaceful settlement of the conflict in south-
eastern Ukraine, contributing to it by holding in
Minsk the meetings of the Trilateral Contact Group on
Ukraine and its subsidiary working groups, including
the subsidiary group on security. We also support
establishing mutually acceptable parameters for the
possible deployment of United Nations peacekeepers
to the region that would satisfy all the parties, without
exception. I want to assure the Council that Belarus
stands ready to continue to work comprehensively
to promote the peaceful settlement of this situation,
including at the regional level.

