Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Panama would like to begin its statement in this open
debate by welcoming the wise initiative of the Malaysian
presidency to convene this event to exchange views on
something of ever-increasing importance and on the
challenges we face as a global community in ensuring
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), their delivery systems and related materials.
We would like to first thank the Secretary-General and
the initial briefers for their contributions, from both the
tactical and academic points of View.

My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf
of Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In our national
capacity we would like to add a few additional remarks.

Panama is proud to belong to the only region in the
world that is free of nuclear weapons. As a feature of
our foreign policy, we have committed, in all forums,
to the non-proliferation of all nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, as we are convinced that they pose
the greatest threat to international peace and security.
My country believes that the ability to live in a world
free of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons is an
ethical imperative. Thereby, we consider disarmament
to be an essential component of efforts to promote not
only international peace and security but development
as well.

Forty-nine years after the signing of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, we should recognize that the Agency
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean has been a reference point
in various parts of the world for the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, and we hope that trend
will continue. Today we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment, adopted in 1967 with the signing of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as with the ratification of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty and, more recently, the resolutions of the
Security Council, particularly resolution 1540 (2004).

In step with the review opportunities offered
by the conventions, such as the Biological Weapons
Convention Review Conference in November, and as
Panama does not have an army nor weapons of mass
destruction, we have reiterated our support for efforts
that tend to yield more encouraging results that are in
line with their stated objectives.

Coinciding with your concept note (S/2016/712, annex), Mr. President, my country is aware of
emerging trends of proliferation of technological and
scientific progress and international commerce, and as
Mr. Koblentz noted this morning, this fourth industrial
revolution, which implies greater democratization of
those advances, makes them more vulnerable to the
threat that non-State actors will obtain and exploit
them. Hence the importance of resolution 1540 (2004),
through which, in this multilateral forum, we pledge
to stop weapons of mass destruction from reaching
dangerous non-State actors.

To that end, and with a View to better contribute to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), Panama
has worked consistently to adopt a national plan and
to effectively regulate dual-use materials in order to
prevent chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials from being diverted to non-State actors, to
the detriment of commerce and safe investments and
humankind itself.

Panama has been firm in its call for the immediate
cessation of recent tests, and we have reiterated that the
development of WMDs and their use is an act against
peace and international cooperation that only aggravates
tension among States and regions, threatening their
political stability and seriously jeopardizing the
peaceful coexistence of their peoples. Making strides
towards a more peaceful, secure world is a collective
global responsibility.

Noting the importance of regional coordination
efforts and their positive impact on the world, I am
pleased to share that in December, along with the
Organization of American States, Panama will host the
regional high-level conference on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). That will be a prelude to
Panama's assuming the presidency the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism in 2017. There we
hope to continue the work of capacity-building and
strengthening cooperation, which are both necessary to
face this significant challenge.

In today's world, with the growing relevance of
gender equality, I wish to point out the need to consider
the role of women in the promotion of peace and in
disarmament efforts. While scientific studies have
shown that women and children are the most affected
by radioactive exposure, thanks to their being highly
vulnerable in conflicts, they should not be seen merely
as victims but as part and parcel of the resolution and
decision-making process.

Additionally, it is essential to recognize the danger
represented by the production and possession of nuclear
weapons when they are seen as political tools to ensure
the distribution of power in the world. The strategy of
nuclear deterrence is but a myth by which, in reality,
we are exposing ourselves to a great danger. We must
recognized it as such and assume the corresponding
responsibility if we are to achieve a sustainable world.

Finally, Panama would also like to highlight
the pressing need to raise public awareness of
the importance of bringing about a world free of
threats, a world in which Governments, civil society,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations, academia and social media are called
on to promote education as a tool for peace that leads
to security, disarmament and the non-proliferation
of WMDs. Along those lines, I wish to stress the
multidimensional focus of security linked to human
rights and development. The non-proliferation of
WMDs through the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is indisputably the path to true
sustainable development that will ensure a safer world.
The Security Council's efforts and, more important,
the commitment of Member States, are therefore
fundamental to achieving that objective.

