Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French):
North Korea continues to represent the most serious
proliferation crisis that the international community
has had to deal with in the early years of the twenty-
first century. It is a major challenge to our collective
security, and I would like to thank Secretary of State
Michael Pompeo for organizing today's meeting.

What is the situation? The process that has been
launched between South Korea and North Korea, on
the one hand, and between the United States and North
Korea, on the other, has helped to reduce the tensions
in the Korean peninsula since the beginning of this
year. The Singapore summit, initiated by the United
States, was an important event in that regard, and we
should certainly welcome it, especially in the light of
the mistrust that prevailed throughout 2017. We have
taken note of the commitments made by North Korea
on 19 September in the Pyongyang Declaration aimed
at easing tensions and bringing about a rapprochement
between the two Koreas. In that regard, I welcome the
diplomatic efforts of President Moon, which were also
on view again at last week's inter-Korean summit.

However, we must not lose sight of the fact that as
long as North Korea has not given up its nuclear and
ballistic programmes, they will continue to pose a
threat to the region and the whole world. The Council's
priority should be to induce North Korea to display a
significant willingness to retreat from its ambition
to build an operational nuclear arsenal and to make
concrete moves in that direction. As a matter of fact,
the International Atomic Energy Agency recently
pointed out that North Korea had continued its nuclear
activities in the past few months, as did the United

Nations Panel of Experts assisting the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). We should also
highlight the fact that North Korea has not ratified
the Chemical Weapons Convention and continues to
maintain military chemical and biological capabilities.
The investigation conducted following the death of
Kim Jong-nam in February 2017 in Kuala Lumpur
established links with North Korea.

As a result, and despite the welcome reduction in
tensions, the situation remains a threat to international
security. As long as North Korea's nuclear and
ballistic programmes continue to exist, any incident
is capable of provoking an escalation. Furthermore,
while this programme continues, there is always a risk
of secondary proliferation from North Korea to other
countries, and even to non-State entities, which will
persist until North Korea's arsenal has been eliminated
and its nuclear and ballistic experts have been converted
back to civilian sectors.

The Council's task must be to keep up the pressure
so that this time North Korea keeps to its commitments.
For the process to be successful, it must be based on
concrete measures, and North Korea must demonstrate
a genuine willingness to dismantle its nuclear and
ballistic programmes in a comprehensive, verifiable and
irreversible manner in line with Council resolutions. We
expect it to go above and beyond what are admittedly
symbolic and reversible gestures, such as announcing
the destruction of its nuclear test site. In that regard,
the International Atomic Energy Agency will certainly
have an important role to play, for which it is actively
preparing. Experts from the nuclear-weapon States
should be at the forefront in verifying the most highly
sensitive activities. France will be ready to assist when
the time comes. A first concrete step could be making
a complete and accurate inventory of North Korea's
nuclear and ballistic programme.
How should we approach this? First and foremost,
we should support the existing dialogue, because it
is vital to restoring confidence and making progress
towards denuclearization. At the same time, we must
collectively maintain a firm policy with regard to North
Korea by rigorously applying the Security Council
sanctions. Sanctions are not an end in themselves but
rather a strategy for applying pressure in the pursuit of
a political solution. I think that the Security Council
must remain united on the fact that the sanctions
remain essential. We should continue to be particularly
vigilant in ensuring that we all respect our obligations
under international law. In that regard, I commend the
remarkable work done by the Panel of Experts and the
Sanctions Committee, both of which are essential tools
for verifying the effective application of sanctions, and
here I want to highlight the importance we attach to the
independence and impartiality of the work of the Panel
of Experts.

As several previous speakers have already
mentioned, we must combat the strategies deployed
by North Korea to circumvent the sanctions through
various illicit activities ranging from money-laundering
to ocean trans-shipment operations of oil and coal.

President Kim Jong Un says that he wants
denuclearization, and he has asked us not to doubt his
intentions. For our part, we willjudge him by his actions,
and we call for a united and determined response from
the international community that respects the decisions
of the Council. The credibility and sustainability
of our collective security architecture - and of
non-proliferation in particular - are at stake. That is
the path that France wishes to see the Council take here.

