Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I join other
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Alain Le Roy and Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos for their comprehensive and useful briefings on
the situation in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
representative of Haiti for sharing his perspective on
the state of play there.

It has been a very difficult year for the people of
Haiti. Just as stability was beginning to be witnessed in
the country and the indicators of economic development
were showing an upward trend, the country was struck
by a massive earthquake on 12 January 2010. The
disaster took the lives of nearly 300,000 persons and
injured an equal number. An earthquake of such
devastation - the worst in the region in more than 200
years - demanded relief operations of a huge
magnitude. The international community rose to the
occasion and undertook the challenge to help the people
of Haiti. Our work continues, and should continue as
long as the Haitian people require our assistance in their
efforts at reconstruction.

Last week, the Council issued a press statement
on the anniversary of the earthquake in Haiti. We wish
to convey our sincere sympathies to the people and
Government of Haiti and to the families of the United
Nations personnel who lost their lives. We assure them
of our continued support.
In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake,
India made a cash contribution of $5 million to the
Government of Haiti towards relief measures, as a
token of our solidarity with the people of Haiti. I
would also like to recall that the Central Emergency
Response Fund was put to good use in the earliest
stages of recovery work in Haiti. India attaches
importance to that facility, to which we have made
significant contributions since its inception and to
which we have contributed $500,000 each year over
the three-year period since 2009. Furthermore,
recognizing the need to provide basic amenities -
shelter, drinking water and sanitation - to the Haitian
people, we have joined Brazil and South Africa in
expanding the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Trust
Fund's waste management project in Haiti, in both its
area of coverage and its scope in handling different
types of waste. IBSA is spending over $2 million in
that effort and for the reconstruction of a community
health centre in Haiti.

As we progress towards reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Haiti, we think there is an urgent need
for better coordination among aid agencies, donors and
the Government of Haiti. This would not only avoid
duplication but also direct aid to sectors considered
most necessary by Haiti. The various United Nations
agencies have to work hard on improving Haiti's
technical capacity to fully and properly utilize
assistance. For our part, India has pledged to
reconstruct one of the Government ministries, to be
identified by the Government of Haiti. In that context,
I must share with the Council that, in spite of several
efforts that I personally made, it is perhaps the lack of
coordination that is making it very difficult for us even
to identify where our offer could be best utilized.

We highly commend and support the role played
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in humanitarian and recovery efforts in
the aid of the local authorities. We are proud of their
sterling efforts, both on the civilian and police sides, in
the immediate aftermath of the disastrous earthquake,
in spite of the tremendous losses that the Mission itself
faced. I also recall the contributions made by the
Indian police officers deployed with MINUSTAH,
which presently number 470 in three contingents, two
of which were deployed by India after the earthquake
at the request of the United Nations. MINUSTAH
peacekeepers continue to provide full support to the
local authorities. We therefore urge all stakeholders
that any action that impedes the work of MINUSTAH
peacekeepers should be avoided.

Even as Haiti battled to overcome the disaster
caused by the earthquake, it was struck by an outbreak
of cholera, which further aggravated the already grim
situation. In the midst of all that, the country has
become embroiled in a political crisis following the
presidential elections. As far as the cholera epidemic is
concerned, we hope that the recent appointment by the
Secretary-General of an independent panel of experts
to determine the source of the epidemic will submit its
report based on scientific studies and that this will
adequately address the allegations that have been
made. I am sure that Doctor Balakrish Nair, Director of
the National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases
in Kolkata, who is a member of the panel, will make a
valuable contribution to the panel's work.

We think that concerted reconstruction and
rehabilitation work demands stable political and
administrative conditions. We therefore call upon all
political actors in Haiti to exercise restraint and avoid
actions that cause violence and distract focus from the
urgently needed reconstruction and rehabilitation work.
The focus of the United Nations should of course
remain on humanitarian and infrastructure work. It
should not get too deeply involved in the domestic
political process, which is better handled by regional
organizations in cooperation with the local political
establishment.

