The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maleski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force pursuant to Security Council resolution
1058 (1996) (S/1996/961).

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1996/979, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 19 November 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
the text of a letter dated 18 November 1996 from the

 
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia addressed to the Secretary-
General, which will be issued under the symbol
S/1996/983.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I call on the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, who wishes to make a statement
before the voting.


