Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month and to wish you every success in
your work. I should like also to thank your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Spain, for his efficient
stewardship of the work of the Council last month.
Similarly, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
the report (S/2016/1109) presented on his behalf today
to the Security Council. In addition, I wish everyone a
happy and successful 2017, in particular Mr. Ladsous,
and I thank him for all of his efforts.

In previous statements before the Security Council
and on other occasions, we have very often stressed the
continuing improvement of the situation in Darfur, in
particular from a security, political and humanitarian
standpoint. The various reports of the joint working
group, as well as the visits and missions by United

Nations representatives and special representatives of
various countries, in addition to the report presented
today, all have confirmed that progress has been made
in Darfur. This is, of course, the result of the efforts
made by the Sudanese Government, with the help of
our international partners. The Sudanese armed forces,
as well as other regular forces, have been able to take
control of the entire territory of Darfur following the
departure of the rebel forces, which are now outside of
the Sudan.

All of this has made it possible to ensure security
and to prevent tribal conflicts. The Council can see that
in 2016, there was no significant tribal conflict that
could have had an impact on security and stability in
Darfur. For us, that is a great accomplishment and a
great step forward, if we take account of the four most
recent reports of the Secretary-General since 2015.

We also have the first report of 2016 (S/2016/1109),
which indicates that tribal clashes were a serious threat
to peace and security in Darfur, which is no longer the
case. That is why the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has been able
to justify its presence, thus far, in Darfur.

Today, however, what prevails in Darfur is security,
stability and recovery, which have had a positive impact
on the humanitarian situation as well. In 2016, we saw
the return of 93,000 displaced persons and refugees
who returned from Chad and who have re-established
themselves in Darfur. Southern Darfur saw the return
of 71,000 people; 65,000 returned to western Darfur;
32,000 to central Darfur and 21,600 to eastern Darfur.
All ofthat is thanks to the provision ofbasic services to
their villages. Those villages are part of the voluntary
return that was facilitated by the League of Arab States
and Qatar, as well as other countries, particularly China
and Japan - countries that have also contributed to the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Our Government
also wants to put a plan in place to improve the
conditions for voluntary return for our citizens.

The Sudanese Government is doing everything it
can to establish a holistic and long-term peace across
our national territories to move us away from war and
fratricide. That is Why we are pursuing dialogue and
negotiations, in order to advance the peace process and
put an end to the conflict. We have made great efforts
to work with different factions, and were successful
when the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid joined
the National Dialogue, launched by our President.
That initiative was integrated into the constitutional
amendments that are currently under discussion. Thabo
Mbeki, Chair of the African Union High Level Panel
on Darfur, led the ongoing African mediation efforts,
which seek better results with the other functions, with
a view to achieving sustainable peace.

I reiterate the demand that we have already made
of the Security Council - to bring pressure to bear
on the more recalcitrant movements as a means to
encourage them to continue negotiations in order to
put an end to the suffering of our population in Darfur.
I would also like to kindly request that the Council
deal firmly with the case of the rebel Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nour, who has consistently rejected any
initiative that promotes dialogue. He is called Mr. No
in the Sudan, as he has rejected all of our proposals for
dialogue. In the face of that, we must apply the Security
Council's resolutions firmly, particularly paragraph 3
(c) of resolution 1581 (2005). It is very important that
Abdul Wahid be added to the sanctions list. The African
members of the Security Council should take that into
account. We officially request that the Council take that
matter in hand.

For two years now, the Secretary-General has
responded positively to my country and to the demand
that we made for a gradual disengagement strategy for
UNAMID. We made that request in 2014; it is a logical
and legitimate request, which is based on a number of
different considerations.

First of all, the security situation and the
humanitarian and political situation have improved
drastically in Darfur. Everyone is aware of that. The
reports of the Secretary-General are also evidence of
that fact. That is why the presence of UNAMID, in its
current form, does not seem logical. UNAMID also has
a very significant budget, whereas the international
community needs those resources to react to
humanitarian crises and issues elsewhere in the world.

In addition, the withdrawal of UNAMID from
certain sectors would still allow us to continue the
peace process because those sectors no longer require
a UNAMID presence. Currently there is an unequal
situation in some zones of Darfur, but it covers an
enormous territory. Peace is possible thanks to a
series of factors that we see are seeing now. That is
why there should be a progressive, flexible and quick
withdrawal strategy.

We have carried out a number of cycles of
negotiations and consultations with the United Nations
and the African Union with the help of the joint
working group. That group has met four times, most
recently in November. There were also two evaluation
visits made to different parts of Darfur. The group
demonstrated that the situation has improved, thereby
allowing the withdrawal of UNAMID from eastern
Darfur, for example. Representatives of the United
Nations, with whom we have carried out discussions,
continue to reject the withdrawal of UNAMID from
other sectors as well. That is why I would like to make
some clarifications.

The Government of my country has reached the
conclusion that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations does not take seriously the disengagement
strategy for UNAMID. However, my Government
has, at several turns, demanded that the strategy be
taken into account and that dialogue and national
consultation be considered. That is the request of the
Sudanese Government. We are surprised to see that the
international community continues to bear the financial
and material burden for UNAMID when, in fact, there
is no longer a need to do so. UNAMID is no longer
needed in some sectors. It is as if UNAMID were an
end in itself and not, in fact, a means of securing peace
in Darfur.

The UNAMID budget is now a whopping $1.3 billion
annually. A small fraction of that would allow for
certain cities in the area of Darfur to be supported,
which, in turn, would help us make progress in our
efforts for development. Different agencies have also
visited various regions and sectors of Darfur i Jebel
Marra in particular. We therefore stress the need to
build a road that would allow us to end the armed
conflict and the armed confrontations. It would be very
useful if we could begin such a project. We must take
all the necessary measures to secure disengagement in
a gradual fashion, which would allow us to implement
the objectives set up in February 2015. I would also like
to stress that my Government will not accept the option
whereby the withdrawal or the end of the work of the
joint working group, which my Government is a part
of and is very important to us, and we need to continue
the implementation of a UNAMID withdrawal strategy.

We have sent two messages to the Secretary-
General on that subject. One of them was sent by the
Foreign Minister of my country. We have also contacted
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on that
issue. We agree with the Secretary-General's report,
in that it stresses the need to resolve the deep-seated
causes of conflict in Darfur and to continue to commit
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

To that end, my country continues its efforts
to carry out holistic development in all sectors and
across Darfur. As the Council knows, one of the main
problems in Darfur is the scarcity of resources. Our
efforts are therefore ongoing. We are trying to better
connect the two cities of Al-Fashir and Khartoum. It is
the first time that high-speed roads have been built and,
for the first time in a long while, products from Jabel
Marra are now being sold in Khartoum.

Lastly, I would also like to highlight our sincere
willingness to achieve peace in Darfur and to continue
our cooperation with the United Nations, the African
Union and all of our other partners so that we can attain
our noble objectives and meet everyone's interests.
I would like to reiterate my gratitude to UNAMID
and to all troop- and police-contributing countries. I
should also like to commend the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Special Representative for
Darfur, Mr. Martin Uhomoibhi. In one year, he has
assisted us in making considerable headway and in
re-establishing trust between the Sudan and UNAMID.
Once again, I should like to stress that we are ready
to continue dialogue with all of the members of the
Council and to cooperate in a positive manner.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
