Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for his outstanding
work heading the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
I would also like to thank President Mkapa for his
briefing and his assessment of the process.

What has been reported to us here today about the
Sudan is good news. The self-determination referendum
began on the scheduled date and proceeded under
transparent and credible conditions. France commends
all participants who made it possible for this important
stage of the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement to take place, beginning with the
authorities in Khartoum and Juba, who embarked on a
constructive path of partnership rather than
confrontation. We also commend the Secretary-
General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, which
organized the voting under very difficult conditions,
and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, which
provided logistical and technical support critical to
organizing the referendum in the largest country in
Africa. Lastly and most importantly, we commend the
people of the Sudan, whose peaceful participation,
according to the latest reports, far exceeded the 60 per
cent quorum required to validate the voting.

The parties, however, still have much to do to by
the end of the interim period provided for in the
Agreement. First, a solution must be found in Abyei.
Like previous speakers, we are concerned by the
violence that has occurred there. An agreement appears
to have been reached by the parties, but a lasting
solution must be outlined regarding the status of the
province and the coexistence of the ethnic groups
there. Moreover, post-referendum issues left pending
must be settled. The future of the relationship between
the North and the South depends on a shared
understanding of the placement of the border, security
matters, citizenship and the sharing of wealth.

Regarding Abyei, as with other post-referendum
matters, we support the facilitation work conducted by
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
headed by President Mbeki. We encourage the parties
to spare no effort and to make the concessions
necessary to a lasting peace.

While we welcome the successful conduct of the
referendum, we cannot fail to note the deterioration of
the situation in Darfur. What is taking place is not a
case of sporadic attacks; it is a war between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and rebel groups that is also
being waged against civilians, sowing death and
creating tens of thousands of newly displaced persons.
We are also very concerned about the Bulgarian pilots
abducted on 13 January.

Given the current instability, what is needed is for
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel groups to
achieve a genuine ceasefire and sustainable peace. To
that end, peace talks must take place between the
combatants. The only framework for such negotiations
that exists today is the Doha talks, conducted by Joint
Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassole with the support of the
Government of Qatar. This framework is open to
improvement. New incentives must be found to bring
the Sudanese Government and all rebel groups back to
the table. We must nurture this tool because it is today
the only means of bringing those warring parties
together.

We continue to lend our full support to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and strongly condemn the obstacles placed in
its way. It must redouble its efforts to protect civilians,
as required by its mandate. We believe that progress is
possible.

I would like to conclude by saying that there can
be no peace without justice in Darfur, in keeping with
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

