Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to express my condolences to Malawi and
Tanzania on the deaths last week of their nationals in
peacekeeping operations.

United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa
have achieved considerable successes over the course
of the Organization's history in terms of maintaining
international peace and security and protecting
civilians. The tasks of those peacekeeping operations
have evolved over decades and the expectations of the
international community have increased. However,
at the moment those operations are currently facing
unprecedented challenges in carrying out complicated
tasks in an unconventional security environment and
a tendency to reduce the funding for those missions in
Africa. That is why our meeting today is particularly
important. We therefore thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this open debate.

We are keen on participating in this meeting
in order to underscore our commitment to joining
any effort aimed at promoting the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations on the African continent. In
our capacity as Chair of the Group of 77 and China,
we have contributed to negotiations on increasing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, the 2019
peacekeeping operations budget and the Secretary-
General's proposals on the structural reform of the
peace and security architecture.

Egypt is committed to supporting and developing
peacekeeping operations in Africa, and it has
contributed to those operations since 1960. Over
the past six decades, we have contributed more than
30,000 Egyptian troops and police to 38 peacekeeping
operations. Currently, Egypt is among the 10 countries
that contribute the greatest number of troops and police
to peacekeeping operations.

Egypt believes that in order to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, we need to
adopt a comprehensive approach to all stages of those
operations, including mandate design and periodic
review, the configuration of missions with the provision
of equipment and deployment processes, as well as
exit strategies. Therefore, we must adopt practical
and objective frameworks to assess performance,
resources and the alignment of the configuration of
every mission with its mandate and with the security
and political environment. Egypt would like to stress
the following points.

First, priority must be given to political solutions,
and the United Nations response to African conflicts
must be adequate and comprehensive. Peace cannot
be achieved through military and security solutions
alone without clear political vision. In order to ensure
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations must increase its efforts and resources
in order to respond to all stages of the conflict, and
strive to build peace according to the priorities of every
African host country and in line with the specificities
of every conflict.

Secondly, it is important to be committed to
the basic principles of peacekeeping, including the
consent of the parties to the conflict, impartiality and
the non-use of force, except in cases of defending the
mandates or self-defence. Those are the main criteria
for ensuring the success ofpeacekeeping operations and
the safety and security of international peacekeepers on
the African continent.

Thirdly, we must design clear and sequenced
mandates for peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The clarity of mandates is one of the most important
criteria for ensuring the success of peacekeeping
operations. Mandates must be realistic and capable of
keeping track of developments on the ground, including
political developments.

Fourthly, we must ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers. We have witnessed recently an increase
in casualties and in threats facing peacekeeping
operations, especially as those international operations
expand in Africa. Therefore, we must focus, as a
United Nations priority, on the safety and security of
peacekeepers and we must allocate financial resources
and provide technical capabilities in line with the
challenges facing our international troops in Africa.

Fifthly, we must stress the importance of national
ownership and respect for the sovereignty of concerned
African States. Peacekeeping operations must
contribute effectively to creating the necessary security
environment to allow States and institutions to carry
out their responsibilities, including the provision of
security and basic services to their citizens and support
for the basic role of States in ending conflicts.

Sixthly, we must ensure an equitable distribution
of responsibilities and strengthen the partnerships
of the United Nations. In order to ensure the success
of peacekeeping operations, we must ensure a just
distribution of obligations and tasks among troop-
contributing countries, donor countries and the
Secretariat. This is also linked to strengthening the
strategic and operational coordination between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).

In closing, my country endorsed the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations in September, as part of the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have
also signed on to the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians. That demonstrates Egypt's commitment
to continuing to work to achieve more effective
international peacekeeping operations.

The Foreign Ministry of Egypt and the Cairo
International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding hosted over the past
few days a high-level regional conference in Cairo on
developing the performance of peacekeeping operations
in Africa. A number of United Nations and African
officials took part in that conference, including the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
The conference sought to build on the content of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments and to give troop-
contributing countries the opportunity to contribute
to the discussion on developing the performance of
peacekeeping operations.

As President ofthe AU in 2019, Egypt will continue
to strengthen the strategic partnership between the AU
and the United Nations in peacekeeping, reconstruction
and development in Africa. Egypt will inaugurate
a relevant AU centre in Cairo that seeks to ensure
cooperation and the mobilization of efforts to achieve
peace, stability and security on our continent and in
the world.

