Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Two months after the adoption of resolution 1127 (1997),
no substantive progress has been achieved in the Angolan
peace process. The peace that has been long awaited by the
Angolan people continues to elude them. China is deeply
concerned about this.

A complete end to many years of strife in Angola, the
realization of Angolan national reconciliation and peace,
and, in turn, the creation of conditions for the resumption
of economic and social development in Angola, constitute
the demand of the entire Angolan people. It is the common
aspiration of numerous African countries, and it is also an
important goal that the international community, including
this Council, has been working for over a number of years.

In recent years, the hot spot issues in southern Africa
have been resolved, one by one. The aspirations for peace,
stability and development have already become a historical
tide flowing over the entire African continent. China
sincerely hopes that Angola will also swiftly complete its
peace process and begin its reconstruction and development.

The key to the realization of peace in Angola lies in
the parties concerned, particularly UNITA, their carrying
out without delay the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
and other agreements between the two sides in Angola.
Particularly with regard to disarmament and the
normalization of State administration, UNITA should
show its sincerity and adopt a cooperative and serious
attitude.

As long as these tasks are not completed, there
cannot possibly be genuine progress in the Angolan peace
process. This would be in contravention of the will of the
nation and people of Angola, and it is also something that
the international community, including this Council,
cannot agree to.

The draft resolution will give effect to measures for
further sanctions against Angola as provided for in
resolution 1127 (1997). It is well known that China has
throughout taken a very cautious attitude towards
sanctions in order that Angola can achieve peace at an
early date.

As a special case, China voted in favour of
resolution 1127 (1997). It will also vote in favour of the
draft resolution. We wish to reiterate that sanctions are
not an end in themselves, but are a means which had to
be resorted to for the advancement of the peace process
in Angola. We hope that the adoption of this draft
resolution will help to make UNITA take a cooperative
attitude towards the peace process, swiftly carry out all
the obligations contained in the Lusaka Protocol and,
under the overall leadership of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation, make its own contribution to
Angolan peace, stability and development.

