Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire,
Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea. The three countries
align themselves with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the African Union later today.

I would like to thank Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on the progress made in the implementation of
resolution 2378 (2017), and Ms. Sarah Blakemore for
her enlightening and poignant briefing.
Resolution 2378 (2017) was the first resolution to
comprehensively address the issue of the reform of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, following
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446), and it
was adopted against the backdrop of the Secretary-
General's efforts to reform the United Nations
peace and security architecture on the basis of the
recommendations of the HIPPO report. We are pleased
to note the outcome of the discussions in the various
Committees of the General Assembly on restructuring
the peace and security pillar. We hope that the current
momentum will enable the United Nations to become
better organized when responding to conflict and crisis
situations, by adopting an approach that covers all
pillars and political and operational responsibilities.
We believe that it is important to continue to reform
peacekeeping operations in order to implement the
plans and vision of the United Nations international
peace and security architecture to enable it to respond
to the many challenges brought about by current crises.

The issue of the reform of peacekeeping operations
has sparked growing interest among all stakeholders
since the high-level open debate convened in
March under the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands (see S/PV.8218). That debate provided a
good opportunity to discuss the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. By the end of
the debate, it was clear to us that, as underscored by
the initiative, peacekeeping is above all a shared
responsibility. Peacekeeping is not exclusive to troop-
contributing countries, and effective reform efforts
cannot focus solely on those countries. It is a collective
endeavour that involves the States Members of the
United Nations, the Security Council, host countries,
troop-contributing countries, financial contributors
and regional partners. Effective reform efforts require
ongoing coordination among all key peacekeeping
actors. That is why we welcome the notion of shared
responsibility, highlighted in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which was developed following a series of
consultations among all Member States. We welcome
the ever-increasing number of countries that are signing
onto the Declaration as a sign of their commitment to
supporting the reform efforts under way. We welcome
the wealth of information that will be shared during the
high-level event to be chaired by the Secretary-General
on 25 September, on the sidelines of the general debate
of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
Resolution 2378 (2017) underscored the importance
of the proper implementation and follow-up of United
Nations peacekeeping reform, in accordance with
existing mandates and procedures. In that regard,
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Cote d'Ivoire now chairs, has been tasked with
reviewing reform initiatives, in close cooperation with
all the relevant stakeholders. Over the past year, the
Working Group has facilitated important discussions
on peacekeeping reform, enhanced triangular
cooperation, the protection of civilians, the role of
women in peacekeeping, strategic force generation
and capacity-building. The Group is vital in that it
fosters discussions on various aspects of the reform and
supports implementation and follow-up.

With regard to strategic force generation and efforts
to bridge existing gaps, important discussions took
place in December 2017 under the Japanese presidency
of the Security Council (see S/PV.8150), based on the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General. We welcome
the fact that the Secretariat has already taken important
steps to improve United Nations force-generation
processes and capacity-building. The outcome of
the Vancouver Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
conference and pledges made at that event attest to the
shared commitment of Members States. It is important
that we honour the promises made at the conference. It
is our view that progress on the issue requires ongoing
efforts and political support from Member States. We
look forward to the upcoming defence ministerial
meeting, scheduled to take place in spring 2019.

Improving the performance and effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations is also
an important issue highlighted in resolution 2378
(2017), and we note the ongoing efforts in that regard.
It is essential to monitor the training and capacity of
peacekeeping operations, in particular their military,
police and civilian components, in order to enhance
performance in important areas, such as the protection
of civilians and the promotion of human rights. It is also
vital that we all remain objective with regard to issues
relating to the performance of peacekeeping operations.
We must understand that the effective implementation
of peacekeeping mandates is a responsibility shared by
all stakeholders and that it depends on several critical
factors. It is also imperative that we make every effort
to ensure that civilian and uniformed personnel have the
skills and training required in an increasingly complex
operational environment. Without the right resources
and skills to match their operational environment, it is
difficult for contingents to discharge their mandated
tasks. We cannot ask for more to be done with less.

The Security Council must also shoulder its
responsibility, in particular with regard to solving
problems posed by "Christmas-tree" mandates,
according to the term used by the Secretary-General.
Its inability to formulate mandates defining realistic
and achievable goals has been one the principal
factors contributing to the difficulties that have been
encountered in implementing them. The issue of
performance should therefore be considered in the light
of this problem if we are to make progress on it.

One of the important pillars of the ongoing
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations is
the strengthening of partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union. The African countries that are members of the
Security Council are pleased with the progress that
has been made in the framework of the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
with closer collaboration, more regular exchanges of
information, more thorough consultations and better-
coordinated action. In that regard, we look forward
to the comprehensive integrated performance policy
framework that the Secretariat is working on at the
request of the Special Committee on peacekeeping
Operations. It is also important to ensure that
peacekeeping operations take account of the gender
aspect, in accordance with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2242 (2015).

We all recognize the importance of improving
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
funding for African peace operations authorized by
the Security Council. In resolution 2378 (2017), the
Council expressed its intention to consider the practical
arrangements that can be made and the conditions
necessary for establishing a mechanism by which
African peace operations authorized by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
can be partly financed through statutory contributions
on a case-by-case basis. To that end, considerable
efforts have been made to strengthen the mechanisms
for the establishment of mandates and the management,
control and accountability of African peace operations,
as well as to finalize frameworks regarding respect
for human rights, conduct and discipline. These
are all requirements that can help to achieve the
objectives of accountability, transparency and respect
for international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, in accordance with United Nations
standards for conduct and discipline.
These concerns are fully reflected in the Secretary-
General's latest report, issued in July (S/2018/678). We
therefore believe it is time that the Council translated
into concrete action its expressed intention to fund
African peace operations on a case-by-case basis. We
will continue to advocate for achieving this important
goal, which we believe is vital to strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in the context of collective security.
We will work closely with all members of the Council
in the next few months to advance the discussions,
building on the positive momentum generated in recent
years by resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). We
hope that this dynamic will be further consolidated in
the coming months under the Ivorian and Equatorial
Guinean presidencies of the Security Council, where
we hope to have the support of all the member States of
the Council for the adoption of two resolutions on the
financing of African peace operations and the African
Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.

