Mr. Satoh (Japan): I found it very embarrassing
here today to have to choose between the two seats -
one on the side of Israel and the other on the side of
Palestine. I want to tell both my Palestinian and my
Israeli colleagues that my sitting here today on this side
does not mean anything more than sheer convenience. I
cannot divide myself. I hope that the Security Council
can find a way for us to sit in a more politically
comfortable way in the future.

The Government of Japan is gravely concerned
over the escalating violence and terror in Israel and the
Palestinian autonomous territories, which include the
series of terrorist attacks by Palestinian extremists and
the military campaign into Palestinian cities by the
Israeli Defence Forces.

We are particularly concerned over the killing of
innocent civilians, which can never be justified. In the
past six days alone, more than 80 Israelis and
Palestinians have reportedly been killed and hundreds
more injured. We extend our deep condolences and
sympathies to all the victims and their families.

It is all the more deplorable that these events are
occurring at a time when there are constructive
developments for peace in the region. These include,
first, the adoption by the Security Council of resolution
1397 (2002), which affirmed, for the first time, a vision
of a region where two States, Israel and Palestine,
would live side by side and within secure and
recognized borders; and secondly, the Arab peace
initiative adopted at the Arab summit meeting, based
on the proposal of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia.

The Japanese Government condemns in the
strongest terms all acts of terrorism aimed at innocent
civilians. We have urged the Palestinian Authority at
various levels to do its utmost to suppress extremists.
Last Friday in Tokyo, Foreign Minister Yoriko
Kawaguchi urged the Palestinian Authority, through the
visiting Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council,
Mr. Abu Ala, to act immediately against those
responsible for terrorist actions.

At the same time, the Government of Japan has
urged the Israeli Government to exert maximum
restraint. In a telephone conversation last Saturday,
Foreign Minister Kawaguchi told the Israeli Foreign
Minister, Mr. Shimon Peres, that the incursions into
Palestinian cities by Israeli forces and putting the
headquarters of Chairman Arafat under siege were not
conducive to restoring calm to the situation. She also
called for the immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces
from Palestinian cities. It should be recalled that
Mr. Arafat is the legitimate leader of the Palestinian
people, elected through a democratic process.

The Security Council, with its recent resolution
1402 (2002), has once again sent a strong message to
both parties to put an end to the escalation of violence
and return to the negotiating table. The Government of
Japan fully supports that resolution and requests the
parties concerned to implement it without delay.

We also regard American engagement
indispensable in order to break the impasse and bring
the peace process back on track. In this context, the
mission of General Zinni of the United States, who
remains in the region to continue his mediation efforts,
is of utmost importance. The Government of Japan
appeals to both parties to respond positively to his
efforts and to achieve a ceasefire agreement as soon as
possible. To that end, it dispatched to the region its
special envoy, Ambassador Hiroshi Shigeta, in order to
support General Zinni's efforts. The Government of
Japan is determined to extend all possible assistance to
the efforts to improve the situation.

