Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important and
timely meeting. This is indeed the right moment to take
stock of international efforts on nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and security and to
reaffirm our shared commitment to seek a safer world
for all. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for his support.

Nuclear disarmament and preventing proliferation
are at core of our common concerns when addressing
international security priorities. Portugal is deeply
committed to global disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control. Like most countries around the
world, we believe that the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, as well as other weapons of mass destruction,
represents a major threat to international peace and
security, and we call for a coordinated and resolute
response by the international community as a whole.

We are conscious of, and encouraged by, the
enormous amount of work and resolute efforts that
were accomplished in recent years. We stand by the
basic deal that President Obama outlined in Prague
three years ago to build on a consensus that all nations
have the right to peaceful nuclear energy, that nations
with nuclear weapons have the responsibility to move
towards disarmament, and that those without such
weapons have the responsibility to forsake them. There
have been positive developments, but it is crucial to
continue advancing the agenda with energy and
persistence. Nuclear-weapon States have to do more,
and the non-proliferation regime has to be strengthened
in a credible and verifiable way. In that regard, I will
limit myself to a few key issues and priorities.

First, we have to reaffirm that the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains
the core of global nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. We have to build on the positive
outcome of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, taking forward the three pillars of the NPT in
a comprehensive and balanced approach. The Treaty
must be strengthened and must become universal. We
must also promote and universalize the safeguards
regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
ensure sufficient resources and means to enhance the
monitoring and verification capabilities of the Agency.

Secondly, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty is a vital element of the international
disarmament machinery. We urge all remaining States,
especially those whose signatures and ratifications are
necessary for the Treaty's entry into force, to renew
their political commitment and to take all the necessary
measures in order to achieve that crucial goal.

Thirdly, we have to address the risks posed by
terrorist groups acquiring the equipment and the
technology to produce a nuclear device. In that regard,
we have to ensure the effective implementation of, and
full compliance with, resolution 1540 (2004), as well
as the enforcement of strict export controls for
sensitive materials and technologies. We have to make
full use of non-proliferation mechanisms, like the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and other international
cooperative instruments, as well as the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Proliferation Security Initiative.

Fourthly, we are concerned about the paralysis in
the multilateral negotiations in the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva. A consensual programme of
work should be formulated and negotiations on the
fissile material cut-off treaty should begin without
delay. In that regard, Portugal is convinced that the
question of the expansion of the membership of the
Conference should be recognized as an important step
to revitalize disarmament negotiations.

Finally, issues of security are indivisible and
global. Compliance, enforcement and verification are
key concepts to be put into practice if we want to move
forward on those matters. We must strengthen mutual
trust and confidence. That is why we attach great
importance to the promotion of nuclear-weapon-free
zones, in particular in the Middle East. We are
confident of the necessary follow-up to the 2010 NPT
Review Conference to start a process for the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.

As recent events have shown, the Middle East is
one of the most unstable regions in the world, where
serious risks of internal and international conflict are
present. Furthermore, any conflict in the region has a
particular potential to reverberate in a much wider
area, with a serious danger of increasing any
confrontation. To add nuclear weapons to that situation
only reinforces existing mistrust and fear. It is for that
reason that I very much wish for the success of the
diplomatic conference to be hosted by Finland. A
successful outcome, which rests on the engagement
and support of the countries in the region and other
stakeholders, will substantially contribute to peace and
stability at the regional as well as at the global level.
The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and security. In

that context, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Portugal's full support and active contribution to our
common goals.

