Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join earlier
speakers in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto for his briefing. I take
this opportunity to thank him and all members and
personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication in carrying
out their duties under challenging circumstances. I also
thank Foreign Minister Rabbani for his substantial
briefing and wish him success in his efforts to bring
peace and stability to his country.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/686) provides realistic assessments and
important insights into the work of UNAMA and the
United Nations country team in Afghanistan. More
important, it contains constructive recommendations
that are crucial to maximizing the potential of all the
efforts and resources of the United Nations and the
international community. Kazakhstan looks forward
to the deliberations over, and eventual implementation
of, those recommendations, which would enable us to
then leverage the comparative advantages of the United
Nations and the international community to support the
reconstruction and redevelopment of Afghanistan.

On the political track, allow me to reiterate
Kazakhstan's firm support for the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts undertaken by the Government
of Afghanistan. We also commend the Afghan
Government's continuing commitment and efforts to
address the increasing political, economic and security
challenges faced by the country. We take those as
strong testimony of Afghanistan's aspiration to achieve
national unity and stability, which could contribute to
regional stability.

Kazakhstan is also pleased to note the encouraging
progress made on the electoral issue and the gain in its
credibility, particularly expressed through the setting
of 7 July 2018 as the date for legislative and local
elections. We welcome their inclusive, transparent and
participatory character.

We urge the Government to swiftly implement its
progressive strategies, such as the four-year plan on
security sector reform and many others in different
dimensions, which, in our view, will further strengthen
the capacity of their national institutions.

Kazakhstan reiterates that a peaceful political
settlement is the only way to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in the country. We remain hopeful that
relevant talks will resume at the earliest convenience. It
should be an Afghan-led and -owned process.

Despite somenoteworthydevelopments,Kazakhstan
remains concerned by the fragility and volatility of the
security situation in the country. As reflected in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/783), the conflict
continued unabated throughout the country during the
reporting period. Furthermore, the significant increase
in violent incidents involving the self-proclaimed
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
affiliates and the Taliban have resulted in further
hardship endured by the Afghan people, as well as the
loss of innocent civilian lives. Kazakhstan strongly
supports all regional and global initiatives, including
the efforts of regional organizations to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan.

Kazakhstan commends the positive trends in the
ongoing efforts to counter narcotics in Afghanistan.
Countries in the region and regional organizations
are actively engaged in facing the challenge. We
also recognize important steps towards meeting and
eventually adopting of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime-World Health Organization
International Standards for the Treatment of Drug
Use Disorders. I am also pleased to state that, in the
intersessional period, my country hosted a Precursor
Case Meeting in Almaty in the framework of
regional cooperation on counter-narcotics, held at the
headquarters of Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for combating the illicit
trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances
and their precursors.

Kazakhstan believes that at this stage it remains
imperative for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan through
reconstruction and redevelopment efforts to rebuild
the country. Their political and development activities
should be in greater alignment with the priorities set
by the Afghan Government. We are heartened to hear
that the Afghan Government prioritizes the social
and economic development of Afghanistan, with the
broad involvement of international business in the
implementation of concrete economic projects. The core
of our efforts is to help Afghanistan set up its image as
an attractive partner with great potential. Our Afghani
brothers and sisters needjoint projects, job creation and
the facilitation of the development of communication
and trade.

All Central Asian States are committed to
the development of long-term cooperation with
Afghanistan and intraregional connectivity in the areas
of infrastructure, transit and transport, energy and other
fields, so as to contribute to Afghanistan's integration
into our region's trade and economic cooperation as a
new model of relations with this brotherly country.

My country therefore proposes a new approach,
based on a security and development nexus. That
approach is based on our assumption that economic
development will create the prerequisites for a
political settlement and a solution to security issues.
We would like to stress once again that there can be
no security without development, and no development
without security.

The plight of children continues to be severely
affected by the escalation of the conflict. Afghanistan
has taken many commendable steps towards ensuring its
national security forces are child-free. The Government
is also promoting age-assessment guidelines that we
hope will be widely implemented. However, Kazakhstan
is alarmed that during the current reporting period
the conflicts in Afghanistan recorded a high number
of child casualties - with up to 50 boys reportedly
recruited by Da'esh - and welcomes the joint efforts
of UNAMA and UNICEF to address that challenge.
Attacks on schools and educational personnel is also
an alarming trend, as they prevent access to education
and a return to normalcy. In that regard, we urge the
Government to maintain its commitment to the full
implementation of its action plans and road maps to that
end, and prevent the recruitment and use of children.

Finally, Kazakhstan is pleased that UNAMA and
the Government of Afghanistan have continued to
maintain a close partnership between themselves and
with other stakeholders, which is vital to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. We
hope that these will lead to a more productive and
effective collaboration within the country, the United
Nations system and the international community. Let
me conclude by reaffirming Kazakhstan's sincere
commitment to supporting the Afghan Government in
its effort to achieve peace, security and stability.

