Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): We are
sad to learn, Mr. President, that you will be leaving us.
We seek consolation by telling ourselves that the very
good cooperation between our country and you will
continue in Geneva, which is one of the beautiful
capitals of the French-speaking world. We will also
seek consolation in the fact that your authorities have
made a good choice for your successor.

We thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate,
which we think is entirely appropriate and which is
also an interesting way to review the Syrian presidency,
which, although it took place in the month of August,
was especially rich and well managed by you and your
delegation.

Since the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), United
Nations peacekeeping operations have made great
progress. We must welcome that. But it is useful to
continue seeking to improve our action in that domain.
The paper that you prepared, Sir, and to which we fully
subscribe, contributes usefully to that end.

For my part, I will perhaps focus my comments
on a particular situation, the specific case of what we
have been doing in recent weeks in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, because we think that several
general lessons can be taken from it.

First, by adopting resolution 1484 (2003)
concerning the Interim Emergency Multinational Force
in Bunia and resolution 1493 (2003) providing the new
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
Council has been able to respond to two constraints.
On the one hand, the Council acted on an urgent basis
to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe in Bunia without
boxing itself into an approach to the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that was
exclusively security-oriented. On the other hand, the
Council's actions underlined the privileged position of
the political dimension in the peace process, with an
emphasis on getting the transition under way.

I would like to add that the Council mission to the
region took place between the adoption of the two
resolutions, resolutions 1484 (2003) and 1493 (2003).
That mission undoubtedly proved to be particularly
useful for relaunching and refocusing the peace
process. It reminded the Congolese and foreign parties
to the conflict of all their responsibilities. The mission
also reaffirmed forcefully that a military solution is not
an option and that there can be no impunity for
criminals.

An important episode was Operation Artemis
authorized by resolution 1484 (2003), with the
deployment of French troops and, above all, with the
action of the European Union, which proved to
particularly effective. That operation once again
demonstrated that when circumstances require it, the
decisive involvement of Member States can give the
United Nations the necessary time to deal with difficult
and rapidly unfolding situations on the ground. As was
underlined by the representative of Cameroon in
particular, it is also clear that interventions of that
type - such as were taken by the United Kingdom in
Sierra Leone and now by the United States and the
Economic Community of West African States in
Liberia - must be the exception and must be narrowly
focused. Otherwise, they could quickly lose their
credibility. Basically, it is not a question of taking the
place of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Rather, it is a question of enabling the United Nations
fully to discharge its mandate.

I also wish to refer to one subject covered by
several speakers, including, so convincingly, by
Ambassador Jones Parry. This was the fact that
increasingly we are dealing with peacekeeping
operations that are more and more complex. We can
clearly see that in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In complex operations of this kind, there has be
close consistency among the actions of the
international community: support for the political
process, the disarmament programme, the reintegration
of former combatants, restructuring security and police
forces, electoral assistance and so on. In this kind of
problem, the experience of MONUC has shown how
crucial the United Nations role of coordination is, in
particular the crucial role on the ground of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. During the
mission to West Africa led by Ambassador Greenstock,
one of the things that struck me personally was that at
every stage of the mission, we met officials belonging
to the United Nations system, very often highly
qualified and very competent, who played a
fundamental role, as did, for example, the
representatives of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. But one rarely had
the feeling of united action by the United Nations.
Despite our Organization's extraordinary contribution,
its influence on the ground was not felt as forcefully as
could be possible and desirable. It is therefore useful to
give thought to strengthening the coordination of
action on the ground through the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and to give
thought to the very clear mandates that should be given
by the Security Council in that regard.

Many current peacekeeping operations are taking
place in Africa. I think it is important that countries
outside Africa continue to be concerned with Africa's
security. We welcome measures being taken in that
regard. It is also important that we continue to
encourage Africans to organize themselves. What we
saw in Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire, and what we
now see in Liberia, is African soldiers working hand in
hand with soldiers from elsewhere. That is a very good
thing that should be built upon.

Finally, as others have said, we cannot consider
future peacekeeping operations without bearing in
mind the essential need of providing security for
humanitarian personnel and other personnel working
under the flag of the United Nations. The resolution we
adopted under your presidency, Mr. President,
constitutes a first step in that regard. However,
providing security will be an ongoing responsibility of
the Security Council in the future. It is therefore crucial
that future peacekeeping operations include that
essential need as part of their mandates, in order to
confront any attacks on human rights. Such attacks
increasingly constitute a basic element in the security,
or lack of security, of the crises we deal with.

