Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing and the important work
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and her partners are doing to support
the Syrian people.

We applaud OCHA's work to facilitate the largest-
ever humanitarian aid convoy in Syria during the
successful joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivery from Damascus to the Rukban
encampment on 6 February. The United States also
salutes the courage and selfless dedication of the
humanitarian workers who so bravely carried out the
delivery to ensure that life-saving aid reached Syrians
in desperate need.

While that convoy was successful in achieving
its aim of providing immediate support for the
Rukban population, that assistance will only sustain
the population for approximately 30 days. Therefore,
the United States urges the Al-Assad regime and the
Russian Federation to facilitate a new United Nations-
Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy to
Rukban before the end of March. The Al-Assad regime
and the Russian Federation can ensure, if they have
the will, that the United Nations can regularly provide
unfettered humanitarian assistance to Rukban as long
as there are vulnerable civilians at that location.

The United States has not impeded and will
not impede any voluntary departures and has long
advocated for freedom of movement for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) throughout Syria. We remain
steadfast in our support for safe, voluntary, dignified
and informed departures from Rukban. The United
States insists that any process to arrange for departures
be coordinated with the United Nations and reflect
humanitarian principles.

To that end, the United States takes note of the
receptivity of the United Nations to all efforts that
will ease the suffering of those displaced in Rukban,
including Russia's checkpoint initiative, as long as those
initiatives allow for truly safe, voluntary, dignified and
informed departures. The United States looks forward
to continuing to coordinate with the United Nations,
Russia and other partners to develop a plan to support
voluntary and informed returns from Rukban that best
address the long-term needs of the population.

The United States calls on all parties, including
Russia and the Al-Assad regime, to ensure that
the following five minimum conditions are met on
departures from Rukban.

First, they should ensure that any planning
is coordinated with the United Nations and allow
for United Nations monitoring and oversight of
movements, ensuring that departures are in line with
humanitarian standards.

Secondly, they should ensure that IDPs are given
access to information about potential departure options
and accurate information on conditions, including
security, in their preferred place of return.
Thirdly, they should ensure that guarantees are
provided against arbitrary arrest and detention.

Fourthly, they should ensure that a clear explanation
is provided of military conscription requirements for
IDPs who decide to leave.

Fifthly, they should ensure that sustained
humanitarian access is facilitated to allow aid to reach
those who do not wish to depart Rukban.

Rukban is only one example of the extreme and
challenging humanitarian conditions faced by millions
ofpeople throughout Syria. The regime has an obligation
under resolution 2165 (2014) to enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations and its implementing partners. It
is unacceptable that the Al-Assad regime continues to
hinder regular access for the United Nations and other
relief agencies to eastern Ghouta, Yarmouk and Dara'a.

As long as civilians cannot count on the Al-Assad
regime and its allies to allow the United Nations to
provide sustained unfettered humanitarian aid to areas
under its control, it is clear that conditions are not
conducive for sustained and voluntary returns and that
the time is still not right for the international community
to support reconstruction efforts in regime-held areas
of Syria, absent irreversible steps towards a political
solution to the conflict.

We are also concerned about the increase in IDPs
fleeing the last grip of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) as it tries to cling to territory in the middle
Euphrates river valley. We thank our partners who
continue to provide additional shelter, medical care and
crucial food assistance to address the needs of IDPs in
places like Al-Hol and across north-east Syria.

We also welcome the recent announcement by
Prime Minister Al-Mahdi that the Government of Iraq
is prepared to help facilitate the repatriation of Iraqi
nationals in Syria. The United States will continue to
work with its coalition partners on stabilization efforts
in north-east Syria to prevent the return of ISIS now
that its territorial control has collapsed.

Finally, concerning the situation in Idlib, the United
States is concerned about the recent increase in shelling
by the regime of Idlib governorate, which has spurred
the movement of an estimated 20,000 people towards
the Turkish border. The United States reiterates its calls
on all parties to uphold the Turkish-Russian brokered
ceasefire in order to prevent a dangerous escalation
of the conflict and a humanitarian catastrophe. The
ceasefire is vital to protecting 3 million civilians and
protecting the border of our NATO ally Turkey.

