Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, whom I wish to thank for convening
today's meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General,
the representatives of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, who
is with us in his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings. Moreover,
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Worship of Haiti and the Minister for Legal Reforms
and Parliamentary Affairs of Timor-Leste.

The concept note (S/2019/540, annex) is a
comprehensive and informative document that serves
as a road map for today's debate. We are pleased this
meeting provides a timely opportunity to exchange
views and shed light on ways to enhance peace,
security and stability in conflict areas. After several
decades of United Nations experience in peacekeeping,
it has become clear that there is no single model or
approach for transition phases, which are adapted to
the specific situations in host countries. The nature
and characteristics of conflict vary from country to
country, but the similarity of some conflicts must also
be taken into account, where necessary.

The Security Council has recognized the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly
with regard to consolidating peace, recovery and
reconstruction during transition periods and the
withdrawal of peacekeeping operations, which are
the most delicate and critical of stages once the
mandate for a special political mission has begun to be
implemented. It is therefore important to emphasize the
role of national institutions and their full ownership of
all points of the conflict cycle and of the withdrawal of
peacekeeping operations, so as to ensure that countries
do not relapse into conflict. Transitions can be smooth
only with the support of robust and competent national
institutions, which must play a fundamental role in
post-conflict reconstruction.

In recent years, we have seen the cooperation
grow between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council. I would emphasize that the
Peacebuilding Commission briefs the Security Council
on its role on an annual basis, but the Chairs of the
Commission's country-specific figurations should
be able to play a greater role, and the Council should
support the PBC'S recommendations when renewing
peacekeeping mission mandates. Such momentum must
be maintained bearing in mind that achieving lasting
peace involves acknowledging national ownership, as
national reforms are more effective when there is robust
cooperation with the host country.

Unpredictable financing remains one of the major
challenges for peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
sustaining peace. While the Peacebuilding Fund plays
a significant role, its resources alone are insufficient to
carry out all the required tasks. Concerted efforts are
therefore needed to ensure adequate funding through
international contributions, specifically from such
international financial institutions as the World Bank
and the myriad funds and development banks, as well
as regional and subregional organizations and United
Nations agencies. At the local level, the private sector
is a key partner in reconstruction and development.
The private sector's participation removes numerous
funding obstacles, thus contributing to sustainable
development, peace and security.

The Security Council's recognition, through
its resolutions and presidential statements, of the
importance of regional and international organizations
in the maintenance of international peace and security
stems from the fact that these key organizations are
best positioned to understand the root causes of many
conflicts and other security challenges. The Security
Council has acknowledged the role that such bodies
can play in peacebuilding, recovery and post-conflict
reconstruction, but this role must be strengthened.

In conclusion, it is fundamental to address the root
causes of conflict and conflict prevention, which helps
to avert material and human losses, especially if we
have preventive tools at our disposal, including early-
warning mechanisms and surveys. If correctly used
at the beginning of conflict, such tools can help us to
prevent the escalation and outbreak of conflicts.

