Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to express our pleasure and
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over this
important meeting. I would also like to congratulate all
the members of your delegation on their excellent
performance during your friendly country's presidency
of the Security Council during the month of January.

This is the first time my delegation has
participated in the work of the Security Council since
the end of Tunisia's tenure as a non-permanent
member. We would therefore like to congratulate the
new members of the Council 4 Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic - on
joining the Council. We wish them full success in their
task. Also allow me to welcome Mr. Amara Essy,
Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity,
to the Security Council.

We express our thanks, Sir, to your delegation for
preparing the valuable document that has been
distributed to us. It covers very important questions
dealing with the challenges that the African continent
continues to face. The document also defines the
responsibilities of the international community,
including the United Nations and the Security Council,
towards the current situation in Africa.

It is known to all that the African continent is
undergoing more suffering than any other region of the
world. The African continent includes the majority of
the least developed countries, among them, the most
heavily indebted. Many areas of the African continent
suffer abject poverty, while others are theatres of armed
conflict, where one conflict flares up as soon as another
is extinguished. Deadly diseases and epidemics such as
AIDS claim thousands of Africans every day. The
continent is also host to the largest number of refugees
and internally displaced persons in the world. Small
weapons flow into the continent at alarming rates,
while its natural resources continue to be plundered
and smuggled.

It is only fair to acknowledge that in the past few
years the Security Council has made many efforts to
resolve the problems of Africa. The question that must
be answered frankly and honestly is, why does this
situation persist despite all the initiatives and efforts to
promote Africa? In Tunisia's view, the answer can be
summarized as follows.

First, those initiatives were not consonant with
the specific cultural, social, economic or political needs
of the continent and they lacked the resources
necessary for their implementation. Secondly, we feel
that the cooperation and coordination between the
Security Council, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the subregional African organizations in
dealing with the questions before the Security Council,
as provided for in Chapter VIII of the Charter, has been
limited.

Thirdly, in our view, there has been a lack of
timely intervention by the Security Council, as well as
a lack of timely adoption of necessary measures to deal
with conflicts and crises in some African regions. We
also note that even when the Security Council
intervenes, its mandates for some peacekeeping
operations and the resources made available to them
are inappropriate and inadequate for dealing with the
situation on the ground. It is also clear that, due to the
strategic, political and economic importance of a
country or region where a conflict is taking place, some
interested parties greatly influence the Security
Council's decision on whether or not to intervene in
that particular conflict. Many questions, despite their
importance and gravity, such as the question of
Somalia, remain almost absent from the Council's
agenda.

Fourthly, we feel that there is a lack of proper
consideration of the regional aspect of a given conflict.
This happens although the facts show that many of the
conflicts in the African continent can have
ramifications and repercussions that make it imperative
to deal with them comprehensively and from a holistic
perspective.

Fifthly, we believe that the Security Council
sanctions have had limited effectiveness in directly or
indirectly influencing parties to the conflict. Indeed,
experience shows that the arms embargoes imposed on
some African countries and some non-State parties in
certain conflicts have failed to produce the desired
effect. These sanctions could not even stem the flow of
weapons. Somalia is the best proof of this. As for
economic sanctions, we believe that the application of
such sanctions in Africa, particularly in some of the
least developed countries, will in the medium and long
term merely increase tensions and instability in those
countries.

Sixthly, we believe that preventing conflicts,
stopping them from flaring up repeatedly and
eliminating their root causes, particularly the economic
roots, are not given the requisite attention by the
parties intervening. This occurs despite the fact that all
parties, including the Security Council, acknowledge
the close interrelationship between security, stability
and development. Moreover, resources allocated to
conflict prevention and peace-building activities - if
they exist at all- are extremely limited and hardly
commensurate in most cases with the desired
objectives.

In our opinion, these are the major shortcomings
that have prevented the bolstering of the foundations of
security and stability in Africa. These are the very
points that Tunisia affirmed the need to address during
our tenure on the Security Council. How can we
address such shortcomings, and how can we help
Africa overcome its crises? Our reply to this question
is not at all easy in view of the numerous and varied
challenges facing Africa today. However, we are
hopeful that today's debate will produce some useful
and practical ideas in helping us find the necessary
answers.

For our part, Tunisia believes that the following
measures should be adopted. First, African capacities
should be strengthened in the field of peacekeeping,
conflict prevention and peace-building through the
training of troops and the enhancement of the relevant
regional structures of Africa. Secondly, there should be
sound and effective coordination and consultation
among the international bodies, especially the Security
Council, the OAU and African subregional
organizations in order to guarantee that the specific
characteristics of each African situation are taken into
account. In this regard, Tunisia proposes that the
Security Council consider the initiation of a direct and
regular dialogue with the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. This morning
the OAU Secretary-General, Mr. Amara Essy, put
forward a similar proposal, and we fully support it. We
believe that such a dialogue could bring the Council to
a closer understanding of the African realities. It could
enable both the Council and the OAU to formulate
joint plans that would respond to the imperatives of the
situation under consideration. In order to help achieve
this objective, we would also suggest that the Council
increase its field missions to the areas of conflict in
Africa. It would also be useful to conduct joint
missions of the Council and the OAU to areas of
conflict and tension in the continent, with a view to
understanding the situation on the ground and
formulating appropriate strategies to deal with them.

Thirdly, we believe that in order to renounce the
culture of reaction and move towards adopting a
culture of conflict prevention, all necessary resources
must be made available to contain hotbeds of tension
and to build peace. All interested parties ought to
coordinate among themselves, in accordance with their
respective abilities and specialities, through unified and
comprehensive strategies. All have now come to
understand that the concepts of peacekeeping and
peace-building are simply too large to confine to the
mere deployment of troops in one country, or the
disarming or demobilizing of combatants. Experience
has shown in some African regions, such as West
Africa and the Great Lakes region, that building
security and stability in one country cannot be achieved
without first achieving stability in neighbouring
countries.

Fourthly, for all the reasons I have mentioned
previously, there is a need to review the use of
sanctions, particularly economic sanctions, as an
instrument of deterrence.

Fifthly, sufficient attention must be paid to the
importance of preventing the flow of small arms and
light weapons to conflict regions in Africa. In this
respect, we should focus on countries that produce and
export such weapons. Tunisia proposes that we
consider establishing an international mechanism to
monitor the sources of such weapons and their routes to
regions of conflict. We also assert that the Security
Council must devote the same level of attention it
accords to the question of the flow of small arms and
light weapons to the issue of the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the African continent.

Sixthly, unconditional support and assistance
must be provided to the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. We believe that ensuring the success of
this promising initiative is a collective responsibility
that must be assumed by the entire international
community, regardless of how heavy a burden it may
represent. The international community, with all its
components and institutions, must realize that no
matter how many sacrifices and efforts the African
countries and peoples make to win the struggle for
development, peace and stability, they will not be
sufficient to raise Africa from its current
marginalization.

Tunisia stresses the need for an effective and
regular follow-up to today's debate. This can be
achieved by making the situation in Africa a standing
item on the Security Council's agenda. The
international community, including the United Nations
and the Security Council, is today called upon to move
from words to concrete action vis-a-vis the African
continent.

