Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative to focus on conflict
prevention in the present open debate. We would
certainly expect this debate to be a new stepping stone
in the evolution of the concept and practice of conflict
prevention.

We commend and support the efforts of the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and the Department
of Political Affairs, in particular. Over the years they
have made significant contributions to strengthening
capacities, tools and mechanisms for tangible
prevention, as well as by leading high-quality debate
on its conceptual elaboration. The presence here
today of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights demonstrates the urgency of addressing
prevention in a comprehensive and all-embracing
manner. In that regard, we underline the importance
and value of structural prevention as a long-term goal
and of sustainable prevention efforts that address both
the current and the potential root causes of conflicts.

Armenia recognizes the remarkable potential of the
non-governmental sector and civil society as a whole
in identifying and promoting confidence-building
measures as an effective instrument of prevention.
Often, such efforts face considerable constraints,
especially in conditions where a Member State evinces
serious failures to uphold basic human rights and stifles
fundamental freedoms. That problem deserves to be
more prominently recognized and addressed.

Armenia has a significant interest in advancing
international efforts, at both the global and the regional
levels, to achieve and maintain effective prevention. In
that respect, we recognize prevention that aims beyond
simply pre-empting an actual outbreak of conflict.
We stress the equally important priority of preventing
the resumption of conflict in situations where a final
resolution remains pending.

The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is a case in point.
That conflict is the result ofthe use of force on the part
of Azerbaijan, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, against the population of Nagorno-Karabakh,
which had exercised its right of self-determination. For
the past few weeks, the international community has
witnessed an alarming escalation of tensions, along
with a considerable increase in the number of ceasefire
violations across the Armenian-Azerbaijani border
and attempted incursions and subversive operations by
units of the Azerbaijani army along the border between
Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan. Numerous lives
have been lost, including those of civilians. Prompt
action by the co-chair countries of the Minsk Group
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and, in particular, the initiative of the President
of the Russian Federation to host a trilateral meeting
with the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan in Sochi
on 8 August, averted further escalation. Yet again, there
are lessons to draw from those latest developments.

Earlier this year, the Armenian delegation raised
the issue of religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East that have been targeted by terrorist
groups and called the attention of the United Nations
to the plight of the Armenian population of the town
of Kassab in Syria. Unfortunately, the situation in
the region continues to deteriorate. In the past few
weeks, the international community has witnessed
highly disturbing developments caused by the actions
of Islamic State fighters in north-west Iraq. Minority
populations, most specifically the Yazidis, who are
among the ancient peoples of Iraq, have been subjected
to mass killings. Hundreds of thousands of people,
including Yazidis, Assyrians, Armenians and other
minorities, have been forced to flee. They are in a state
of critical deprivation of the basic necessities of life.
The Government of Armenia has decided to provide
humanitarian assistance to the Yazidi community
through appropriate United Nations channels.

The international community is witnessing shocking
horrors that should in fact be addressed as part of our
commitment to the prevention of mass atrocities. The
time for the international community to act is now. The
need to mobilize efforts throughout the United Nations
system is a matter of the utmost urgency. We call upon
all the relevant bodies and mechanisms of the United
Nations to act without delay. The role of the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide is vital on this matter. Armenia calls upon
the Security Council to treat the tragic situation of the
Yazidi population as a matter of the utmost urgency.

