Mr. Deng Alor Kuol (South Sudan): First, I
would like to congratulate the representative of
Azerbaijan on his assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
appreciation for the Security Council's prompt response
to the request of the African Union (AU) to adopt and
reinforce the decision of 24 April 2012 of the AU Peace
and Security Council on the Sudan and South Sudan. On
behalf of my Government, I would like to formally
express my appreciation for the adoption of resolution
2046 (2012) and state our solemn commitment to
comply with its mandated provisions.

It is my privilege to reaffirm that, in compliance
with the decisions of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council's
presidential statement, and in the spirit of our
commitment to peace, my Government ordered the
withdrawal of our police force from the Abyei area on
28 April 2012. We expect the international community
to exert efforts to ensure the immediate and complete
withdrawal of the Sudan Armed Forces from the Abyei
area.

As acknowledged formally by the African Union,
my Government is already committed to the cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of negotiations under
the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP). We welcome the
decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the commitment of the United Nations
Security Council to the enhancement of the AUHIP-led
negotiations process through the active participation of
the United Nations, the Chairman of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other international partners.

We appeal to the United Nations and its Member
States to urgently mobilize humanitarian assistance for
the population affected by the Sudan's continuous
aerial bombardments and ground incursions in the
northern states of South Sudan, as well as for those
tens of thousands of civilians displaced by the Sudan
Armed Forces' invasion and occupation of the Abyei
area in May 2011.

Once again, we would like to thank the Security
Council for the adoption of this resolution and to
reinstate our commitment to compliance with its
provisions.

