Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking the United Kingdom
presidency and you, Madam, for having organized this
important open debate on security, development and the
root causes of conflict. I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Swedish
Ambassador, and Ms. Bouchamaoui. We extend our
heartfelt congratulations, once again, to her, and to all
our friends in Tunisia, on this outstanding achievement
of winning the Nobel Peace Prize, which honours all of
Tunisia.

This debate comes at a trying time: the despicable
and barbaric attacks in Paris have cast France, and at
least 19 other countries, into mourning and shocked
the international community as a whole. In recent days
many other countries have also been struck by terrorism.
Allow me to reiterate what President Hollande said
yesterday morning before the French Parliament, which
met in Versailles: those attacks will never change the
face of France, land of liberty; they will only strengthen
our determination to combat terrorism, always and
everywhere; and they make working together more
important than ever for the future of this planet and for
solidarity between peoples.

This debate also comes in the wake of the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) by our Heads of State and Government,
which sets forth, in a very creative manner, the road
map for the international community with regard to
sustainable development for the next 15 years. I must
say that is a noteworthy success for the United Nations,
and it is a major step, as well a wonderful message
of hope, in our common fight against poverty and
inequality.

Finally, this debate takes place two weeks before

the launch of the twenty-first session of the Conference
of the Parties (COP21) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Paris
on 30 November. Everyone understands how much the
outcome of the climate conference will be critical, not
only for our environment, but also for our security and
collective well-being.

Today I would like to highlight two topics,
governance and the climate. The first topic is a key
factor in both conflict prevention and development.
When we began to discuss what would follow the
Millennium Development Goals, one thing was clear
to all: countries at war saw the poorest results with
respect to the Millennium Development Goals. Given
that simple fact, a new discussion began on including
governance in the new development framework.
France therefore welcomes the fact that the Sustainable
Development Goals include a goal on governance,
that is Goal 16, which is dedicated "to the promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, the provision of access to justice for all,
and building effective, accountable institutions at all
levels".

That goal is key because it signifies that all the
members of the international community recognize
the interrelationship between poverty eradication
and the promotion of sustainable development, peace
and security, on the one hand, and good governance,
on the other. That interrelationship, we know, is
complicated; it requires detailed consideration; and
that is why the precise spelling out of the goal was
strenuously negotiated. But now we have an invaluable
tool which, fortunately, goes beyond a narrow, binary
concept of development, as do security matters. Among
the 12 targets of that goal, allow me to mention a
few, because I feel they are particularly relevant to
our discussion today: reducing all forms of violence;
promoting the rule of law; combating illicit financial
flows and arms trafficking; combating corruption;
strengthening public institutions; and promoting
legislation against discrimination. As we can see from
the enumeration of those few targets, the international
community, particularly the development community,
fully recognizes the interrelationship between peace
and security, governance and development. We welcome
that fact, and we attach the greatest importance to the
sound implementation of Goal 16, which concerns all
countries.

The issue of climate is the second point I would like
to emphasize in my statement. Everyone knows today
that climate is a development issue. Why? Because
the primary victims of climate change are the poorest
and most vulnerable. A few days ago, the World Bank
published an important report which highlights the
point that, in the absence of action on climate change,
100 million additional people could risk falling into
extreme poverty.

Last June, on the initiative of Spain and Malaysia and
with the participation of my German and Bangladeshi
counterparts, we held meetings on the links between
climate and security. Those meetings made us aware of
the genuine risks that climate change poses for security,
with the consequences that are becoming increasingly
clear in terms of natural disasters, the competition for
increasingly scarce resources and climate displacement.

We are 15 days away from the start of the COP21
in Paris, a major event for our planet. I myself am
returning from a pre-COP21. It was an informal
ministerial consultation. My conclusion from those
three days of meetings is very positive, although much
remains to be done collectively. As the French Foreign
Minister, Laurent Fabius, said following the event: "We
have taken an important step, but we remain mobilized
more than ever and the road ahead is long".

It is very encouraging to see that there is a true
desire, one very widely shared, to move forward and
achieve a far-reaching, universal and legally binding
agreement in December in Paris. Genuine progress has
been made, for example, regarding the principle of a
regular upward revision of the commitments of States
or the financing of climate policies. But it is clear that
much remains to be done before a universal, legally
binding agreement that is commensurate with the
climate challenge can be reached in Paris. As Council
members know, this is a unique opportunity. We have
a collective duty to succeed together. As the Secretary-
General has said many times, and quite rightly so:
"There is no plan B, because there is no planet B".

And so I would like to take advantage of the
presence of many ministers here today to thank them
for their engagement in climate matters, but also to call
on them to mobilize their efforts to ensure that the best
agreement possible is reached in Paris in the interest of
guaranteeing a future for future generations.

