Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to express my delegation's gratitude to
Ambassadors Vilovie and Urbina for their briefings on
the work of the Committees over which they preside. I
would also like to thank them for the important work
they carry out as the Chairs of those Committees.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

We know the threat that terrorism poses to States
and peoples. It affects the civilian population, who are
the primary victims of terrorism. It is indeed an
intolerable threat against which we have no choice but
to unite and act together. France will continue to fulfil
all its responsibilities in this respect.

As the United Nations so bitterly discovered
recently, the Organization itself is also a target. We
would like to pay tribute here to all the United Nations
staff members who have fallen victim to terrorism. We
remember in particular the men and women who were
wounded or killed in Kabul on 28 October. We also
welcome the United Nations determination to not give
in to terrorist blackmail and to persevere in its mission
in Afghanistan.

The United Nations now has a solid framework
within which to fight terrorism, but we all know that
terrorists will take advantage of any loophole in the
system. That is why it is crucial for the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
with the support of their respective expert groups, to be
able to implement the corresponding resolutions and
enjoy the full support of all Member States.

Resolution 1822 (2008) has made it possible to
improve the operation and procedures of the 1267
Committee, in particular through the revision of the list
of persons and entities subject to sanctions. This is an
enormous task that will enable the list to give us an
accurate idea of the state of the threat. We hope that the
renewal of resolution 1822 (2008) will be an
opportunity to continue these improvements, and we
believe that the resolution deserves to be more widely
known by the public.

The work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to review the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is crucial. That is why it must be very
clear that the resolution is binding and that all States
must comply with it. France has done its share in this
regard. Of course, some States lack the means to
implement the resolution. In such cases, they can and
should benefit from technical assistance. Here, I would
like to welcome the effective work of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
quality of the dialogue it has achieved with States
aimed at helping them to honour their obligations. I
would also like to thank CTED for having organized
seminars on the regional situations that correspond to
the priorities in the fight against terrorism. In that
respect, the work of the 1373 Committee must be
focused on the most strategic issues and give us a
precise and dynamic understanding of the situation.

I would like to say a few brief words on
resolution 1540 (2004). We all know that nuclear,
radiological, biological and chemical terrorism remains
one of the primary threats to our security. We must
therefore continue to work tirelessly in that Committee.
We have to increase its visibility and its effectiveness.
We welcome in this respect the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) carried out on 1 October
under the chairmanship of Costa Rica, which must
serve as a basis for its work in the months to come. We
should also pursue our efforts to ensure effective
implementation of that resolution. To that end, the
Committee's operations must be improved, as its role is
critical to coordinating assistance requests.

Indeed, we must focus all of our efforts today on
assistance. The working group of the 1540 Committee,
currently chaired by France, will do all it can to make
concrete progress in that area. We must improve the
timeframes involved in dealing with requests, improve
follow-up to offers and carry out specific visits to
certain countries.

We encourage all States that wish to enhance
their capacity to combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to make requests for assistance to
the Committee. We also call on all States with the
necessary capacity to assist the Committee in
strengthening the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

We welcome the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which has
strengthened the capacity of the United Nations and
helped those involved in the fight against terrorism to
share their experience and define common priorities.
We believe that the Task Force has become a crucial
tool in our kit, and we must now institutionalize it.

On our part, we will continue to play an active
role within the three Committees and to do our utmost
to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to
fight terrorism in all its forms.

