I thank Ms. Khawla Matar and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. At a time when, in other theatres, we are beginning to see very encouraging signs that the crisis is being resolved through dialogue, the situation in Syria remains deadlocked. The increase in hostilities reported in recent weeks in north- west Syria, which has cost the lives of several people, including three children and two humanitarian workers, as reported by UNICEF, remains a source of concern. My delegation condemns this resurgence in violence and calls on the parties to immediately cease hostilities, which is a sine qua non for achieving tangible progress in resolving the crisis in Syria. The resolution of this crisis, as we will never stop saying, must be achieved on a political and not a military basis, in accordance with a process led by the Syrians themselves and through the various components of Syrian society. That is why it is urgent to put the political process back on the right track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). As Geir Pedersen mentioned last month, "A political deal to implement 2254 (2015) is indeed the way to restore Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and meet the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians." (S/2020/1049, annex I) To that end, I would like to call on the actors in the Syrian conflict to exercise greater restraint and to work to de-escalate the hostilities. We also reiterate the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for an immediate national ceasefire in Syria in order to create the conditions for the political process to succeed and mitigate the effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is spreading with alarming virulence throughout the country. However, and as my delegation has repeatedly stressed, these calls, the echoes of which we eagerly await, must not distract us from the fight against terrorism, just as it is crucial to prevent criminal groups from taking advantage of the current health crisis. With regard to the work of the Constitutional Committee, we are pleased to learn that, should the restrictions related to COVID-19 be lifted, the Special Envoy will hold the fourth round of consultations from 30 November to 4 December 2020, and a fifth round in January 2021. To that end, my delegation calls for flexibility on the part of all stakeholders in order to move forward on the political path towards lasting peace in Syria. The parties to the conflict should also take steps to strengthen mutual trust, including through unilateral mass releases of detainees and by providing information to the families of missing persons, as confidence-building measures as requested by the Special Envoy. The Niger maintains its view that the political and humanitarian issues of the Syrian crisis cannot be dealt with separately, as the continuation of hostilities has a negative impact on the humanitarian situation, which, in turn, affects the peace process. Indeed, the contamination rate of COVID-19 in Syria remains a major concern, as weakened health infrastructure, insecurity, living conditions and the lack of access to adequate water and sanitation facilities, particularly in the north, hamper the ability to respond effectively. A large number of vulnerable people, including internally displaced persons and refugees, are at high risk of contracting the virus. That is a major risk factor for a more acute crisis, as social distancing is virtually impossible in overcrowded camps. From the detailed briefing just delivered by Mr. Rajasingham, it is clear that the humanitarian assistance provided to the Syrian people does not come close to meeting their needs. The delivery mechanism for this aid must be substantially improved throughout the Syrian territory. Therefore, procedures at the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point and between the contact lines need to be streamlined and simplified to speed up the delivery of humanitarian aid, including much-needed medical supplies and equipment for the Syrian health system to deal with the pandemic. At the same time, we call for the easing or suspension of unilateral economic sanctions that could undermine Syria's ability to deal with the pandemic. Those sanctions are a source of aggravation, not only for Syria but also for its neighbours. In conclusion, allow me to express my delegation's appreciation to the Special Envoy and his team for their tireless efforts to engage in dialogue with all stakeholders in the process, including the Women's Advisory Board and civil society organizations, in Syria and in the region.
