Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, as well as the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey and the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) countries members of the
European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his briefing, which, together with
the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General,
provides us with an update on the situation as it has
recently been shaping up in Kosovo.

The international community has made progress
towards stabilizing Kosovo and enabling its inhabitants
to chart a course for their future. The European Union
would like to reiterate its main policies, that is, the
consolidation of peace and the promotion of stability,
democracy and the rule of law, as well as respect for
human rights and minority rights. The full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), the peaceful resolution of conflicts and regional
cooperation are principles of the highest importance for
the area. Terrorism and violence - be it ethnically,
politically or criminally motivated - will not be
tolerated and should be unequivocally condemned. We
fully support Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Steiner's Administrative Order proscribing the
Albanian National Army (ANA) as a terrorist
organization.

Full democratization requires the support of the
international community and of all the political forces
in Kosovo, along with Belgrade's full cooperation. Our
principles should be unambiguous in order to build a
multi-ethnic and multicultural society in Kosovo, with
full respect for Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework. The
"standards before status" policy provides the
framework for achieving these objectives. The
European Union fully supports the work of the Special
Representative and of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
carrying out the mandate entrusting to them by the
Security Council.

The Serbian and Albanian people, despite the
conflicts of the past, must learn to live together,
achieve reconciliation and make an effort to create and
sustain conditions for the implementation of the
principles of true democracy, diversity and tolerance.
The European Union attributes particular importance to
a dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
issues of mutual interest further to, and on the basis of,
the Common Document.

Political stability in Kosovo requires the
formation of stable institutions. The establishment and
strengthening of local democracy is a precondition in
this regard. The process of transfer of competencies to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, as set
out in chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework, in
full compliance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and taking into account the
capacity of these institutions to assume additional
responsibilities, will promote general and local
democratization as well as raise awareness of
individual and communal responsibilities.

Building effective, transparent and accountable
institutions for the benefit of all the communities,
while at the same time adhering to the obligations
stemming from Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework and not
prejudging the final status, should be the goal of our
actions.

Achieving genuine and sustainable reintegration
of minority returnees should be assessed as an indicator
of political and democratic maturity. It is encouraging
that national and international perceptions regarding
displacement issues, apart from a purely humanitarian
approach, also include a broader development and
social and economic perspective. Therefore, efforts
should focus on the sustainability of return and on
ensuring the inclusion of the displaced and returnees in
the process of political action, social reintegration and
economic recovery.

Political will, at the central and municipal level,
is a prerequisite for further progress. Essential also to
the success of the return process is the active support
of the donor States and the participation of the
international organizations. This political as well as
financial support should maintain the momentum for
return and ensure its sustainability.

No initiative will be effective and no effort will
bear results if the region does not rid itself of the dual
scourge of extremism and organized crime - two
phenomena closely interconnected and feeding each
other, while at the same time undermining all serious
attempts by the local institutions and the international
community to lay the foundations of and build stable,
prosperous and peaceful societies with freedom and
justice for all.

The European Union firmly believes that no
effort should be spared and no stone left unturned until
this double-edged menace is addressed and eradicated.
Only then will our aims be achieved and the region
become a better place for all its people.

