The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Indonesia and Portugal, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Efi'endi
(Indonesia) and M. r. Monteiro (Portugal) took seats at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the question of East Timor,
document S/ 1999/705.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the question of East
Timor of 22 June 1999 (S/l999/705).

"The Security Council notes with understanding
the Secretary-General's decision to postpone for three
weeks his determination, which he will base on the
main elements identified in his report of 5 May
(S/ 1999/513), of whether the necessary security
situation exists for the start of the operational phase of
the consultation process in accordance with the
Agreement between the United Nations and the

Governments of Indonesia and Portugal (S/ 1999/5 13, annex III). The Council also endorses his intention
that the operational phases of the popular
consultation not begin until the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) is fully
deployed, and his decision to postpone the ballot
date for two weeks.

"The Security Council emphasizes that a
popular consultation of the East Timorese people
through a direct, secret and universal ballot
represents an historic opportunity to resolve the
question of East T imor peacefully. It concurs with
the Secretary-General's assessment that this process
must be transparent and that all parties must have
the opportunity to express themselves freely.

"In this regard the Security Council expresses
serious concern that the Secretary-General, in his
assessment, concludes that the necessary conditions
do not yet exist to begin the operational phases of
the consultation process, given the security situation
throughout much of East Timor and the absence of
a 'level playing field'. It is especially concerned
that the militias and other armed groups have carried
out acts of violence against the local population and
exercise an intimidating influence over them, and
that these activities continue to constrict political
freedom in East Timor, thus jeopardizing the
necessary openness of the consultation process. The
Council notes the Secretary-General's assessment
that while the security situation has severely limited
the opportunity for public expression by pro-
independence activists, pro-autonomy campaigning
has been actively pursued.

"The Security Council stresses the need for all
sides to put an end to all kinds of violence and for
utmost restraint before, during and after the
consultation. It calls on UNAMET to follow up
reports of violent activity by both the pro-integration
militias and Falintil. In this regard, it expresses
grave concern at the attack on the UNAMET office
in Maliana, East Timor, on 29 June 1999. The
Council demands that the incident be thoroughly
investigated and the perpetrators be brought to
justice. The Council also demands that all parties
respect the safety and security of UNAMET
personnel. The Security Council supports the
statement of the Spokesman for the Secretary-
General of 29 June 1999 and requests the Secretary-
General to report further.

 

"The Security Council welcomes the positive
developments identified by the Secretary-General. The
Council warmly welcomes the excellent channels of
communication between UNAMET and the Indonesian
authorities which have been facilitated by the
establishment of a high-level Indonesian task force in
Dili. The Council warmly welcomes the opening of
the DARE II talks in Jakarta with representatives of
all sides in East Timor and the progress towards
making the Commission on Peace and Stability
operative.

"The Security Council stresses once again the
responsibility of the Government of Indonesia to
maintain peace and security in East Timor. The
Council emphasizes that all local officials in East
Timor must abide by the provisions of the Tripartite
Agreements (S/ 1999/513, annexes I-III), in particular
as regards the designated campaign period, the use of
public funds for campaign purposes and the need to
campaign only in their private capacity, without
recourse to the pressure of office.

"The Security Council is particularly concerned
at the situation of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in East Timor and the implications which this may
have for the universality of the consultation. It calls on
all concerned to grant full access and freedom of
movement to humanitarian organizations for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, to cease
immediately activities which may cause further
displacement and to allow all IDPs who wish to do
so to return home.

"The Security Council notes that full
deployment of UNAMET will not be possible before
10 July 1999. It urges the Secretary-General to take
all necessary steps to ensure full deployment by that
time, and urges all parties to cooperate fully with
UNAMET. It stresses the importance of allowing
complete freedom of movement for UNAMET
within East Timor in order to carry out its tasks.

"The Security Council urges the Indonesian
Government and the pro-integration and pro-
independence groups to continue to enhance
cooperation with UNAMET, to allow the popular
consultation to go ahead in a timely manner.

"The Security Council will remained seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

