Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Like the
previous speaker, we wish to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, in his capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.

We acknowledge the instrumentality of the OSCE
in the process of mending the schisms of the cold war
and its potential, through its commitments, norms and
principles, to effectively contribute to the quest for
global peace and security. We are therefore heartened
by its commitment to restoring balance amongst its
security, economic - including environmental - and
humanitarian activities.

We also welcome the Chairman-in-Office's
priority concerns, especially in the area of continuing
the institutional reform of the OSCE, in order to
strengthen the organization in the face of new
challenges and threats to security, which is similar to
what we are all dealing with at the United Nations now.
The problems of human rights, trafficking in human
beings, terrorism and crime are of concern to all States
Members of the United Nations.

The rights and concerns of minorities have been
the bane of democracies and generated conflicts in
many areas of the world, not only in Africa, but also in
certain areas of Asia and Europe. We recognize that the
OSCE has considerable experience in national minority
issues, and we hope that that rich experience will be
brought to bear in resolving some of the frozen
conflicts arising from minority issues in its areas of
operation. In that regard, we welcome the Chairman-
in-Office's planned visit to Armenia and Azerbaijan
with a view to contributing to the successful resolution
of the future of Nagorny Karabakh. In the same vein,
we hope that his announced visit to Kosovo will
contribute to ensuring that the OSCE plays its expected
role on the future status of Kosovo.

We hope that the OSCE will also take advantage
of the endorsement by the world summit of the need
for enhanced cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, and strengthen its links
with the United Nations as a whole, and especially
with the Security Council.

