Mr. Heinbecker (Canada)(spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Russian presidency for
providing us with the opportunity to continue the
debate begun last year on international terrorism. We

would also like to thank Mr. Hans Corell for his
presentation, which was both incisive and
comprehensive.

Terrorism is an ever-present threat to
international peace and security. In addition, it
represents a threat to human security, for the victims of
terrorism are primarily innocent civilians. That is why
this problem deserves inclusion in the expanded
definition of security, which the Security Council is
now developing.

(spoke in English)

As we are all too aware, terrorism knows no
international boundaries. Its perpetrators recognize
neither the rule of law nor international norms of
humanity or decency. They care not at all what
suffering they wreak among the innocent, often for the
sake of political statements whose significance is
apparent only to themselves.

There is no justification for terrorism, and there
can be no concessions made to those who commit
terrorist acts. The presidential statement that we will
adopt today, just like the draft resolution of the Sixth
Committee on elimination of international terrorism, is
perfectly clear on this point. Terrorism is never
justifiable, for whatever purpose committed and by
whomsoever it is committed.

In various regional and multilateral forums,
including the General Assembly, we have agreed on
important principles in the fight against terrorism.
These include the denial of support and sanctuary for
terrorists, the establishment of an ever-widening
network of international conventions against terrorism
and international cooperation and coordination at the
policy and operational levels as well.

No state is immune from the threat of terrorism or
from the threat that its territory could be used to
support terrorist activity elsewhere. For these reasons,
international cooperation is essential in the fight
against terrorism, as noted by Mr. Corell. The
conclusion of negotiations over a year ago on the
International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism now brings to 12
the number of international counter-terrorism
instruments at the disposal of the international
community. Canada has signed all 12 of these
instruments and ratified 11; we are in the process of
ratifying the twelfth. These conventions, along with the

S/PV.4242

 

ongoing negotiations on other instruments, such
as the Indian draft comprehensive convention to
combat international terrorism, constitute a sound legal
framework to combat terrorism wherever it arises in
the world.

The multiplicity of international efforts to fight
terrorism reflects the importance that the international
community attaches to this issue. Our citizens expect
no less. They also expect that strong action against
terrorism will be consistent with broader commitments
to human rights and the rule of law. By respecting
these principles, the institutions entrusted to fight
terrorism will attract public support and deny terrorists
the sympathy and the support they need.

For its part, the Security Council has and must
continue to play a key role in the fight against
terrorism. It has responded robustly to specific cases of
terrorism, whether it be the Lockerbie case or the
assassination attempt on President Mubarak of Egypt.
It has also imposed sanctions against those who
harbour or support terrorism, as in the case of the
Taliban and Usama bin Laden. These actions, while
showing that there can be no impunity for terrorism,
can also serve as a deterrent to future terrorist acts.

(spoke in French)

The fight against terrorism has many aspects. It
must be part of a broader framework that will address
not the immediate threat alone, but also the underlying
factors supporting terrorism. There is, in particular, a
need to cooperate on the implementation of laws while
tackling issues of human rights, democratic
development, good governance and socio-economic
problems. It is in the context of such a comprehensive
approach to the problem that we will be able to find
Viable and enduring solutions to terrorism.

