Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): On the
contrary, Mr. President, I was going to ask you to put
the hourglass down horizontally.
I should like to begin by thanking Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for her very enlightening briefing and for
her interest in promoting and protecting human rights
in Haiti. I wish also to thank my fellow countrywoman,
Loune Viaud, Executive Director of Zanmi Lasante,
for her remarks on the situation of women and girls, of
which I took good note.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Security Council
for having invited me to participate in this meeting
of the Council to share the Views and observations
of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on the
report of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) (S/2019/l98), submitted pursuant to
resolution 2410 (2018).

Let me start by saying that the report provides a
very objective assessment of developments in Haiti,
the support provided by the United Nations in the
framework of MINUJUSTH, the efforts undertaken by
the national authorities in a very difficult context and
the steps that remain to be taken in the promotion of
human rights, the rule of law and the strengthening of
the democratic gains made in the country.

The President of the Republic of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, has tasked me with
reiterating to the Secretary-General his heartfelt
gratitude for the relevance of the report and his full
support for the success of his lofty and delicate mission
in the service of the international community.

Here I refer in particular to the painstaking
consultations carried out by representatives of the
United Nations with the country's highest authorities in
the quest for a better option involving a presence that
is better adapted to the socio-political developments in
the country following the drawdown of MINUJUSTH.
In that connection, I congratulate Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, both for the excellent coordination of the
strategic assessment mission as well as for the accuracy
of his briefing on the most recent events in the country.
My thanks also go to Ms. Helen La Lime, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, for
her exemplary commitment.

It would be remiss of me not to commend here the
unwavering courage and sense of responsibility of all
my Haitian brothers and sisters, who, despite the major
difficulties of the present context, remain resolutely
committed to the lofty ideals of the founding fathers
of our national independence. History calls on us,
my fellow countrymen, to work together selflessly,
guided by the tripartite Republican motto "Liberty,
equality, fraternity", so that the Republic of Haiti,
one of the founding Members of the United Nations
in 1945, can once again play its rightful role in the
international arena.

Resolution 2410 (2018) provides, in its paragraph 8,
for the drawdown on 15 October 2019 of MINUJUSTH,
which was established in 2017 following the closing of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The
progress that has been made as part of MINUJUSTH's
mandate is allowing us today to opt for a new United
Nations presence in Haiti, one that is not a peacekeeping
mission. The Government of the Republic of Haiti
fervently hopes that the new role of the United Nations
will remain coherent with the changing overall context
in the country as well as national needs in the areas of
security, justice, stability and sustainable development.

The Government of the Republic of Haiti is fully
aware of the fact that it bears responsibility for, first and
foremost, adopting the strategies necessary to provide
lasting responses to the real needs and legitimate
claims and expectations of its people. In that regard, I
am firmly convinced that the political will to achieve
that goal must go hand in hand with the mobilization
of the necessary resources. Therefore, the substantive
and organizational contributions of the United Nations,
its specialized agencies, funds and programmes and all
international partners will remain essential.

The Government of Haiti wishes to emphasize
the findings of the strategic assessment, the options
considered for a United Nations presence other than a
peacekeeping operation in Haiti and the very relevant
observations and recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/l98), which
highlights the significant events that have taken place
in the country since the publication of his previous
report (S/2018/ 1059), including the demonstrations held
in the main cities since 7 February. The demands of the
demonstrators focused on the country's socioeconomic
problems, especially the steep rise in the cost of living.

Regrettably, such demonstrations were marked by
unfortunate acts of violence that resulted in deaths,
including the deaths of two police officers who were
burned alive, and considerable property damage.
The Secretary-General quite rightly noted that
demonstrators vandalized public and private property,
used firearms, erected barricades and disrupted
economic activity in the country's main urban centres.
The unrest disrupted trade and markets and had a
serious impact on income-generating activities, in
particular in households headed by women, which are
often dependent upon market-oriented employment.

With regard to women's rights, my country
has made considerable efforts to promote women's
rights. As the Council is undoubtedly aware, the
amended 1987 Constitution incorporated a 30 per
cent constitutional quota for women throughout the
country's social structure.

At the humanitarian level, the report mentions the
persistent migration crisis, increasing food insecurity,
progress in combating the cholera epidemic, the
situation of the Central Emergency Response Fund
and the funding gap in the humanitarian assistance
plan. It acknowledges the joint efforts of the Haitian
Government and MINUJUSTH to reduce the level
of gang violence and establish closer links with
communities affected by violent crime.

Significant progress has been made in
implementing the mandate of MINUJUSTH in areas
such as combating local Violence, enhancing the
performance of the Haitian National Police, improving
security, justice and the rule of law, improving prison
administration, promoting human rights and preparing
for the upcoming parliamentary elections.

The Secretary-General commended the efforts
of the Haitian National Police and the ongoing
improvements within that institution. The National
Police has been increasingly autonomous in providing
security throughout the country. Its performance in the
recent demonstrations attests to its enhanced capacity
for maintaining order throughout the country.
Regarding the concerns expressed by the
representative of the United Kingdom about the
incident at La Saline, the President of Haiti has
condemned such acts of violence. He has instructed
the relevant institutions, such as the Haitian National
Police and the Government Commissioner, to conduct
an investigation in order to shed light on events that
have regrettably been portrayed as a massacre planned
by the State. I would like to refute that accusation and
inform the Council that, unfortunately, what happened
at La Saline remains in dispute. Nonetheless, I assure
the Council that the Haitian Government is in the
process of conducting an investigation to shed light on
what took place.

As the Secretary-General indicated in paragraph
70 of his report,

"the Haitian authorities expressed support for the
deployment of a special political mission under
Chapter VI of the Charter designed to accompany
current priorities in specific and strategic rule
of law, security, human rights and development
areas for a transitional period, so that Haiti would
be subsequently removed from the Security
Council agenda."

The demonstrations held in recent months have
highlighted, if there were still a need to do so, the
crucial steps that need to be taken, including the urgent
need to strengthen the fight against insecurity and
multifaceted corruption and to improve, significantly
and without delay, the living conditions of all segments
of the Haitian population.

The President of Haiti has not in any way
underestimated the difficulties that his Administration
had been tasked to overcome. That is reflected in the
Change Caravan, which he launched on 1 May 2017,
with, regrettably, very limited resources. Unfortunately,
that innovative and ambitious initiative, which could
be improved upon, has not yet received all of the
support needed.

Council members will surely agree with me that
the promotion of democracy, human rights, the rule of
law, justice and the reform of key national institutions
must go hand in hand with sustainable economic, social
and environmental development, including through
risk reduction and natural disaster preparedness
initiatives, in a country that is extremely vulnerable
to environmental threats. It is in that spirit that future
cooperation between the Government of Haiti and the
Organization must be carried out, in harmony and in
compliance with obligations within the framework of a
special political mission.

The President of Haiti is aware that no political
party or sector of national life can claim to be able to
overcome on its own the major challenges facing the
country. That is why he reiterated the unconditional
call for constructive and inclusive dialogue among all
national stakeholders. He is convinced that the nation's
recovery is the responsibility of all Haitians who
demonstrate goodwill. In that spirit, and in compliance
with the provisions of the amended 1987 Haitian
Constitution, the President initiated discussions with
several sectors, with a View to selecting a new Prime
Minister, in consultation with the Presidents of the
Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, and to forming a
Government that reflects the legitimate aspirations of
all sectors of national life.

On behalf of the President of the Republic, I
have already requested and been assured that the
United Nations, through the good offices of the
Secretary-General, will play the role of observer in
that inter-Haitian dialogue. A request for technical
assistance was therefore issued by the facilitation
committee of the inter-Haitian national dialogue to
provide an experienced United Nations expert in
that area.

Within that same framework, on 12 March, the
President reactivated the National Commission for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration to
deal with all issues related to local violence, which
constitutes an obstacle to the country's socioeconomic
development. That decision by the President provided
the necessary impetus to the development of a national
strategy to control the flow of weapons and support
vulnerable young people prone to being recruited by
armed groups.

Accordingly, the Government of Haiti is
energetically seeking the United Nations strategic
support within the framework of a special political
mission. Such support will make the reconfiguration
of the Commission possible, while considering
the following main points: the development of a
weapons and ammunition management programme;
the implementation of socioeconomic projects to
reduce community violence; and the expansion of the
presence of community police in high-risk areas. I look
forward to continuing discussions with Ms. La Lime,
which should lead to the provision of United Nations
technical support for the national dialogue as well as
the development of a national strategy to combat the
proliferation of armed gangs.
The year 2019 will be in many ways a pivotal one
for my country, which will ultimately be defined by
the effectiveness of the national authorities' efforts
to respond to the urgent demands of every segment of
the population. The upcoming holding of legislative
elections in a peaceful security environment will be
particularly crucial. The Government of the Republic of
Haiti is committed to taking all the necessary measures
to ensure that those elections are held in accordance
with constitutional deadlines and within a renewed
environment of constructive dialogue. I strongly hope
that the United Nations and Haiti's main international
partners will not fail in providing concrete support
for the priorities defined by the national authorities,
with a view to ensuring security and stability and
encouraging direct foreign investment and the long-
term development of the country.

Rest assured that the main institutions of the
Haitian State, under the leadership of the President
of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise,
will continue to play their full role in the major
transformations necessary to improving the living
conditions of the Haitian people and, moreover,
maintain the climate of trust and safeguard the hope for
a better future.

Long live the Republic of Haiti.

