Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We are very
grateful to you, Mr. President, for arranging this
timely debate so soon after the Secretary-General's
mini-summit on Somalia last month. We welcome
the Indian Minister of State to today's meeting. We
also thank Ambassador Mahiga for his briefing, and
we look forward to the possibility of a briefing from
Commissioner Lamamra.

Much has been achieved in Somalia in the past
12 months, as we have heard. We congratulate the
people of Somalia on the peaceful end to the transition
and on the election of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud. The transition was the most representative
and transparent Somali political process in decades. As
the Secretary-General's high-level event made clear,
the process must continue to be Somali-owned and
Somali-led, with the international community playing
a supporting and facilitating role. I hope that we will be
able to forge a new partnership between Somalia and
the international community, based on the principles of
mutual accountability, good governance and financial
transparency, working for the benefit of the people of
Somalia.

We continue to think that a joint financial
management board would be a useful tool for the new
Somali Government in pursuing those aims. It would
build confidence among the international community
and provide the Somali people with a tool with which
they can hold their Government to account.

The upcoming reviews of the United Nations and
African Union (AU) operations in Somalia provide a
timely opportunity to ensure that the correct mechanisms
are in place so that international assistance to Somalia
is well coordinated and effective. The needs of the
people of Somalia must be at the centre of the reviews,
but the reviews must also be complementary and
coherent, outlining a clear delineation of responsibility
between the United Nations and the AU, and setting out
how the wider international community can contribute
effectively.
The Council and the wider international community
must support the priorities that President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud has set out, including improving
security, economic recovery, improving basic services,
strengthening governance and combating corruption,
as well as continuing the process of political dialogue,
including between Mogadishu and Hargeisa.

It is in that context that my Foreign Secretary
announced last month a further £10 million to help
Somalia with its immediate needs. That is in addition to
our £38 million three-year aid programme, focused on
supporting core State functions throughout Somalia. As
a further sign of our long-term commitment to Somalia,
we hope to open our new Embassy in Mogadishu in the
spring, should security conditions permit.

Maintaining and increasing security and
establishing clear Government structures will be vital
to creating the stability to allow increased delivery of
basic services and economic activity. I pay tribute to
the continued bravery and commitment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Security Forces, which have made significant
progress, including by liberating Kismayo only two
weeks ago.

I urge Security Council partners to do all they can
to support Somali and international efforts to increase
security, including through AMISOM's upcoming
mandate renewal, on which we will circulate a draft
resolution to Council colleagues in the next few days.
There is much to be done, expectations are high, and
there are many challenges ahead, but Somalia has my
Government's unwavering support. I urge Security
Council partners to do all they can to ensure that
Somalia consolidates recent progress and continues on
its national path to peace and prosperity.

