Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for their valuable briefings. We share the sentiments expressed by Mr. Griffiths towards His Majesty the late Sultan Qaboos bin Said, and I thank him for the optimism conveyed in his briefing. We are determined to participate with all parties to make 2020, as he said, the year of peace in Yemen. That sentiment was also echoed by Mr. Rajasingham. Tunisia continues to closely follow developments in Yemen. We call on all parties to prioritize the country's best interests and to promote dialogue and negotiations as the only way to overcome differences and reach a political settlement to end the suffering of the Yemeni people and preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen. In that context, my delegation welcomes the positive steps taken thus far, which constitute signs of hope to build upon, especially the Riyadh agreement and endeavours to implement the Stockholm Agreement. We also reiterate the need to support confidence-building measures and commitments by all parties to continue to work to overcome the current situation and reach a political solution in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and allrelevant Security Councilresolutions. Tunisia welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement. At the same time, we call for concerted efforts to lay the political foundations for the resumption of the negotiations towards a comprehensive solution leading to a transitional period. Parties should also commit to the outcome of the Stockholm talks, which are the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, the prisoner-exchange agreement and the memorandum of understanding on Taiz. Tunisia supports the efforts of the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy for Yemen, especially the consultations with all parties to advance the political process and reach a comprehensive, durable and peaceful solution. On the humanitarian situation, my delegation expresses its solidarity with the brotherly Yemeni people in view of their suffering as a result of the severe humanitarian crisis, and commends the role of OCHA and all humanitarian organizations in addressing the crisis. Tunisia stresses the need to provide vital funding to ensure the humanitarian response in Yemen. We urge the Yemeni parties to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all beneficiaries in an expedited, safe and unfettered manner. We call on all parties to the Yemeni conflict to respect international humanitarian law and international human rights law. In the same vein, we commend the efforts of the legitimate Yemeni Government and members of the coalition, as well as donors, to mitigate the humanitarian suffering in Yemen. In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates the need for the political settlement to gain traction in Yemen, as it is the only way to overcome this crisis. We also welcome the fact that all parties are leaning towards calming the situation and highlight what Mr. Griffiths said earlier today in that regard. We therefore call for capitalizing on the achievements made, in accordance with a common vision of the Security Council based on the agreed terms of reference.
