The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for the
enlightening briefing she has just given to the Security
Council on the current situation in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. We welcome the presence of
Mr. Jorge Arreaza, Minister of the People's Power
for Foreign Affairs of Venezuela, among us at this
important meeting.

Today, we meet again after our meeting a month ago
on the situation in Venezuela (see S/PV.8452), which
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea has been watching
with great attention and enormous concern. Last month,
we expressed our concern that the momentum of events
taking place in Venezuela could reach levels that would
generate greater suffering for the population. It would
seem that this situation is becoming more and more
worrisome. We therefore urge all parties involved to
refrain from any initiative that could lead to further
acts of violence - clashes that could result in the loss
of human life.

We believe that today's meeting is a fitting
occasion for us to reflect on a possible political
solution to the situation in Venezuela, which, as far
as we are concerned, should be a solution negotiated
among the Venezuelans themselves, with the mediation
of a neutral party, such as the United Nations, as we
proposed in our statement on 26 January. As we have
heard in various interventions this afternoon, nearly the
entire international community is opposed to a military
solution to the issues that Venezuela is currently facing.

Given that this is a national matter, the politicians
of the country must sit down to negotiate and reach
agreements on the points of contention that are causing
the problems threatening the stability of the country.
We believe that any international approach must
provide peaceful initiatives that do not go beyond
this framework of negotiations, which provides an
assured means of resolving conflicts and prevents
further suffering for the population. In this sense,
it falls to the Venezuelan Government - with the
support of the international community - to pave the
way for facilitating this inclusive dialogue. Here, the
national interest must be prioritized so that satisfactory
agreements can be reached among all parties and so
that peace and social harmony can be restored in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

Finally, I would like to express our gratitude for
the support provided by Venezuela's neighbouring
countries and others that receive thousands of
Venezuelan migrants on a daily basis. In this regard, we
commend the solidarity of the humanitarian agencies
that have supported the Governments of these host
countries in serving the displaced. We therefore call
on the international community to bolster the efforts of
these countries to assist the migrant populations.

I conclude my statement by reiterating our
suggestion that, in the light of the fact that the sole
viable alternative to resolving the crisis lies in inclusive
dialogue between Venezuelan political actors, the
United Nations - through Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres - should be involved in the organization and
facilitation of such negotiations, with the support and
coordination of initiatives such as the International
Contact Group on Venezuela and the Montevideo
Mechanism. The fact that we are discussing this matter
in the Security Council for the second time in the
space of one month is, in itself, a clear indication of
the important role that the United Nations must play in
resolving this conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the of the United States has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

