Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the Foreign
Minister Al-Malki of the Palestinian National Authority
and the Permanent Representative of Israel,
Ambassador Shalev, for their statements.

The Security Council is meeting once again to
assess the situation in the Middle East in a context of
growing tension in the region and scant progress in the
peace process, as the Under-Secretary-General told us.
At our last informal meeting on this matter, we
expressed our hope that the high-level meetings to take
place at the margins of the general debate could lead to
the unconditional resumption of peace talks between
Israeli and the Palestinian National Authority. We
welcome the holding of the trilateral meeting among
President Barack Obama, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and President Mahmoud Abbas. We regret,
however, that negotiations have yet to attain a
definitive peace in the Middle East.

The resumption of the peace process hinges on
the will and commitment of all of the parties to the
conflict. The international community, for its part, has
the obligation to facilitate the process in order to
ensure a fair and lasting peace in the region. We
therefore express our appreciation to President Obama
and his special envoy George Mitchell for their resolve
in laying the foundations of dialogue between Israel
and the Palestinian National Authority founded on trust
and mutual respect. Furthermore, we reiterate our
support for the Quartet and the statement it issued last
September, in which it underscored the essential
principles for attaining comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. We share the sense of urgency expressed
by its members and recognize the need for the parties
to meet their commitments and obligations, in
particular those contained in the Road Map, if
conditions conducive to the resumption of the peace
process are to be met.

It is therefore essential that Israel put an end to
the establishment of new settlements in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and to so-called
natural growth. The demolition of homes, the
expulsions and the expansion of settlements in East
Jerusalem represent a serious obstacle to the peace
process. Similarly, the agreement on places of worship
must be respected and provocations that weaken
prospects for dialogue avoided.

The Palestinian National Authority, for its part,
should continue to strengthen its political and security
institutions, with the support of the international
community. We welcome the announcement by Prime
Minister Fayyad that the institutions necessary to
create a Palestinian State will be built in a reasonable
time frame.

To that end, as the Palestinian security forces
increase their control over their territory, it is essential
that Israel simultaneously lift restrictions on the
movement of people and goods. We note the
dismantling of some obstacles and a reduction in the
number of military personnel that Israel has stationed
at certain checkpoints in the West Bank. We hope that
those actions are definitive and that they lead to the
complete and irreversible dismantling of all
checkpoints.

Furthermore, it is essential that progress be made
in the process of inter-Palestinian dialogue being
carried out with Egypt's support. We regret that the
signing of the reconciliation agreement between
Palestinian factions, slated for late October, has once
again been postponed. The unity of the Palestinian
Government is an element essential to the achievement
of a comprehensive and definitive settlement in the
Middle East.

With winter about to begin, it is of vital
importance that access to Gaza be provided for
humanitarian aid and reconstruction in order to avoid a
new humanitarian disaster. That is why we stress the
need for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) and for the establishment of an international
monitoring mechanism that ensures a lasting ceasefire,
the opening of border crossings and control over illicit
arms trafficking. We support all initiatives aimed at
establishing such a mechanism, which is the only way
to ensure the gradual normalization of the situation in
the Gaza Strip.

We also recall that peace in the Middle East is
linked not only to the question of Palestine, but also to
regional stability. For that reason, we are concerned
about two successive incidents that occurred in
southern Lebanon in July and just a few days ago.
According to the information available to date, they
appear to have been violations of resolution 1701
(2006). We urge the Government of Lebanon, in
cooperation with personnel of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, to take the measures
necessary to prevent another such incident. We also
reiterate our appeal to Lebanon and Israel, as well as
all other parties involved in this conflict, to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).

Our debate today coincides with the discussions
currently under way in Geneva concerning the report of
the Human Rights Council's United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
led by Judge Richard Goldstone. We are convinced
that, at this time, the Security Council must avoid
greater politicization and polarization of the positions
that have been expressed in that regard.

Thus, we believe that it is inappropriate for the
Security Council to consider or pronounce itself on the
report before the Human Rights Council, which is the
competent organ on this matter and mandated the
drafting of the report. The Human Rights Council's
decision to consider the report within an established
timetable - adopted in Geneva a few days ago -
must be respected by the Security Council. Mexico is
studying the Goldstone report with all due care and
will participate in its consideration and the analysis of
its recommendations within the Human Rights Council.
Let us be clear: there are no good or bad
violations of international humanitarian law. We
reiterate once again that, in any armed conflict, all
actors involved must respect the provisions of
international humanitarian law at all times and in any
circumstances. This is not subject to free interpretation
by the parties to a conflict. All alleged violations of
international humanitarian law deserve to be
investigated and punished when appropriate.

As on many past occasions, we now find
ourselves at a defining moment for the peace process,
which could lead to a resumption of negotiations or,
should that fail, to a new spiral of violence that would
aggravate yet further the instability in the region. The
objective, known to all, is clear: the achievement of a
comprehensive and definitive settlement of the conflict
in the Middle East that would reaffirm the recognition
of Israel's right to exist and allow for the establishment
of a politically and economically viable Palestinian
State coexisting in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Road
Map, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

