Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
country's position with regard to its steadfast
commitment to defending the international legal order,
its attachment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and its traditional
adherence to settling disputes peacefully has already
been clearly set forth in my statement during the
Council's previous open debate, held prior to the
beginning of military action. The purpose of my
statement today is to associate ourselves with those
countries that believe that the absolute priority issue
now is to address the humanitarian situation of the
Iraqi people as fully and as promptly as possible.

Without prejudice to the political and legal debate
surrounding the question of restoring international
peace and security, we believe that, today more than
ever, the Council should commit itself to promoting
mechanisms that will ensure that the most pressing
needs can be met, in particular in the areas of medicine
and food. The Secretary-General should be given broad
powers and sufficient discretion to restart the oil for
food programme or to establish an alternative
mechanism to ensure effective collective action in this
regard.

In that connection, we should make full use of the
agencies and bodies of the United Nations system with
technical experience and legal jurisdiction, in order to
ensure the greatest efficiency, speed and coordination
of efforts. The work of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees and of such organizations
as the Red Cross and the Red Crescent are extremely
important. We should therefore strengthen and fully
support their efforts. The Government of Uruguay has
already taken steps to act and has contacted the
competent offices of the United Nations in order to
obtain information regarding the most effective way
our country can help provide for the basic needs of the
Iraqi people.

Finally, allow me to say, in the strongest possible
terms, that all the norms of international humanitarian
law must be strictly observed.

