Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): The delegation of the Central
African Republic welcomes the proposed agenda, and
we would like to share with the Council part of our
modest experience.

Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency during this month. Your presence is
evidence of the sympathy and interest that your
country, Singapore, has for the cause of sustainable
development in Africa through the resolution of
conflicts there. I also would like to thank Ambassador
Lavrov of the Russian Federation, who very ably
conducted the work of the Council during the previous
month.
I appreciate the conduct of this work because it is
interactive and strengthens the will of members and
non-members of the Council to find compromise
solutions to the difficult issues confronting Africa.

My delegation is pleased with the very
informative presentations made by Ambassador
Koonjul, Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on
prevention and resolution of conflicts in Africa, by
Ambassador Kebe ofthe Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and by Ambassador Simonovie, President of the
Economic and Social Council. The statement of
Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall, full of
reflective thoughts, could enable greater coordination
between the Security Council and the Working Group
in order to respond to some pending issues that merit a
just and lasting solution.

Africa is facing huge problems of great
complexity, and their appropriate solution requires an
integrated and comprehensive approach. Wherever the
crises are, the same problems include poverty, HIV/
AIDS, refugees, drought and famine.

It is very encouraging to note also that it is the
African leaders themselves who are the first to do
something about outbreaks of tension and conflict. My
country, the Central African Republic, has been the
scene of repeated crises in the past years. It was the
first country in the African continent to receive great
attention by African leaders, and this was very
reassuring. The establishment on the ground of an
inter-African force (MISAB) for the monitoring of the
Bangui Agreements, followed by the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
and, finally, the United Nations Peace-building Office
in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) certainly
contributed to an improvement in the security situation.

We thank all African countries, friendly nations
on other continents, the European Union, United
Nations bodies and OAU bodies, near and far, that
helped us to gradually re-establish national unity.
However, I believe that MINURCA has not fully
accomplished its mandate. Whereas the Central African
Government wanted the extension of its mandate, its
hasty retreat left a hint of lack of conviction that was
witnessed by the international community. Why did
MINURCA withdraw even though there was no
political stability, even though a lot remained to be
done in the political, social, economic and cultural
areas? The Central African Republic, the patient, was
still recovering when the doctor left the room.

A special meeting on cooperation with the
Central African Republic was held in May 2000, where
some promises of external aid were recorded. Repeated
calls were made to have programmes that had been
stopped made operational. Again, the implementation
of the foreign aid promised was pitiful, just when the
Central African Government was making progress. The
question remains: is it possible to carry out national
programmes while a country is trying to be reborn from
its ashes?

To give an example: is it possible to implement a
demobilization programme during the transitional
period of seeking peace - that is, between the end of
the conflict and the beginning of development? It is
now nearly a year ago, on 27 May 2001, that there was
an attempted coup in Bangui, and that, too, jeopardized
normal life. Again, it was African countries that
showed their concern.

Thanks to members of the Community of Sahelo-
Saharan States (CENSAD), the reestablishment of
peace is gradually happening. The Acting Chairman of
CENSAD, the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, spoke very eloquently. Its actions should
be supported by the Security Council.

We are gathered here to think about what the
work of the ad hoc Working Group should be. It is
working successfully and has a very busy programme.
What we expect of it is concrete work within the
framework of the various Security Council resolutions
on African conflicts. It is clear that African issues
dominate the Council's agenda. Voices more eloquent
than mine have raised in this Chamber the question of
the implementation of Security Council resolutions.
Taking the Central African crisis as an example, we
have the impression that the Council has grown tired of
this conflict, although it made enormous efforts to
establish MINURCA to do the job, but then it was
quickly eliminated while the situation on the ground
was still risky.

A post-conflict State does not mean a peaceful
State. The reestablishment of peace is a slow, long but
certain process. I would like to thank all speakers and
those who spoke about the case of the Central African
Republic, whose experience has not been very
convincing. The involvement of regional organizations
in conflicts, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, is very important. Nor should
we forget the impact of non-governmental
organizations, which are increasingly playing the role
of mediator in national crises.

The work of the ad hoc Working Group, which
we are considering, should save as a catalyst for the
work of various ad hoc groups created in various places
to find solutions to African crises. We do not want yet
another working group that would duplicate the same
functions in another programme. This Working Group,
which would work in concert with the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and other
regional and subregional organizations, should be able
to establish priorities and deadlines. I am afraid that
there might be some risk of overlapping in the work
and the objectives, but my delegation believes that this
new group might make a difference, compared to other
groups previously created. Transparency and vigilance
should be major assets. No regional organization
should refuse to cooperate with this Group. Its work
will play a crucial role in allowing the voices of
countries confronting conflicts to be heard.

My delegation will work in close cooperation
with the ad hoc Working Group, the establishment of
which, we believe, is very welcome for all of us. We
fully support its work programme and the role that the
Security Council continues to play in this regard.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate, to encourage and to wish
full success to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, who will be starting
his new functions in the coming months.

