Mr. Maurer (Switzerland): The most recent acts
of terrorism in London, as well as in other parts of the
world, which wasted the lives of dozens of innocent
civilians and caused injuries to many more, have once
again confirmed that the threat of terrorism is far from
over. Switzerland condemns all forms of terrorism and
terrorist acts and supports the fight against terrorism by
all means in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including human rights
and international humanitarian law.

The efforts of the Security Council are an
important part of the global fight against terrorism.
Switzerland has fully complied with the Council's
counter-terrorism resolutions and has closely
cooperated with its Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its sanctions committees, and will continue to do so in
the future. Combating terrorism is the concern of all
States, and it is therefore essential for the Council to
have regular exchanges on its strategies and decisions
with all members of the United Nations. I therefore
express my appreciation to the Chairmen of the three
committees for today's briefings.

The Council is currently reviewing the measures
imposed by earlier resolutions concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
In my statement I will focus on the 1267 Committee
and share some concerns that Switzerland has with
regard to the effectiveness of targeted sanctions as
applied today. Security Council targeted financial and
travel sanctions against individuals can be a useful
instrument in the international community's efforts to
enforce implementation of Security Council decisions.
Since 1998, the common efforts of Switzerland,
Germany, Sweden and others in the Interlaken, Bonn-
Berlin and Stockholm processes have contributed to the
further development and refinement of that instrument.

In recent years, however, the scope of targeted
sanctions has been extended considerably to loosely
defined categories of individuals and entities rather
than specific groups of persons. Furthermore, while
targeted sanctions are intended to be preventive in
nature, they are punitive in their effects, and the rights
of individuals under domestic and international law are
severely affected. In particular, the application of
measures against individuals without any possibility of
review or appeal has the real potential to violate
individual due process rights guaranteed by relevant
instruments of international law. Not surprisingly, the
second report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, of February 2005 (S/2005/83, annex), mentioned a number of legal challenges in
national and international courts against specific
sanctions implementation measures.

The conflict between Security Council
resolutions and international human rights law is both
harmful and unnecessary. It violates the integrity of the
system of international law and it undermines the
legitimacy of the Council's action in general.
Switzerland shares the concern of others that, as a
result, it will severely compromise the effectiveness of
the Council's anti-terrorism strategy. At the same time,
we are convinced that new mechanisms must, and can,
be developed that would avoid incompatibility between
obligations under international human rights law and
Security Council sanctions. In that regard, we welcome
the statements and suggestions made by Greece,
Denmark and, just a minute ago, Liechtenstein.

We believe that an effective regime of Security
Council targeted financial and travel sanctions against
individuals and entities needs; first, to apply strict and
transparent factual and evidentiary requirements with
respect to the listing of individuals and groups;
secondly, to guarantee the timely notification of
targeted individuals and entities upon their inclusion in
a sanctions list; thirdly, to limit the duration of
sanctions and their punitive effects; and fourthly, to
provide for the right to appeal against the inclusion of
individuals and entities in a sanctions list, as well as
for binding arbitration by a body of impartial and
independent experts.

We recognize that recent sanctions regimes
provide improved safeguards with regard to the rights
of listed individuals or entities, and we suggest that the
relevant counter-terrorism and sanctions committees
update older sanctions regimes according to the newer,
better standards.

With respect to further improvements in the
efficiency of targeted sanctions, Switzerland would
welcome opportunities for discussion with the
members of the 1267 Committee.

In the ongoing debate on the reform of the
Security Council, Switzerland has suggested, among
other things, that the Council consider on a case-by-
case basis the possibility of including Member States
not currently on the Council but with strong interest
and expertise in the topic to participate in the work of
one or more of the subsidiary bodies. We believe that
improving the listing and de-listing procedures would
be an excellent opportunity to start such a practice. We
suggest that the Council establish a working group
with members of the 1267 Committee, other interested
Member States and relevant experts from the
Secretariat with a mandate to come up with suggestions
on how to improve the effectiveness of the
Committee's listing and de-listing procedures, in
particular by avoiding incompatibility between
obligations under international human rights law and
Security Council sanctions.

