Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): It is with keen interest
and great satisfaction that Portugal welcomes this
thematic consideration by the Security Council of the
importance of post-conflict peace-building activities in
keeping and consolidating peace and security. We very
much congratulate you, Sir, for organizing this debate.

The statement to be made later on by the Austrian
Presidency of the European Union fully reflects our
thinking on this matter, and I wish merely to add to and
elaborate further on a number of points.

It is particularly gratifying for my delegation to
participate in this debate today, since it was last year,
during the first Portuguese presidency of the Security
Council in April 1997, that we raised the issue of peace-
building in a peacekeeping context. At that time, we
recommended a discussion by the Council in order to
identify those short-term activities - strictly speaking,
post-conflict peace-building activities - which were
essential to the functioning and, ultimately, the success of
peacekeeping operations. Much work had been done by
Germany in this respect in helping to define problematic
areas, and we felt it was time for the Council itself to
address the issue, especially where it had a direct impact
on the elaboration of mandates and the very structure of
the peacekeeping operations established by the Council.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to hold the discussion
at that time, but we wholeheartedly welcome its
realization here today. This is an important debate which
will help the United Nations trace the major lines of
current thinking on the interplay between peace-building
activities and the immediate task of maintaining or
restoring international peace and security.

In the increasingly multidisciplinary United Nations
peacekeeping operations, particularly those involved in
addressing intra-State conflicts, a number of peace-
building activities have already been needed during the

 

operational life of those peacekeeping operations as well as
after their conclusion. The fact is that certain long-term
tasks must be started early, even immediately following a
ceasefire, and these are often foreseen in the elaboration of
peace agreements.

These activities include the demobilization and
disarmament of fighting forces; the transformation of armed
movements into civil political parties; the reintegration of
former combatants into society; the restructuring and
unification of police and armed forces and ensuring that in
their conduct, all forces meet international human rights
standards; the return of refugees and displaced persons;
demining programmes; support for political and legal
institutions geared towards national reconciliation; and the
holding of elections.

The successful conclusion of a peace process in
situations of intra-State conflict is premised on national
reconciliation, which in turn cannot be achieved without
safeguarding the rights of individuals. Not only must their
humanitarian and human rights be rigorously protected and
upheld, but they must also be given a chance to secure their
socio-economic well-being.

In today's peacekeeping, these are on many occasions
fully mandated tasks and often make up the main work of
the peacekeepers. And rightly so, since without them the
recurrence of conflict is not only possible but likely. They
act to remove immediate focuses of tension and other
factors of destabilization that may threaten the peace
process and its implementation.

These are the lessons which have been learned by the
United Nations in a number of peacekeeping operations and
are now being applied in the Central African Republic, in
Liberia, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and elsewhere.

The strong link between peace-building activities and
the immediate goals of establishing and maintaining peace
and security was particularly evident in Mozambique, in the
work of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ). The careful deployment and effective
coordination of peacekeeping and peace-building
components secured the successful consolidation of the
peace process in Mozambique, which today continues
rightly to be supported by the international community.

While peacekeeping operations still focus primarily on
the military aspects of a peace agreement, the fact is that
peace-building activities are increasingly important in
ensuring the timely and full implementation of the terms of
peace agreements and the fulfilment of peacekeeping
mandates.

Peace-building is thus essential in the peacekeeping
phase. Peace-building may be post-conflict but it is not,
nor should it be, post-peacekeeping. It is important to
make this point, since the proper use of peace-building
activities in good time, before the end of peacekeeping
mandates, will help bridge the transitional gap that
inevitably appears between the withdrawal of the
peacekeepers and the effective functioning of
development activities which address the long-term causes
of conflict. In this so-called twilight zone, conflict can
erupt again very easily unless steps have been taken to
disarm and demobilize, to find relevant occupations for
ex-fighters and to help the wider process of national
reconciliation through a participatory political process,
including democratic elections.

Therefore, quite apart from their intrinsic value,
peace-building activities in a peacekeeping context also
seem to be sensible, sound insurance policies to secure
the investments of the international community in
bringing peace to conflict situations.

We welcome the increased attention given to this
important dynamic by the Secretary-General, as evident
in his report on the causes of conflict in Africa. While
peace-building tasks are usually predetermined in the
peace agreements which bring the fighting to an end and
are subsequently integrated into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations by the Security Council, it is up
to the Secretary-General to ensure the effective
coordination on the ground of all the activities of the
various components of the operations so that they
function in a complementary and coordinated fashion,
thereby contributing to the consolidation of the peace
process. For this to happen in optimal conditions, there
should be a clear leadership and coordination structure on
the ground, headed by his Special Representative, whose
task is to deploy appropriately all those components at his
or her disposal to ensure the stability of the peace
process. Such flexibility should also include financial
means.

Portugal also agrees with the Secretary-General that
curtailng the availability of small arms in a post-conflict
situation is a very important activity to reduce tensions
and prevent the resumption of hostilities.

In this process of peacekeeping and peace-building,
it is also essential to ensure the greatest degree possible

 

of coordination among the efforts of the organs of the
United Nations - the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council - and those
of the United Nations programmes and agencies and the
international financial and development institutions, as well
as bilateral aid efforts. This will not only avoid duplication
and overlap but also optimize the material and human
investments in peace of the United Nations. An important
role in this area is also played by non-governmental
organizations.

In the wider realm of the maintenance of international
peace and security, we have seen an important and
appropriate division of labour with regional organizations,
as foreseen in Chapter VIII of the Charter. We welcome
this trend and, in this context, it is important also to
identify the peace-building activities within peacekeeping
that can benefit from an effective cooperation with regional
organizations. A case in point, we believe, is Guinea-
Bissau, which will require the careful attention of the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council, and the
continued excellent cooperation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) in
helping to establish the foundations for a long-lasting peace.

The present and future of United Nations peacekeeping
is strongly based on the experiences of the past. Initially,
experience indicated a need for larger and more
comprehensive operations which sought to address each and
every aspect of a conflict. Subsequently, a more realistic
and efficient approach has been taken, tailored to each
situation but still recognizing the need to expand the
definition of peacekeeping tasks to include peace-building
activities. This dynamic development of peacekeeping is the
most effective use of the resources of the United Nations in
the exercise of its responsibilities in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

