Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the President for having convened today's
meeting on a topic of great concern to the international
community. I also wish to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Mufioz for his very clear and precise
briefing.
I would like to associate myself in advance with
the statement to be made by the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union. I shall therefore
confine myself to a few brief comments.

I must first note that this debate is taking place
approximately three years after the deplorable events
of 11 September. Unfortunately, since then we have
become more familiar with the face of modern
terrorism, which is not an American nightmare but,
rather, a real threat affecting all the continents of the
world. We therefore stand by the victims and, at the
moment, our collective thoughts are with the victims of
the events in the Caucuses and at the Australian
embassy in Jakarta. We once again extend our
condolences to the bereaved families of those events.

Terrorism affects the entire international
community. It calls for an extremely energetic response
that is without weakness and that takes into account the
complexity of the phenomenon. That response must
also be based on unity within the international
community. In that regard, one important contribution
made by the work of Ambassador Munoz and the
Monitoring Team has been to provide a clear,
convincing and well-argued analysis of the changing
threat posed by the Al Qaeda network and the Taliban.
That threat has undoubtedly been, to a certain extent,
contained and weakened by the forceful response of the
international community. At the same time, however, it
is also a threat that has survived and evolved into a
new, more diffuse form that is, in some respects, more
difficult to combat. How, then, should the work of the
Committee established by resolution 1267 (1999)
proceed? I believe that we should take three courses of
action.

First, we must adapt our instruments - and in
particular the instrument of sanctions - to the
changing nature of the threat. The Monitoring Team
has rightly argued for maintaining sanctions in an
adapted form as a result of its identification of a
number of gaps. It has therefore proposed specific
measures to bridge those gaps, including through better
coordination and cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). The Al Qaeda Committee
has begun to consider those recommendations. For our
part, we are fully resolved to engage in that
consideration in the most constructive spirit possible.

The second course of action pertains to the need
to strengthen the cohesiveness of the international
community. In that regard, we support the proposal of
Ambassador Munoz to intensify contacts with Member
States in New York, as well as in the course of visits to
the countries concerned, in order to explain the efforts
of the Committee, propose assistance where possible
and remind countries of the cooperation that is
expected, which is sometimes lacking. It is especially
necessary that all Member States cooperate in order to
provide better and more precise information with
regard to individuals on the List.

The third, and final, course of action pertains to
respect for the rule of law, to which the Secretary-
General referred last Wednesday in Mexico. He stated
that we must find measures to combat terrorism in an
effective manner, but that we must also ensure that
those methods do not undermine the rule of law and the
fundamental rights of citizens. In pursuing our
constructive efforts in the Al Qaeda Committee, my
delegation will remain vigilant in order to ensure that
the principle of effectiveness and respect for the rule of
law are both complied with.

