Mr. Crighton (Australia): On behalf of the
Australian delegation, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of Canada for bringing this important
question to the forefront of the Security Council's agenda.
We also very much welcome the fact that the decision
was made to discuss this in an open meeting of the
Council.

The briefings provided to the Council on 12
February by the representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
highlighted the horrific toll that war has taken on civilian
populations, and particularly on women and children.

Of course, this is not a new problem. Nor is it a
diminishing problem. Last year we celebrated the fiftieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. This year is also the fiftieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions. Yet the sad fact is that ever larger
numbers of civilians are being affected by conflict across
the globe.

Conflict today is characterized by increased targeting
of non-combatant groups, increasing involvement of
non-State actors and a widening gulf between the
principle and the observance of humanitarian norms and
laws. The effect of this is to make civilian groups,
particularly women and children, even more vulnerable to
assault, abuse and displacement.

This presents the United Nations and the
international community as a whole with a complex and
difficult challenge, which must be addressed at a number
of levels. Many elements of our response will be beyond
the specific responsibilities of the Security Council. But
at the same time, as a number of speakers in the earlier

 

Council discussion highlighted, breakdown in civil order
and human suffering can be both a consequence and a
cause of conflict, and to this extent it is very much an issue
for this Council.

Organizations like the ICRC, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
UNICEF and the United Nations itself have made a major
contribution over many years to assisting and protecting
civilians in conflict and post-conflict situations.
International humanitarian personnel must be allowed to
continue their work without threat or hindrance. Deliberate
obstruction of humanitarian workers, and incidents like the
recent shooting down of two planes carrying United Nations
personnel in Angola, must not be allowed to go unpunished.

A number of valuable suggestions about what the
Council and the United Nations can do to strengthen the
protection of civilians in conflict were made during the
debate on 12 February. I am sure that a lot more will be
made today, and we look forward to hearing them.

The role of international human rights and
humanitarian law is central. In particular, we should make
every effort to further strengthen those protections already
provided for in international law, not only in relation to
civilian women and children but also where, for example,
children may themselves become involved in armed
conflict. In this area, Australia strongly supports the
development of an optional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. The optional protocol aims to
strengthen the existing international standard contained in
article 38 of the Convention by raising the minimum age
limits for recruitment into armed forces and participation in
armed conflict.

Work on strengthening the international legal
framework is important. That must go hand in hand with
efforts to strengthen the observance of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Ms. Bellamy and Mr.
Otunnu, among others, spoke of the need to improve
education about the obligations of soldiers under
international law. Many countries, including Australia, do
this as an integral part of the training of our soldiers and
our peacekeepers, and we support efforts to extend that
education.

It is vital that we have effective institutions to bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against humanity. In this
regard the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia have made an important
contribution. The establishment of the International
Criminal Court, with which Australia has been closely
associated, is a major step forward.

My delegation agrees with many of the constructive
suggestions that have been made so far in this debate.
Arms embargoes aimed at limiting conflict must be better
implemented. The proliferation of small arms and light
weapons poses a particular threat to civilian populations
in conflict situations, and practical steps can be taken to
address this problem. Landmines exact an appalling
human price, and international cooperation to ban their
use and to remove the millions of mines that still threaten
civilian populations must continue.

In a statement to the Security Council in a similar
open debate on post-conflict peace-building held last
December, my delegation spoke of the need to take a
more integrated, holistic approach to the United Nations
role in responding to conflict. The protection of civilians
affected by conflict is an important element of this, both
as conflict continues and at the post-conflict peace-
building stage.

Canada's initiative in convening this debate will
greatly assist the Council, and all Member States, in
considering how to deal with this troubling issue. To this
end, my delegation welcomes the statement by the
President of the Council of 12 February 1999 and the
request to the Secretary-General to prepare a report with
specific recommendations for the Council on measures to
improve the physical and legal protection of civilians in
conflict. We look forward to the report, and we stand
ready to contribute further to the Council's consideration
of this matter.

