Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank
Senegal for organizing this debate and the briefers
for their important statements. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/16 of October 2013, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) provided long overdue
recognition of OIC's growing role in preventing
and resolving conflict, as well as of the potential for
enhanced collaboration with the United Nations in
those efforts.

Three years on, the need for a strong partnership
between the United Nations and OIC has never been
greater. The past few years have been traumatic ones
for communities across the Islamic world. Many
countries with significant Muslim populations are
experiencing instability and, in some cases, violent
internal conflicts. In many settings that instability has
unleashed sectarian tensions that have been exploited by
violent extremist groups to stir up hatred and division.
Ethnic and religious communities, which in many cases
have lived peacefully together for centuries, have been
turned against one another. That is tearing at the social
fabric of much of the Middle East and North Africa, in
particular. It is contributing to population movements
that have disturbing implications for the future stability
and cohesion of many States. Echoes of those strains
and intolerances are also being heard in countries far
removed from the centres of Islamic faith.

OIC has an important role to play in countering
those messages of hate, in tamping down the embers
of conflict and in promoting healing, reconciliation
and understanding. OIC's standing in the Islamic world
and its deep understanding of the religious and cultural
context of Islamic communities make it uniquely placed
to promote peace and reconciliation by amplifying the
voices of tolerance and moderation. I wish to highlight
three areas in which enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC can reinforce their
respective abilities to support international peace
and security.

First, we welcome OIC's efforts over the past
decade to strengthen its capacity to contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution. New Zealand has
been a consistent advocate for a sharper United Nations
focus on conflict prevention and for strengthened
cooperation with regional and other partners in support
of such efforts. OIC is a natural partner in that regard.

Through its Peace, Security and Mediation Unit,
OIC has supported mediation efforts in Afghanistan,
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia, as
well as in Thailand and the Philippines in my own
region - to name but a few examples. OIC brings to
those efforts a unique authority and an ability to reach,
work with and mobilize communities and religious
leaders in the cause of peace. We encourage OIC to
continue and expand that important work.

Nowhere is that need greater than in the efforts
to halt the fighting and reconcile and heal divisions
between Islamic communities in Syria, Iraq, Yemen
and the occupied Palestinian territories. The political,
military and religious leaders of those countries need
to be encouraged and supported in their efforts to
bring the suffering of their peoples to an end, including
by showing leadership and making the hard political
decisions needed to help bring those conflicts to a
peaceful resolution. And affected communities will
need help in finding ways to live peacefully with each
other once more. In close cooperation with the United
Nations and other international mediators, OIC has a
potentially significant role to play in supporting those
efforts. We welcome its participation in the work of the
International Syria Support Group and its mediation
efforts in Iraq.

Secondly, we acknowledge the tremendous
contribution made by many OIC countries in managing
the unprecedented global refugee flows that the
international community currently faces. Five of the
six countries hosting the largest refugee populations
are OIC members, collectively hosting more than
6 million people. OIC members are also among the
largest humanitarian donors. We also acknowledge the
role played by OIC itself in supporting humanitarian
work in settings such as Somalia and Darfur, as well
as in some of our near neighbours in South-East Asia.

But it is perhaps in preventing and combating
violent extremism that we see the greatest potential
and need for OIC to contribute in the years ahead.
Many communities around the world currently face
severe challenges from extremist forces that manifest
themselves in many ways, from terrorism and violent
extremism, through to aggressively intolerant and
exclusionary political and religious movements. Those
battles can be fought and won only by way of dialogue
and voices within the affected cultures and communities
speaking up for peace.

We commend OIC's long-standing commitment
to promote understanding among different faiths and
communities and to reject all forms of intolerance. All
of those in the international community who support
moderation and the maintenance of peaceful, inclusive
societies must also do their part to support those
efforts. That means cooperating with communities
so as to prevent the radicalization of our youth and to
re-educate and rehabilitate those who fall victim to
extremist narratives. It means confronting and defeating
the politics of hatred and exclusion in our communities.
And it means working together internationally to
amplify the voices of tolerance and moderation.
That is why New Zealand has been a regular
partner to OIC and its members in supporting initiatives
that promote dialogue and understanding, such as
interfaith dialogue and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations. And that is why we have been a strong
supporter of the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. The Plan of Action provides
an important blueprint and a useful practical resource
for other international actors in that space, including
OIC. We encourage OIC to deepen its cooperation with
the United Nations in that area.

In the light of the many challenges, New Zealand
welcomes the OIC 2025 Programme of Action, adopted
in April of this year, which sets out a range of actions
to strengthen OIC's role in conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding. The
actions agreed at the biennial United Nations-OIC
consultations in May provide a useful framework for
further strengthening OIC's strategic partnership with
the United Nations system in pursuing those goals.
New Zealand is confident that the partnership can make
a practical difference in restoring peace and security
to Muslim and non-Muslim communities alike in the
years ahead.

