Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is a
real pleasure for us to participate in this special meeting
of the Security Council to address the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict in Africa. My
delegation takes this opportunity to welcome the efforts
of the United Nations, led by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, to ensure that the international community is ever
mindful of the serious situation and tragedies of the
African continent.

What can we add to what was said last year, since
peace remains precarious and economic and social
development in Africa is encountering increasingly
insurmountable obstacles? Indeed, the general situation on
the continent is extremely disturbing, despite the various

 

attempts of the international community to relaunch
economic growth and development. We refer, inter alia, to
the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative for
Africa, the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa and the Tokyo Conference, whose
promoters we commend.

As the Secretary-General properly emphasizes in his
report before the Council,

"There are... places where the widely held View of
Africa as a region in perpetual crisis is not just an
image but an all-too-grim and painful reality".
(S/I999/1008, para. 96)
It is very difficult, unfortunately, to ignore the excessive
arms purchases, the bad governance, the AIDS epidemic,
the corruption, the impediments to trade and the foreign
debt burden that continue to hinder the development process
of many African countries. Thus, 44 per cent of Africans,
and 51 per cent of those who live south of the Sahara, are
in a state of abject poverty. Of the 30 million people
around the world infected with HIV/AIDS, 23 million live
in sub-Saharan Africa.

How can we ignore the fact that Africa's foreign debt
burden rose to $350 billion in 1998, amounting to 30 per
cent of the value of exported goods and services, whereas
African exports declined by 15 per cent in 1998 and direct
foreign investment amounted to a mere 3 per cent of world
trade. At the same time, official development assistance has
fallen by 40 per cent since 1992 and now represents a mere
0.2 per cent of the gross national product of the developed
countries, whereas the internationally agreed target is 0.7
per cent. Thus, Africa's prospects are by no means
promising, since the economic growth rate foreseen for
1999 will probably not rise above 3 per cent, which,
because of the rapid growth of our populations, is
equivalent to zero growth in terms of gross national product
per capita.

This picture should not, however, overshadow the
praiseworthy efforts of many African countries - ours
among them - to emerge from instability and crisis.

As the Secretary-General properly emphasized,
democratic elections are becoming more common and good
governance and the rule of law are gradually becoming an
established fact, while judicial and legislative reforms are
being actively undertaken in order to improve the
competitiveness of African economies, reforms such as
trade liberalization, privatization of State enterprises and
the setting up of adequate infrastructures.

Morocco is contributing to this common endeavour
for the development of Africa by devoting 95 per cent of
its cooperation budget to finance projects and programmes
in friendly African countries. It has also contributed to
promoting a spirit of responsibility and good governance
in African public institutions by hosting on two occasions,
in 1994 and 1998, the African conference of civil service
Ministers, whose results were endorsed by the General
Assembly of the United Nations.

Faced with the magnitude of the challenges to be
met in Africa, particularly with regard to restoring peace
and security and reducing poverty, the international
community must give its full support to African efforts.
Strengthening the African mechanism for conflict
resolution, reducing the external debt and opening markets
to African exports could and should radically improve the
landscape with respect to security, the economy and the
social situation, so long as they are the subject of
concrete, resolute and coordinated action.

Morocco is convinced that only through genuine
partnership, both national and international, can Africa
achieve the 7 per cent growth rate regarded as necessary
to considerably reduce poverty, according to the World
Summit on Social Development.

The report of the Secretary-General accurately
reflects the situation in our country. Democratization,
liberalization, strengthening regional and subregional
organizations for conflict resolution, restoring peace and
security and dealing with the problems of arms and
refugees are all tasks which deserve our attention and
support.

As for the question of arms in Africa, particularly in
regions of conflict, Morocco entirely supports the
recommendations addressed to the Secretary-General by
the Chairman of the Group of Governmental Experts on
Small Arms that an international conference be held to
step up and strengthen regional and international efforts
to combat, prevent and eliminate the illicit trade in small
arms in all its aspects. Everyone is aware that this trade
has contributed to intensifying and prolonging armed
conflicts in Africa, and to further complicating
peacekeeping efforts by impeding economic and social
development in certain regions of the continent.

 

Furthermore, the challenge presented by small arms in
Africa, in its humanitarian, security and development
aspects, should encourage exporting countries to exercise
stricter control over exports of such arms to countries in
conflict or emerging from armed conflict. In this
connection, my country appeals for the implementation of
the Security Council resolutions establishing an embargo on
weapons, and encourages the various moratoriums on the
transfer of weapons to African countries where armed
conflicts are raging.

In recent years Africa has felt frustrated at not
receiving the same attention and treatment as areas outside
the continent, when it has experienced conflicts which were
often more serious, with victims numbered in the hundreds
of thousands. Obviously, we attempt to settle our conflicts
by our own means, but the international community is not
giving us enough assistance. We will never be able to
overcome the aftermath of the Great Lakes conflicts and the
Somalia conflict, to cite just those two examples, if the
international community does not help us.
The African approach to the settlement of conflicts
necessarily presupposes that the donor countries support the
African Mechanism for Conflict Resolution, by providing
financial and material resources and training. The Secretary-
General's approach to the resolution of conflicts in Africa
appears to be very realistic, and Morocco gives it its full
support. Nevertheless, we are unfortunately witnessing a
lessening of the enthusiasm that led to the creation of this
African Mechanism for Conflict Resolution because only
one country so far has contributed to it, as the Secretary-
General emphasized in his report.

Humanitarian assistance to the continent has also been
particularly weak, particularly compared with the number
of conflicts and the flows of refugees they provoke.
Nothing can justify the international community' s providing
in 1999 only 50 per cent, and sometimes less than 25 per
cent, of the necessary contributions to meet the
humanitarian needs of Africa.

To maintain or restore peace in certain African
regions, the Security Council has had to resort to sanctions
regimes and peacekeeping operations. The Council's
experience regarding sanctions as a means of pacification
and maintaining peace and security has shown some
immense shortcomings in this procedure and the seriousness
of its impact at the humanitarian level. Sanctions as a
means of persuasion or dissuasion should remain an
exceptional procedure, resorted to by the Security Council
when all other means of conflict resolution have been
exhausted; that is, good offices, mediation, negotiation
and arbitration. Therefore, sanctions should not be
subjected to abstract rules and be applicable indefinitely
without taking into account their impact on the civilian
population, particularly without the benefit of all the
necessary objective information.

I would here add a word about the concept of
interference which has been bandied about recently. I
appeal to all those who may speak about it or use it not
to forget that the employment of this dangerous
instrument deserves real reflection, and perhaps much
deeper than we have been giving to the reform of the
United Nations and even the restructuring of the Security
Council, because it essentially calls into question our
sovereignty, our cultures, our different civilizations and
perhaps also our respective beliefs. Let us think about this
very carefully together before taking any further steps in
this direction.

In this regard, we welcome the laudable efforts the
Secretary-General continues to make by quite properly
encouraging the States, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations to give further thought both
to this problem and to promoting sanctions when that is
warranted, provided they are fair and as little damaging
as possible.

