Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like first and foremost to convey our heartfelt
sympathy to and express our full solidarity with France
in connection with the horrific attacks that struck Paris
and the surrounding region last Friday. The horror of
those attacks, only a few days after the events in Beirut
and many other places, is a painful reminder that no one
is safe and that strengthened international cooperation
is imperative to combat the scourge of terrorism, which
can never be justified.

(spoke in English)

I wish to thank the British presidency for the spirit
in which it started the work of the Council this month,
and we specifically appreciate, as reported to Member
States by the President of the General Assembly, that the
overall intention of the United Kingdom is to conduct
the Council's business in as transparent and interactive
a manner as possible. We look forward to seeing all
Security Council members following in this trailblazing
endeavour. I also thank the British presidency for having
convened this open debate and appreciate the valuable
contributions of the Secretary-General; our colleague
Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui.

Development, security and human rights are
intertwined, a linkage that Algeria has always
strongly defended, including by promoting this idea,
today enshrined in Sustainable Development Goal
16. Numerous General assembly resolutions, as well
as continued efforts to improve the working methods
of the Peacebuilding Commission, confirm this
correlation. We also want to stress the importance of the
normative work on women and peace and security and
call for its implementation, in particular with respect
to the prevention pillar, the participation of women in
peace processes and countering violent extremism and
terrorism.

We also stress the importance of cross-border
cooperation for the resolution of disputes and the
equal priority to be given to the implementation of
post-conflict reconstruction programmes for States
transitioning out of conflict.

Addressing the root causes of conflict means that
we have to perform a thorough examination of past
experiences, draw and learn lessons therefrom, and
admit that the symptoms, however dire and harsh,
are just the consequences of deeper problems and
imbalances. If we do not investigate the reasons that led
to conflict, we will continue our ever-riskier journey
into uncharted and uncertain territory.

We also deem it vital to stress that the Council and
Member States, collectively and individually, should
be careful about taking any action that might lead to
institutional vacuums or lawlessness in countries that
were or are still on the agenda of the Council. Thinking
of the day after is also important, and working with
regional organizations is equally so.

In this regard, I would like to remind the Council that
Africa faces complex, multidimensional challenges. I
wish in this regard to underline the fact that the African
Union has taken a number of initiatives, including
the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
supports efforts aimed at the prevention, management
and resolution of crises and conflicts, post-conflict
reconstruction and development. It is critical for us
Africans to identify potential conflict situations as
early as possible. The African Union continental early-
warning system, created in 2002, is yet another such
initiative and provides timely advice on potential
conflicts and threats to peace and security.

At the regional level, we support preventive
action ranging from institution-building to preventive
diplomacy, which protects and strengthens State
sovereignty. In that regard, Algeria's actions in the
promotion of dialogue as a solution to the crisis in
our neighbourhood has been widely recognized. The
International Crisis Group, in its 12 October report on
the Middle East and North Africa, noted that Algeria
has emerged as an indispensable broker of stability
in North Africa and the Sahel. It emphasized the fact
that Algeria has at key moments promoted dialogue
and State-building as the best means for lifting its
neighbours out of crisis.

While we are in favour of the development of
Security Council tools for the prevention of conflicts,
ranging from the use ofpeace operations to interventions
through statements, resolutions and consultations with
the Peacebuilding Commission, we emphasize that the
Security Council may not be the only body that should
address the development, peace and security nexus.
Peace, security, inclusive institutions, the rule of law
and access to justice should also be deliberated in the
relevant forums: the Human Rights Council, the Sixth
Committee, the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly.

We believe that enhanced coordination among
all bodies under the Charter of the United Nations,
including the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council, could contribute to
a better understanding of the interlinkages between
development issues and conflict prevention. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's plan of action on
preventing violent extremism, to be issued later this
year, since terrorism and violent extremism threaten
to reverse much of the development progress made in
recent decades.

