Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important open
debate and taking the lead in our common endeavour to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
The topic of improving the working methods of the
Council is indeed an issue of great interest for both
Council members and non-members alike. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank you for preparing and
circulating the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) for
this meeting, which highlights some of the key topics,
issues and challenges to be addressed in our debate.

In undertaking the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
effectively, it is critical that the Security Council's
action and decisions garner the support of the greater
United Nations membership. Therefore, enhancing the
level of communication and interactivity between the
Council and the entire United Nations membership is an
essential part of helping the Council achieve its aims.
Against that backdrop, and with a View to contributing
to the advancement of dialogue between Council and
non-Council members, Indonesia would like to share
the following views.
First, Indonesia reiterates the importance of the
effective implementation of Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter of the United Nations, inter alia by increasing
regular consultations with non-Council members,
especially with States that have special interests in
the matters being considered by the Council. Through
those consultations, the Council should give particular
attention to the ability of States to implement the
Council's decisions.

Secondly, in relation to the use of veto rights,
Indonesia welcomes the initiative for the early
commencement of dialogue among the permanent
members of the Council on a voluntary code of conduct
regarding the use of veto, in particular one in which
all permanent members are committed to exercising
voluntary restraint on the use of the veto in situations
of mass atrocities. With clear and agreeable modalities,
the code of conduct can help the Security Council
arrive at a united voice and live up to its mandate under
the Charter, particularly in situations where there
are violations of international law, human rights and
humanitarian laws relating to acts under the definition
of war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity.

Thirdly, as a major troop-contributing country
(TCC), Indonesia welcomes the note of the President
of the Security Council contained in S/2013/630,
dated 28 October 2013, in which Council members
reaffirmed their commitments to enhancing interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries. While
Indonesia welcomes the enhanced engagement
between the Council and TCCs that ensued following
that commendable initiative, we believe that there is
still room for improvement. In that regard, to further
enhance transparency, understanding and coordination
between the Council and TCCs, Indonesia proposes
that more consultations with TCCs be conducted,
especially before decisions are taken with regard to the
establishment, conduct, review or change of mandates
and the termination of peacekeeping operations, as
well as when urgent situations that may affect mission
operations and the safety of personnel arise. We believe
that such an improvement will help to expedite the TCC
decision-making process of TCCs.

Fourthly, it is incumbent upon the Council to
increase and strengthen its collaboration with the
various relevant United Nations bodies. Indonesia sees
that as a matter of urgency in the light of the multifaceted
global challenges that have surfaced in recent years
and demand the immediate and equal attention of the
Council. One issue that comes to mind immediately
pertains to peacebuilding. As an active member of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Indonesia also sees the merit of
enhancing the relationship between the Council and
the PBC. The interactions between both bodies should
remain mutually proactive at both the ambassadorial
and the expert levels. Furthermore, the Council should
also continue to make use of the advisory, advocacy
and resource mobilization roles of the Peacebuilding
Commission and hold regular informal dialogues and
consultations to develop trust and confidence between
the two bodies.

Lastly, Indonesia reaffirms its support for the efforts
to enhance due process within the sanctions regimes.
In that regard, Indonesia commends the creation and
the work of the Office of the Ombudsperson Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and
strongly suggests that a similar mechanism be applied
in the other sanctions committees.

In conclusion, I would once again like to commend
you, Madam President, for your stewardship in
our efforts to improve the working methods of the
Security Council. I would like to reiterate Indonesia's
commitment to supporting the Council in its work and
its efforts to realize greater transparency, inclusivity,
democracy, accountability and efficiency as it carries
out its responsibilities.

