Ms. Tagliavini: I am asking for the Council's
attention at a moment that may become a turning point
in the Ukrainian conflict.

We indeed seemed to be standing at the brink of an
all-out war in Ukraine just a few days ago. Today, we are
actively engaged in de-escalation, which we hope may
become an irreversible process. A sustainable ceasefire
and a continued process of de-escalation, including
the withdrawal of heavy military equipment, are in
our opinion indispensable prerequisites to any further
progress on the way towards a peaceful settlement. Let
me repeat that unless the guns fall silent, there will be
no hope for stabilizing the situation, let alone for peace.

When the first Minsk agreements were signed on
5 and 19 September last year, the toll in terms of human
lives taken by the war already stood at around 3,500,
with an even higher number of wounded. Five months
later, when the implementation package was signed in
Minsk on 12 February and the declaration of the four
Heads of State and Government was agreed upon, the
death toll was already close to 6,000, not to mention
those missing in action. On top of these alarming
figures of persons left dead by fighting and other
violence, there are thousands more seriously wounded,
there are vast areas of utter destruction, and - last but
not least - there are more than 1 million internally
displaced persons (lDPs), plus a significant number
of refugees from the conflict area. It is a scene of all-
out human tragedy, and we deeply deplore each of the
victims.

These sad figures were further increased by a
considerable number of dead and wounded when, in
clear violation of the recent ceasefire, the rebel forces
took the Ukrainian controlled city of Debaltseve after
intense fighting, with much further bloodshed and
destruction. In addition, in a parallel development to the
Debaltseve fighting, access, monitoring and verification
were repeatedly denied to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
for several consecutive days.

Fortunately, in the most recent days, we have
witnessed a significant reduction of hostilities, another
release of detainees and, finally, the beginning of the
withdrawal of heavy arms from the line of separation.
These most recent developments are encouraging signs.
We hope that this trend will prove to be sustainable and
followed by further positive developments.

Where do we stand now? In our opinion, if the
aforementioned most recent positive developments
do not continue, we will be again in a negative spiral
leading towards more dead, more destruction, more
IDPs and refugees, and almost certainly towards an
even more serious crisis, entailing the risk of a larger
war. This we cannot accept.

We welcome the active engagement and continued
involvement of Heads of State and Government,
notably in the Normandy format, in order to stabilize
the situation and work for a peaceful settlement. We
know that we are still far away from this goal, but
through the pattern that has been laid the road has been
established. Against that background of agreements
reached at the senior political level, it is the purpose
of the Trilateral Contact Group to build bridges and to
provide opportunities to implement these agreements
and to work out peaceful solutions on the ground.

Should the ceasefire hold and de-escalation
continue, the Trilateral Contact Group stands ready to
take appropriate steps towards the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements and the establishment of a
proper monitoring and verification mechanism, in
which the Special Monitoring Mission is to play a central
role. I thank my dear colleague and friend Ambassador
Apakan for all the efforts he and his Mission are doing
in that direction.

The Trilateral Contact Group is already in the
process of developing a scenario for setting up working
groups, as foreseen in the implementation package of
February. It seems obvious to me that these working
groups must focus first on the most important and most
urgent issues. These are the security- and humanitarian-
related parts of the package, which must benefit the
people in need as quickly as possible, together with an
inclusive political dialogue, as well as economic and
social rehabilitation.

In my opinion, the delivery of humanitarian aid
to the conflict area and its population, who are in dire
need of almost every basic services and commodities
required for daily life, should be one ofour top priorities.
We should be able to establish a mutually acceptable
framework, including rules and procedures for these
efforts. And it would be most helpful if we reached
agreement among all sides to conduct a humanitarian
needs assessment mission to the region, representing
internationally recognized organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant
United Nations bodies and other organizations.
Such a mission may also lay the groundwork for the
coordination of relief efforts coming from various sides
on the basis of their mutually acceptable findings.
Having in mind the precarious humanitarian situation
in the conflict area, some time ago I worked out and
handed over to my colleagues in the Trilateral Contact
Group a draft document on the general modalities for
consideration and appropriate action.

Touching upon conditions in the conflict region, I
also suggest that, at the earliest possible point in time,
plans and other necessary preparations should be made
for the removal of unexploded ordinance and all other
dangerous remnants of war, and these plans should be
carried out as soon as the situation on the ground allows.
In view of the high number of displaced persons, it is
our understanding that more efforts need to be made to
alleviate the suffering of the more than 1 million IDPs
and refugees, victims of the conflict, and facilitate the
creation of favourable conditions conducive to their
return to their places of origin.

Let me finally return to what I said at the beginning.
We seem to be at a crossroads where we either face the
risk of a further escalation of the conflict or where
common sense, responsibility and humanity shall
prevail and we may be able to walk on the road to peace,
as laid out by the four Heads of State and Government
during their recent meeting in Minsk. In spite of the
existing complexity of the situation, we will not give
up our hopes and our engagement. I thank Council
members for their attention and their support for all our
endeavours.

