Mr. Egeland: Sixty years ago, the nations of the
world came together to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. We should now assess how
effective we have been in our efforts to shield civilians
from the horrors of armed conflict in situations where
States have proved unable or unwilling to fulfil their
primary responsibility to do so. Let me start with some
positive observations.

It has now been six years since the first report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict was presented to the Council, and six
years since the adoption of the Council's first thematic
resolution on the protection of civilians. Over that
period, we have witnessed some significant
improvements in the protection afforded to civilians.

First, the Security Council's more systematic and
sustained engagement on protection-of-civilians issues
has had an impact. The Council's expansion of
peacekeeping mandates to encompass a range of
protection measures - such as the physical protection
of civilians under imminent threat of physical violence,
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of combatants and measures to
protect displaced populations and returnees - has
been an extremely important development. The
evolution of protection elements in mandates has
resulted in a more effective approach by peacekeeping
missions to protection issues. The adoption by the
Council of robust peacekeeping measures in Ituri, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
had an obvious impact on the ground. Moreover, the
Security Council's sharpened focus on key protection
concerns draws global attention to those issues and
reinforces a stronger culture of protection.

Secondly, the enhanced engagement by regional
and subregional organizations has made a real
difference on the ground, as demonstrated by the
African Union's appointment of a special
representative, the timely deployment by the European
Union of its rapid reaction forces to Ituri, the
deployment of the Economic Community of West
African States' Mission in Liberia (ECOMIL) and the
African Union's deployment of its peacekeeping
mission in Darfur. It is critical that the necessary
financial and other support be provided to regional and
subregional organizations to enable them to effectively
contribute to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

Thirdly, we have seen strengthened humanitarian
assistance and response by United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations to the needs of
civilians in conflict. That humanitarian action has
helped to reduce conflict-related deaths, including
death through malnutrition and disease, and to shield
innocent children, women and men from some of the
worst side effects of armed conflict. There is an
important connection between protection and
humanitarian action, and agencies have become
increasingly aware of the protection aspects of
humanitarian relief. We in the humanitarian community
must continue to strengthen our capacities to respond
where we have the access to do so.

Fourthly, an increasing number of countries have
signed and ratified the relevant international legal
instruments. In September last year, more than 30
States took more than 100 treaty actions during the
2004 treaty event on the protection of civilians. Yet, it
is disturbing to note that only 13 of the 26 countries in
which there is currently an armed conflict are party to
Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions.
Additional Protocol II is most relevant to the non-
international conflicts with which we are mostly
confronted, and its importance must be fully
appreciated.

I also wish to underline the importance of the
continuing work of the International Committee of the
Red Cross - which is represented in this meeting -
in promoting the key instruments of international
humanitarian law, and I pay tribute to its work in that
core area of its mandate. I would also like to
congratulate the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement for the historic agreement on a third
protective emblem.

Finally, efforts to deter war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide and efforts to break the
prevailing culture of impunity in situations of armed
conflict have been boosted by the establishment of the
International Criminal Court. The Court's
investigations in Uganda, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Darfur region of the Sudan, as well
as the indictments already issued, should provide hope
to the traumatized civilian populations in those
countries and elsewhere that the unconscionable crimes
committed against them will not go unpunished.

Improving the situation for civilians in armed
conflict requires continuous engagement by the
relevant Governments, the Security Council and the
providers of humanitarian assistance and protection.
Despite the progress I have just outlined, however, that
engagement is too often inadequate, and grave areas of
concern persist.

Stark and disturbing evidence that civilians
continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts has
emanated from a broad range of conflicts over the past
six years. In too many instances, civilians have been
subjected to extreme violence. Indeed, our greatest
challenge is how best to address the unconscionable
acts of sexual and other forms of physical violence
perpetrated against civilians. Forced population
displacement has continued to be either a by-product or
a deliberate strategy of warfare. Continued long-term
conflicts have eroded social support structures. A
prevailing culture of impunity has continued to spur
cycles of violence and criminality. Millions of people
have been denied life-saving humanitarian assistance.
In many situations, humanitarian actors have been
operating in a less secure environment, where
deliberate attacks have been steadily increasing.

I would like to address some of those key
protection concerns in more detail and to draw on
current situations to illustrate those concerns.

Over the past six years, civilians have continued
to bear not only the devastating side effects of armed
conflict, but often have been deliberately targeted by
parties to conflict, both non-State actors and
Government military forces alike. It is alarming that, in
some situations, the very structures that should protect

civilians - the military and law enforcement
authorities - are, instead, committing violent crimes.
In some areas - in Cote d'Ivoire, for example -

Government-controlled militias and Force nouvelles
troops have both been responsible for killings, rapes
and other human rights violations. In some parts of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the joint military
forces and armed groups linked to the Government
have attacked villages and carried out extortion,
looting and kidnapping for ransom. Perhaps most
disturbing is the widespread sexual violence and abuse
of women and girls. The problems caused by having
50,000 unpaid soldiers demonstrate the long-enduring
legacies of armed conflict. Stronger action to restore
and build the capacity of law enforcement and justice
systems is critical.

Improving the security situation in the longer
term requires firmer action in relation to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation
(DDRR). Lack of adequate and sustained funding for
DDRR activities should not become the reason for
which fragile countries slip back into conflict. The
provision of economic and social support to local
communities that shoulder the burden of providing
reintegration assistance is crucial. We must ensure that
all children and women associated with armed forces
and groups, as well as issues related to women and
children, are systematically included in every DDRR
process. The high prevalence of small arms, light and
easy even for a child to use, perpetuates that cycle of
violence. We need to adopt and implement firm
measures to combat the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, to control and reduce the illicit traffic in
those weapons, including at the local level, and to
involve ex-combatants and local communities, in
particular women, in the collection and destruction of
small arms and in demining.

Two years ago, I gave my first briefing to the
Council on the grave situation in northern Uganda.
Sadly, widespread physical violence, including night
attacks on villages and camps, killings and forced
recruitment, remain just a few of the perils still faced
by civilians, particularly children, in northern Uganda.
For children abducted and recruited by the Lord's
Resistance Army, adequate resources to allow for
appropriate reintegration are needed urgently,
particularly to help girls deal with their serious
reintegration challenges.

Efforts by peacekeeping missions to provide
physical security for civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence need to be augmented by concrete
measures to facilitate a secure environment more
generally. It is vital that multidimensional
peacekeeping missions work to improve the overall
security situation. Working closely with the African
Union and other regional and intergovernmental
organizations towards that objective is crucial.

Violence directed against civilians continues to
trigger high levels of population displacement. More
than 50 per cent of the world's 23 million displaced are
found in just three countries: the Sudan, Uganda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is now a
danger that long-term displacement in Darfur will
become entrenched, with a real risk of compounding an
already desperate situation. We must not allow Darfur
to become tomorrow's northern Uganda, where over a
generation of displacement has resulted in exploding
mortality rates and eroded social structures.

Normal life is foreign to an entire generation.
Long-term displacement is pernicious. Long-term
displacement kills. It kills people. It kills societies. We
must make every effort to speed the return of people to
their normal lives. Security measures in northern
Uganda must not add to the suffering of the civilian
population, and while people remain displaced, they
must be able to engage in economic activity and
maintain their capacity to return to normal lives and
livelihoods. That requires increased commitments from
both the humanitarian and the donor communities, as
well as a commitment from the Government to
implement its own policy on the internally displaced.

The displacement of populations is not
necessarily linked to camps. Equally difficult
challenges exist when those who have been displaced
are merged with local communities, which then must
bear the main burden. In Cote d'Ivoire, for example,
the majority of the 500,000 people displaced live with
host families and therefore easily fall outside safety
nets and beyond the reach of humanitarian
organizations. The host families face economic
difficulties that, combined with the climate of
impunity, have led to sexual exploitation, prostitution
and forced child labour. Immediate action is needed in
order to avert a further deterioration in the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire.

Obstructed or restricted humanitarian access
remains a key concern in most conflict areas around
the world. Poor security is tantamount to denying
access. I wish to recall the Security Council's
statement in resolution 1296 (2000) concerning the
need for all parties, including non-State entities, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations humanitarian
coordinator and the humanitarian agencies in providing
access. To facilitate such access, based on the support
of the Council, my office will soon launch a manual on
humanitarian negotiation with non-State actors in
armed conflict. Humanitarian workers must be able to
negotiate with all actors with influence or control over
territory in which populations are in need of assistance
and protection. In line with the humanitarian principles
of neutrality, impartiality and independence, such
negotiations will in no way imply recognition or
legitimization of the non-State actor concerned.

Humanitarian personnel increasingly find
themselves exposed to threats, violent attacks,
kidnappings for ransom and ambushes. In the month of
October alone, 10 humanitarians were killed in
northern Uganda and the Sudan, while in Afghanistan,
five medical aid workers were killed and three
seriously wounded when their vehicle was attacked.
Statistics from the United Nations Department of
Safety and Security reveal startling increases in
incidents against United Nations personnel over the
past 12 months. Assaults, for example, have increased
from 120 in 2004 to 407 in 2005, and kidnappings have
increased from two to 20. Incidents of harassment and
delays at checkpoints in the occupied Palestinian
territories have numbered in the thousands every year.
We hope that the United Nations role in tracking
progress in the implementation of the recent Israeli-
Palestinian Agreement on Access and Movement will
have a positive impact on overall access and freedom
of movement there.

As the Security Council has consistently stressed,
all parties must guarantee the safety, security and
freedom of movement of United Nations and
associated personnel, as well as personnel of
humanitarian organizations. In that connection, I
welcome the General Assembly's adoption yesterday of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel. The new
Protocol expands the application of the Convention to
the implementing partners of the United Nations
agencies - those delivering humanitarian, political or
development assistance in peacebuilding or delivering
emergency humanitarian assistance. I urge the
Council's support in promoting the ratification of the
new Protocol and the Convention itself, which to date
has received only 79 ratifications.

A humanitarian response cannot be effective
without adequate security conditions and a safe and
secure operating environment. How much can 13,000
humanitarian workers in Darfur achieve, for example,
when their movements are restricted due to threats,
harassment and attacks? The mere presence of aid
workers in the region does not ensure assistance and
protection.
The presence of aid workers should therefore
never be used as an alibi to camouflage the absence of
genuine efforts to find lasting political solutions. Year
in and year out, we are unable to undertake adequate
humanitarian programmes in severe emergencies
because no coherent and systematic attempts are made
to end the conflict. We become an expensive plaster on
an open, unhealed wound. The band-aid approach costs
lives and ultimately costs the international community
dearly in both moral and financial terms. Many violent
conflicts have persisted for years on end without
sufficient efforts devoted to peacemaking, and they
become more complex and difficult to resolve with
each passing day, as we have seen in Somalia, Cote
d'Ivoire and northern Uganda. The colossal toll on the
civilian population and the many wasted opportunities
for peace become tragically clear in hindsight. In
northern Uganda, for instance, it would have been
unthinkable several years ago that we would allow tens
of thousands of children to be mutilated, killed, raped,
tortured, abducted and forcibly recruited. The conflict
in northern Uganda has obvious regional dimensions,
with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) crossing the
borders into southern Sudan and the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, disrupting return
efforts, interrupting aid efforts and destabilizing the
region.

The broad international support for the peace
process in southern Sudan is now, at long last, allowing
refugees and displaced persons to return to their home
communities. For how much longer can we tolerate the
inadequacy of the resources given to resolving the
conflict in northern Uganda? That conflict that has
gone on for 19 years, with minimal resources allocated

to peacemaking, A solely military solution there is not
possible. Efforts to end the violence and to secure the
safety of the population through negotiations must be
dramatically strengthened. We cannot but applaud
courageous individuals such as Mrs. Betty Bigombe,
who continues to try to find ways to engage with the
LRA in order to save lives and explore opportunities
for peace, despite inconsistent financial and political
support. At the same time, the Government of Uganda
must do more to fulfil its responsibilities to its people
in the north.

We now have an opportunity to finally put the
Secretary-General's good offices and mediation
capacity on a more robust and professional footing, as
supported by the 2005 world summit. Mediation efforts
have for too long been a missing link. We need
increased and predictable mediation efforts that ensure
that the protection concerns of the population are taken
into account. We must make the world summit's
commitment to peacemaking and mediation an early
reality, and we must prioritize peacemaking efforts
where there are serious humanitarian consequences.

The Secretary-General, in his recently released
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2005/740), provides a five-year perspective on the
changing environment of conflict. As I conclude, I
would like to underscore three of the recommendations
for action contained in that report, which is before the
Council today.

First, the current framework needs to be updated
to reflect the current environment of conflict and the
latest developments and best practice in providing
protection to civilians in armed conflict. Five years
after the previous resolution on the protection of
civilians, we need a new resolution to guide our future
work. I thank the United Kingdom presidency for its
role in facilitating negotiations on a new resolution,
and I urge the Council to ensure that the strongest
possible language is adopted. The eyes and ears of the
world community, including human rights and
humanitarian workers, are on the Council. This is not a
time to weaken our joint resolve to protect those who
need protection most.

Secondly, we need to improve the collation of
empirical data for both situation-specific and global
trend analysis to facilitate the Council's deliberations
and decision-making. It is important that the Council
be properly informed about the nature and extent of
protection needs in countries of concern so that its
response can be better tailored to the specific needs of
the population. To this end, I welcome the efforts that
have been made in the Sudan and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to establish incident-reporting
systems, and I would encourage such systems to be
established in other countries of concern. My office has
already initiated links with academic institutions in
order to gain a better understanding of global trends
and to inform future reports to the Council.

Thirdly and finally, as I said earlier, much more
emphasis and support needs to be devoted to
peacemaking, and all peacemaking efforts must reflect
the protection needs of the civilian population. Those
involved in peacemaking and mediation efforts are the
natural partners of the humanitarian community in
ensuring that the impact of conflict and violence comes
to an end. This partnership must now be reinforced so
that we can more effectively address the protracted
suffering of civilians in armed conflict.

The conflict situations that I have touched upon
have serious regional consequences and constitute a
possible threat to international peace and security. The
conflict in northern Uganda, for instance, is now a
regional problem and a threat that, in my view, the
Security Council needs to address more systematically.
I hope to be able to return to some of those issues in
more detail in my forthcoming briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Africa.

The effective protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict requires stronger partnerships that
systematically identify the various protection needs of
civilians and who is best placed to address them. It
requires sustained focus and a commitment to
continually review the effects of security measures on
the civilian population and to take measures to mitigate
them. All of us - Governments, neighbouring States,
regional organizations, the Security Council,
peacekeeping missions and the humanitarian
community - have an important role to play. I look
forward to my continued engagement with the Council
on this important issue in order to further enhance
cooperation and strengthen measures to protect those
who most need our help.

