Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I welcome
the adoption of resolution 2222 (2015) - the first in
nine years on this important issue - and congratulate
you, Sir, on the leadership Lithuania has shown in
moving the issue forward.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and Director-General Deloire
and Ms. Pearl for their moving testimony today. I pay
tribute to them and their colleagues for their work in
truly difficult circumstances. I was particularly struck
by the individual stories of bravery that we heard
regarding the journalists with moral courage who gave
their lives in pursuit of their profession so that all of
us may have a better understanding of the truth than
the terrorist organizations or oppressive regimes would
like us to have.

The protection ofjournalists, both in conflict and in
peace, is an essential tenet of any functioning society.
The freedom of journalists to report unhindered and
unharmed is a vital tool to help hold authority to
account. It is a building-block of an open society and
an effective democracy. Sadly, this year we have seen
25 journalists killed around the world, and we are not
even halfway through the year. To that number, we
can add countless more who have been intimidated,
injured, detained or kidnapped. The numbers keep
growing. Only last week, in South Sudan, Pow James
Raeth, a young talented radio journalist, was shot and
killed with his friend Yohanes Pal Kwek as they crossed
the street in Akobo. We offer our condolences to their
friends and family and to those of all the journalists
who have lost their lives this year.

We are also concerned by growing levels of
harassment ofjournalists. Recent reports ofintimidation
and attacks on radio stations and newspapers in Burundi
are a worrying example. We call on the Government
there to promote an environment where journalists are
free to report on political developments without fear of
reprisal. The current media blackout will only serve to
increase uncertainty and tension in an already fragile
environment.

Today, journalists face new threats. The emergence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
violent extremist non-State actors has created new
risks, both in conflict areas and in areas that were once
seen as bastions ofjournalistic freedom. This has not
been seen more clearly than in the brutal and senseless
murder of 10 employees of Charlie Hebdo in Paris
in January. Because of that single day of barbarism,
more journalists have now died in France than any
other country this year. Together with the high-profile
killings of Steven Sotloff, Kenji Goto, James Foley and
many others, it is clear that journalists have become
even greater targets for terror, whether they are in a
conflict area or not.

We must end impunity for those who target
journalists. In 90 per cent of cases of murdered
journalists, there are no convictions. That is not
acceptable. Those who commit such crimes must
be held to account, whoever they are. The failure of
States to do so only perpetuates the culture of impunity
and so precipitates further attacks. We welcome the
fact that today the Council unanimously adopted the
resolution urging Member States to conduct impartial,
independent and effective investigations to bring
perpetrators of crimes againstjournalists to justice.

As we implement resolution 2222 (2015), we must
update our concept of journalism for the twenty-first
century. In this world of Twitter and YouTube, there
have been great changes to the way in which people
receive news. We need to ensure that we also work
to protect bloggers and social media activists. In
Bangladesh, three secularist bloggers have already
been murdered this year. The latest, Ananta Bijoy Das,
was killed outside his home earlier this month. These
deaths have created a culture of fear that has closed
down the space for free speech in Bangladesh.

The United Kingdom is supporting countries to
keep that space open. In the Sudan, we have funded
75 community correspondents in Kassala, El Gezira
and Blue Nile states. They will help raise awareness
of social issues and ensure that communities have a
voice. In Tunisia, we are supporting the Government
and media institutions in strengthening the legal and
regulatory framework that protects media freedom.
We call on all Member States to support journalists in
whatever ways they can.

Resolution 2222 (2015) recognizes not only the
need to protect journalists, but also the contribution that
journalists can make to protecting others. Journalists
risk life and limb to bring focus to some of the world's
most pressing problems, and bring them to the attention
of the world at large. Would we know the true horror of
the Syrian conflict without the bravery of journalists
willing to work in the region? They and so many others
give voice to those who have lost their own.

It is therefore in the interests of us all to protect
journalists and the work that they do. Through their
investigations and reporting, the media can bring to
light human rights violations. They can act as an early
warning mechanism for impending conflict, atrocities
or humanitarian disaster. Their insights from difficult
and inaccessible places have spurred the international
community to action on issues that otherwise might
have been missed. Protecting journalists so that they
can carry out this role in future is therefore a vital part
of the work of the Council. Through resolution 2222
(2015) today, I believe that we have taken an important
step towards recognizing that.

