The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Davies
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Von der Schulenburg to take a seat at
the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra
Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Canada.

It is so decided.
2
I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/ 135, which contains the fourth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg and
Mr. John McNee. I give the floor to Mr. von der
Schulenburg.


