Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his briefing and commend his
valuable work. We have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/646, annex). We welcome in
our midst the Permanent Representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ms. Mirsada Colakovie.

Pakistan fully supports the efforts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to uphold its sovereignty and territorial
integrity to strengthen its State and to protect the rights
of all communal entities. We have noted that, as in
previous reports, the negatives exceed the positives.
While the rest of the region seems to be forging ahead,
internal dissension and disagreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina seem to be holding it back. The good news
on the economic front and the end of the political crisis
in the Federation entity are welcome signals. We hope
that this momentum will be maintained.

Lack of progress on the implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure
ofthe Office ofthe High Representative is an indication
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's weak commitment to the
future. While the efforts of the High Representative are
appreciated, we urge leaders on all sides of the political
divide to engage constructively to break the impasse.

Pakistan remains deeply concerned at the
increasing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Actions by the leadership of the
Republika Srpska, including advocating the dissolution
of the State, characterizing entities as States, and
challenging the functionality of the State and its
responsibilities under the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina amount to challenging the core provisions
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unilateral action of the Government of the
Republika Srpska has also led to the crisis on citizen
identification numbers. Such conduct creates unrest
and instability and is a matter of serious concern. We
believe that angry and aggravating rhetoric does not
serve the interests of any community; it vitiates the
atmosphere and undermines prospects for long-term
peaceful coexistence. It is vitally important that all
parties recognize international and legal frameworks
for the division of power in the country. The leadership
of the country needs to resolve its differences through
dialogue. Pakistan will continue to support all efforts
to ensure a safe and secure Bosnia and Herzegovina
working for the improvement of the lives of the people.
The Office of the High Representative should continue
to play its role in that regard. We wish Mr. Inzko
success.

