Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to begin by joining others in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing. We greatly
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations and its
specialized technical agencies in responding to the
challenging situation in the region.

The troubling developments in Gaza and southern
Israel will not discourage the commitment of the
United States to President Bush's vision of two States
living side by side in peace and security, and they
should not discourage the Council from its
commitment to the long-term goal of establishing a
Palestinian State that is peaceful, democratic and
viable.
25

Israel and the Palestinians are forging ahead with

a political process launched at Annapolis, and the

United States and other members of this Council and
the Quartet must continue to support their efforts.

As President Bush said during his recent visit to
Jerusalem, we are working to support progress on four
tracks.

First, both sides need to fulfil their commitments
under the Road Map, as the parties themselves
reaffirmed at Annapolis. For the Israelis, that includes
ending settlement expansion and removing
unauthorized outposts. For the Palestinians, that
includes confronting terrorists and dismantling their
infrastructure.

Secondly, the Palestinians need to build their
economy and political and security institutions with the
help of Israel and the international community. Quartet
Special Representative Tony Blair is making important
progress on Palestinian economic reform and
institution-building and has established good working
relationships with Prime Minister Fayyad and Israeli
Defence Minister Barak.

The third track is the international track. The
international community has shown, both in Paris and
in Annapolis, that it fully supports this effort. The
United States appreciates the Arab Peace Initiative and
believes that Arab States that are committed to regional
peace should reach out to Israel.

Finally, the parties' bilateral negotiations are
essential in establishing a peace settlement that ends
the occupation that began in 1967. The only way to
have a lasting peace is if both sides come together to
make difficult choices and implement them to establish
trust. The United States believes that President Abbas
and Prime Minister Olmert will make these choices,
because both of them are committed to creating
conditions of security and stability. It is our hope that
their teams negotiate seriously and touch upon all the
difficult core issues for them. United States envoys
who were appointed to monitor and facilitate progress
on the Road Map, to professionalize the security forces
of the Palestinian Authority and to work with the
parties and regional partners to develop some ideas for
a security concept for a future Palestinian State are on
the ground and engaged.

We also hope that the international community
will undertake to maintain the momentum first
generated in Annapolis, following agreement on Road

Map implementation and subsequently reinforced in
Paris, following commitments of financial support for
Palestinian institution-building and economic reform.

We must all remain committed to the creation of a
Palestinian State that is a homeland for the Palestinian
people, just as Israel is a homeland for the Jewish
people.

The United States shares the regret of other
delegations that the Council was unable to reach a
consensus on a presidential statement on the situation
in Gaza and southern Israel. Let me be clear on this
point. This lack of agreement on a text should not be
understood as a lack of concern on the part of the
Council about the humanitarian situation. The
humanitarian needs of the Gazans must be met, and we
will continue to be a lead bilateral provider of
humanitarian aid to Palestinian suffering as a result of
the illegal coup launched by Hamas against the
legitimate institutions of the Palestinian Authority. As
Secretary Rice has said, we will not abandon the
people of Gaza, and we continue to View Gaza as an
integral part of a future Palestinian State.

But this situation did not develop in a vacuum.
We believe that the Council needed to address the
circumstances that gave rise to this situation, in
particular by calling on Hamas to cease its acts of
violence and to take the steps necessary to achieve
genuine progress towards the vision of two democratic
States - Israel and Palestine - living side by side in
peace and security.

Terrorist groups in Gaza continue to target
innocent Israeli citizens with rocket and mortar fire on
a daily basis. That rocket and mortar fire is
unacceptable, and it must stop. Israel, like any Member
State, has the right to self-defence. Hamas, having
Violently and illegitimately seized power in Gaza last
June, bears responsibility for putting an end to this and
other terrorist activities in and emanating from Gaza.

Most recently, Hamas orchestrated attacks on the
border between Gaza and Egypt, resulting in tens of
thousands of Gazans surging into Egypt in an
uncontrolled manner, destabilizing the region by
potentially facilitating access for terrorists to Egypt
and the transfer of armaments into Gaza. To address
those concerns, the United Nations supports contacts
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
consider ideas such as Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's
proposal that the Palestinian Authority assume
responsibility for the Palestinian side of the Gaza
crossing.
The actions of Hamas are clearly at odds with the
Palestinian people's aspirations to freedom and
statehood. A Palestinian State will never be born of
terror and violence. Those aspirations can be realized
only through negotiations and peaceful means. Hamas
must end the daily rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza
and relinquish its illegitimate control of Gaza to the
Palestinian Authority, under the legitimate leadership
of President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad.

We truly regret that the Council could not agree
to the draft presidential statement last Friday. That
draft would have allowed the Council to act
constructively by addressing this challenge in a
comprehensive, serious and balanced manner.

In that regard, let me comment on the statement
made earlier at this meeting by the Palestinian
representative. We share his regret and that of others
that the Council was unable to reach consensus on the
draft presidential statement last Friday. We recognize
that the current humanitarian situation is troubling. But
the credibility of his assessment would have been
enhanced if, at a minimum, we had heard from him
about the terrorist rocket launches against Israel from
Gaza - territory that is controlled by Hamas as a
result of an illegal and violent coup.

It is regrettable that we do not hear from him on
these points on behalf of his Government, as we have
heard from his own President. Here, I shall quote
President Abbas's statement of 22 January: "We, on our
part, have condemned and continue to condemn the
launch of these futile rockets against anyone. Those
rockets are not helping and must stop". How could we
not rally to support that clear and sensible position? I
believe that most of us were ready to do so.

I have highlighted this point because I fear that
the rhetoric we heard today will not help a process that
has, as its ultimate objectives peace in the region,
Israel's right to exist within safe and secure borders
and the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State. In that regard, we too question the
utility of meetings such as this, which often serve
mainly as platforms for rhetoric and contribute little
concrete support to what we want to believe is the
Council's clear commitment to those objectives.

I now turn to Lebanon. The United States
strongly condemns the terrorist bombing in Beirut last
week, which killed Lebanese internal security forces
Captain Wissam Bid and many other Lebanese. We

extend our condolences to the families of the innocent
Lebanese killed in this brutal attack. This bombing -
the latest in a series of terrorist attacks targeting those
who are working to secure Lebanon's independence
and sovereignty - is a part of the continuing assault
on Lebanon's legitimate institutions. Like the previous
assassinations and bombings, this was an attack on
Lebanon's democracy and on all those working to
secure Lebanon's unity, independence and prosperity.

The United States will not falter in its support for
the legitimate and democratically elected Lebanese
Government. We appreciated the efforts of the United
Nations to rapidly establish the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, which will hold accountable those
responsible for the assassination of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Hariri and other, related crimes. We
urge members of the Council and United Nations
Member States to provide financial assistance to allow
the Tribunal to proceed with its important work.

Finally, we renew our call for the immediate
election of a new President in accordance with
Lebanon's constitution, and we also call upon Syria,
Iran and their allies to end their interference in, and
obstruction of, Lebanon's democratic process.

