Mr. Khare: Let me begin, Sir, by thanking you
and the Member States for the very kind words directed
towards myself and my Mission. I was particularly
touched by the reference made by President Jose
Ramos-Horta to the survey conducted by the
International Republican Institute, which showed a
75 per cent popularity rating for my Mission.

Since, in his usual humble fashion, the President
did not mention his own popularity rating, kindly allow
me to mention that he enjoys the highest popularity
rating of that survey - 82 per cent. The rating is
highly deserved and, in my mind, somewhat reflects
his devoted, constant and tireless efforts to bring peace,
prosperity and stability to his country.

I should also like, Sir, to thank you and the
Council for its constant support for the work of my
Mission and the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General for their constant guidance, advice
and encouragement, which has made our achievements
possible. I would also like to thank all Member States
for their support for the Mission's extension for one
year at the current composition and strength.

Many speakers reflected on the need to define a
meaningful role for the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
in a peace-time setting and to separate very clearly the
responsibilities for policing from those of the military
and, indeed, internal security from external defence.
They also recognized a very strong need to enhance the
mechanisms of internal accountability and civilian
oversight over both security forces.

I am very pleased to inform Council members
that those issues are at the forefront of the thinking of
the Timorese leadership, which is committed to those
developments. While some will be achieved through a
process of security sector review and reform,
essentially led by the Timorese authorities and
supported by the United Nations, substantial bilateral
assistance will be required for the development of
proper military doctrines. I would particularly like to
mention the bilateral cooperation being provided by
Australia, Brazil, Portugal, New Zealand and the
United States of America through its Pacific
Command, which has been extremely useful in helping
the Timorese authorities to achieve the goals of
defining, as I said, a meaningful role for their army in a
peace-time setting.

Several speakers referred to the forthcoming
resumption of policing responsibilities by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste. This resumption would be
gradual; it would follow a phased approach. In my
view, depending on progress, it would take several
months or maybe up to a year. Thus, some time during
the last quarter of this year - 2009 - depending on
progress, my Mission will make a mid-term assessment
of the success of the resumption process to that point.
And, with the help of a technical assessment mission
from Headquarters, we will recommend benchmarks
for possible adjustments in the numbers of UNMIT
police - which also should be carried out in a gradual,
step-by-step fashion, without endangering continued
stability. That recommendation could be included,
perhaps, with the approval of the Secretary-General, in
the next report of the Secretary-General, to be issued in
February 2010.

At this stage I should like to recall that the record
of my Mission in releasing assets that are no longer
required speaks for itself. For example, immediately
after the constitution of the new Government in August
2007, following the 2007 elections, we ensured that the
additional 140 police officers that the Security Council
provided for security during the electoral period
through its resolution 1745 (2007) were immediately
released, along with nearly 400 electoral officers. So,
we are very happy to release assets at the first possible
moment when they are no longer required; but
currently I believe that, at this stage when we are just
commencing the resumption process, the present
strength of international police must be maintained for
a period of a full year, until February 2010.

On the reform of the justice sector, and on the
need for an independent comprehensive needs
assessment - and, of course, on strengthening the
justice sector to provide greater accountability and to
combat any perception of impunity - I would like to
report that at the last meeting of the Committee on
High-level Coordination, chaired by His Excellency
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta on 29 January, a decision was
taken to quickly conduct an independent
comprehensive needs assessment. I trust that within the
next 12 to 18 weeks this independent comprehensive
needs assessment should become a reality and should
thereafter permit the international community to plan
its assistance to the justice sector.

Some speakers raised the issue of the need to
fight domestic violence and the need to fight and curb
any limited trafficking in persons that might be taking
place. I want to put on record my deepest appreciation
to His Excellency the President, who in fact in March
last year, on International Women's Day - from his
hospital bed, at a time when he was still recovering -
issued a public message to the people of Timor-Leste
to combat these evils. And more recently, on
3 February, he released the latest report of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women on the status of
women and committed himself and his country to
fighting the social evils of domestic violence and
gender-based violence.

I would be remiss if I did not mention the efforts
of Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao in promoting
gender-responsive budgeting in the latest budget and in
appointing gender focal points in all ministries to
ensure that the work of those ministries is as attuned as
possible to these concerns of women and development.

Since I have already taken more than five minutes
of the Council's time, allow me to conclude by
thanking the international security forces and their
contributors, Australia and New Zealand; all the
members of the United Nations country team and,
indeed, of the wider United Nations family, including
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund;
and, in particular, the two Deputy Special
Representatives, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen and
Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, who are really my right and
left hands and who are pillars of great strength in my
efforts to assist the Timorese leaders and their people.
38
