The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Egypt,
Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Romania, the Republic of Korea, Senegal and Sweden,
in which they request to participate in the discussion on
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Listre (Argentina), Mr. Aboulgheit
(Egypt), Mr. Lavalle- Valdes (Guatemala), Mr. Pal
(India), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia), Mr.
Charma (Nepal), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr.
Mbanefo (Nigeria), Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea) Mr. Ducaru (Romania), Mr. Ka
(Senegal) and Mr. Norstro'm (Sweden) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council

Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/82, containing a letter dated 25
January 2001 from Tunisia, transmitting a working
paper on the topic "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach".

I welcome the Secretary-General.
Today the Security Council is dealing with the
subject "Peace-building: towards a comprehensive
approach".

Together with conflict-prevention, the re-
establishment of peace and peacekeeping, peace-
building occupies a prominent position in the work of
the Organization in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Many discussions have taken place
over the past 10 years, including consideration of the
Secretary-General's report "An Agenda for Peace" and
its supplement, issued in 1995, and other reports and
statements by the Secretary-General, such as the
important report he presented to the Millennium
Summit, entitled "We the peoples: the role of the
United Nations in the twenty-first century". Many
important discussions have taken place in the Council,
including those on the prevention of armed conflict and
on the issue of exit strategies. Our meeting today is an
extension of those discussions to examine and assess
the various responsibilities of the Organization for
achieving a joint vision and arriving at concrete
proposals in the field of maintaining international
peace and security in order to contribute to the
implementation of the objectives set out by the
Organization at the highest level, that is, at the
Millennium Summit.

It gives me great pleasure to give the floor to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to make a
statement on the item under consideration.


