Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all the briefers, beginning with the Special
Envoy. What we heard today is both uplifting and
frightening. The British Foreign Secretary spoke about
that this morning and asked me to pass on his thanks
to the United Nations and its relevant agencies for all
the heroic efforts, patience and painstaking diplomacy
that have brought us to this point. He was able to see
for himself the work in hand when he visited Aden in
March. I will later address what that means for the dire
humanitarian situation about which Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Fore told us; but, for the moment, I would like to
concentrate on what we heard from Mr. Griffiths.

I believe that we all have to welcome the initial
redeployments by the Houthis from the three ports. They
are significant steps, but they are part of the broader
redeployments in Al-Hudaydah. It was very good that
Mr. Griffiths was able to pass on the Government of
Yemen's commitment in that it would be discharging its
commitments on redeployment. That is a very important
part ofwhere we are, and I completely agree that we also
owe Lieutenant General Lollesgaard our deep thanks
for what he has been able to achieve. I believe that
the next stage with regard to that is obviously that the
parties need to engage constructively with the General
to finalize the outstanding negotiations to allow for the
implementation of the first and second phases of the
Al-Hudaydah agreement.

It is very good news that a meeting should take
place on 14 June among the parties in Amman to discuss
the economic aspects of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. I
think that what we heard from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore
underscores that this is not just about humanitarian
concerns, but that is also about the ability of the Yemeni
economy as a whole to revive and work properly. The
Council has been concerned about that before.

With regard to a political solution to the conflict,
we all want to see these recent developments open
up the path to the broader political solution that
Mr. Griffiths and his team have been working so hard
on, which is necessary in itself, but it is obviously even
more urgent given what we have heard from the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and UNICEF today.

I want to move on, if I may, to the drone strike
on oil-pumping stations in Riyadh province in Saudi
Arabia. We condemn that drone strike by the Houthis.
As my Foreign Secretary has also said, the risks
remain real in connection with the stability of the
peace agreement and to its ability to succeed and bring
the sort of security and safety to the people and the
children of Yemen that we all want to see. The attack
is not just wrong, it undermines the trust needed to get
to a resolution of the conflict. This is not the time for
provocation, when we are so close to being able to make
significant progress on the ground and unlock some of
the economic, humanitarian and medical things that
we all need to see. I think we need to bear that very
strongly in mind.
I also think that we all were horrified by the
briefings and statistics provided by Mr. Lowcock and
Ms. Fore. I will not repeat those statistics. Some of the
individual human stories are absolutely heart-tugging.
For me, it was the scale ofwhat the people of Yemen are
facing that remains shocking. I therefore believe that
we really owe it to Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore to make
sure that the United Nations presence on the ground
can do its job effectively. Whether it is the monitors
or the humanitarian agencies, all the parties need to
help ensure that the United Nations can do its job. That
includes letting the United Nations in, in the numbers
that Lieutenant General Lollesgaard mentioned. It
includes getting rid of the access constraints. It includes
approving travel permissions and operating agreements
swiftly, including allowing access to the large number
onemenis recently displaced in Hajj ah and Al-Dhale'e,
and it includes making sure that the onward road access
from Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports and infrastructure
remain protected.

I think that the other shocking statistic was that only
20 per cent of the response plan is funded. I believe that
it is incumbent on all Members of the United Nations to
help OCHA with that and ensure that new pledges are
made and that the pledges that have been are dispersed
as fast as possible. That must be a priority for all of us
as. As Ms. Fore said, we are very close to the point of
no return. There is therefore urgency concerning taking
action, which we should all reflect upon and report back
to our capitals.

The last thing that I wanted to say here concerns the
stability of the Yemeni rial. I mentioned the economy
earlier. We must have economic measures working
properly so that that, in turn, facilitates the commercial
imports of food and fuel, on which Yemen depends
heavily. I thank the Ambassador of Peru in his capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) for his briefing on
sanctions and what the Committee has achieved. It was
a very interesting visit, but a pity not being able to meet
with Ansar Allah. I hope that that can be corrected
next time.

I will conclude by saying that I think that the Council
is united on Yemen. I hope that we can find some way
of concretely expressing the urgency behind the needed
measures on the humanitarian an economic side, while
giving our full support to Mr. Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard to move ahead on first and second
phases of the agreement, as well as the longer-term
political solution, which is now extremely pressing.
