Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): My delegation sincerely
commends your great country, Mr. President, for the
initiative you have taken to put this key agenda item
on the table for debate during your presidency of the
Council. The fact that the Council agenda is featuring a
debate on this subject shortly after your country became
the 121st State party to the Rome Statute should itself
speak volumes about your country's commitment to
supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
to contributing positively to strengthening the rule of
law at both the national and international levels.

There is no doubt that the drafters of the Rome
Statute must have envisioned a promise of a universal
justice system guaranteed by a permanent court of last
resort. My delegation is pleased to see the Court being
recognized, and we pledge our full support to that
institution because we believe that it is irreplaceable.

Prior to the drafting ofthe Rome Statute in 1998, the
Security Council had formally endorsed the marriage
between peace and justice through the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

My delegation believes that in order to guarantee the
separation of powers and the integrity of the Court and
the Council, a clear distinction must be made to avoid
politicizing their relationship. We see that relationship
as both complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Botswana further believes that both the International
Criminal Court and the ad hoc tribunals have served
and continue to serve as useful tools available to the
Security Council in its quest to promote the rule of law
and to entrench universal respect for human rights.

There can be no doubt that the ad hoc tribunals and
the Special Court for Sierra Leone have also acted in
their own right as a deterrent against mass atrocities
and abuse of human rights the world over. As a State
party to the Rome Statute, Botswana is encouraged
to see the growth and evolution of the institution and,
indeed, its relationship with the Security Council,
which we want to see strengthened over time. We attach
great importance to strengthening the implementation
capacity of the Court so that it may successfully
implement its mandate.

Over the past few years, Botswana has been
outspoken in its defence of the International Criminal
Court, because we believe that it has a very vital
function to fulfil in the international justice system.
We believe that, in order to achieve a robust and
sustained international criminal justice system, the
Rome Statute must be empowered by those who wish
to see it achieve its intended objectives. It must work in
complementarity with the ad hoc tribunals to promote
peace and justice for victims of serious crimes and
crimes against humanity.

The International Criminal Court therefore serves
as the centrepiece of a worldwide criminal justice system
with jurisdiction to prosecute those responsible for the
most serious crimes of international concern. The fact
that the central feature of the Statute is the principle
of complementarity demonstrates the readiness of
the International Criminal Court to defer to national
justice systems. It must at all times be appreciated that
the International Criminal Court intervenes only in
situations where the national criminal justice system is
either unable or for some reason unwilling to take action.
Similarly, even in the most formal link between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council,
as provided for in article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute,
authority to defer cases was assigned to the Council in
recognition of its primary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We further believe that the Court therefore
provides a system of checks and balances in enabling
the Security Council to pursue its mandate for the
promotion of international peace and security. Whether
or not the Council has in the past missed opportunities
to reflect the provisions of article 16, that should not
be held against it. It is therefore important to maintain
a mutually reinforcing relationship between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council,
which has a political mandate whereas the International
Criminal Court exercises ajudicial mandate.

The critical question we should be asking is how the
relationship can be managed to prevent the possibility
of undue pressure being exerted by one institution over
the other. There are those who argue that the Security
Council should follow up its referral actions and pursue
States' cooperation with the Court. My delegation is
of the view that, while that suggestion could result in
an improved relationship between the Court and the
Council, it is not apparent that it would translate into
the implementation of arrest warrants or successful
prosecution. It is the view of my delegation that the
limited application of article 13 (b) does not extend
beyond triggering the work of the Prosecutor and
should remain as such. Allowing an extended political
role to be played by the Council could diminish the
judicial authority of the Court, and thereby undermine
its integrity and independence.

Looking ahead, more ways could be explored
on the engagement of the Security Council, in order
to reinforce the Statute in the same manner that the
Council benefits from the pursuit ofjustice and peace
that is fully embraced by the Court.

