Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes this debate, and we thank
the Russian Federation for its initiative in opening it.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his very strong
words today.

This meeting comes just a week before the start
of an intensive series of Visits to Washington, as the
new United States Administration fulfils its
commitment to offer the leadership necessary to
address both the insecurity of Israelis and the
statelessness of the Palestinians. Today, our duty is not
just to state national positions. It is to unite our
commitment in word and deed to support the
development of a new plan for peace.
After 61 years of temporary truce and bloody
wars, it can sometimes seem inevitable that the conflict
in the Middle East will continue for at least a few more
years and that the best we can hope for is that it does
not get too much worse. But that logic is not only
faulty; it is dangerous. Conflict can erupt again at any
time.

The Gaza war showed how close to the surface
conflict is in the occupied Palestinian Territories.
Resolution 1860 (2009) was a hard-fought achievement
that laid the basis for an end to the Gaza conflict in
January. But there is, as many speakers have already
said, overwhelming evidence that it is has not been
fully implemented. More work remains to be done to
reopen the crossings, to get humanitarian aid in and to
bring an end to arms smuggling. It is relevant to our
deliberations that the only people who gain from this
failure are those committed to violence. There are also
other outstanding issues arising from the Gaza war,
including the Secretary-General's Board of Inquiry
report on attacks on United Nations premises. We look
to the Israeli Government to investigate each of these
incidents in the light of the Inquiry's findings.

The West Bank, meanwhile, is in economic
limbo. The Palestinian Authority is short of funds,
Israeli settlement building continues, with demolitions
and settlements in East Jerusalem particularly
dangerous for peace. Meanwhile, rockets continue to
land in Israeli towns, the rearmament of Hizbollah is in
contravention of resolution 1559 (2004), and Iran
exploits the misery of Palestinians to advance its own
goals. That is why the Secretary-General was right in
his remarks this morning to refer to a crisis of
confidence.

President Obama has said that the status quo is
unsustainable. We need to take that seriously.
Destructive forces in the Middle East have derived
strength from the perceived inaction or failed
initiatives of the international community. Without a
decisive drive for peace, there will be a drift towards
more war.

The Council is not short of consensus about a
solution. We share the passion and conviction of our
French colleagues in setting this out. The broad shape
has been clear for some time: a comprehensive peace,
based on two States, agreed borders based on those of
1967, Jerusalem as the capital for both States, and a
just settlement for refugees. As His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey has explained,
all this is a catalyst for a resolution of other issues
dividing Israel from its neighbours.

Nor is there much argument about the short-term
measures that would give life to hope among the
people in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
Palestinians want to see a freeze on all settlement
activity, both in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as
per Road Map commitments, and the opening of
crossings into Gaza not only for humanitarian aid, but
also for reconstruction supplies and the movement of
people and trade, as per resolution 1860 (2009). They
also want to see the Palestinian Authority properly
funded by all of its donors. The United Kingdom
believes that they are right to want these things.

Israelis want to see an end to the threat of terror
and the release of Gilad Shalit. Again, they are right to
want these things. What has been missing is shared and
sustained political will to overcome the obstacles, and
now is the time to find it - too late for too many, but
urgent nonetheless.

In this context, the creation of a new Israeli
Government takes on added significance. Prime
Minister Netanyahu leads a Government born of the
democratic process. The United Kingdom welcomes
his public commitments, restated today, to political,
economic and security tracks. Progress on each one is
vital, needs to be delineated and requires support.

Meanwhile, Israel has a willing partner for
negotiations in President Abbas. The Palestinians need
a Government. If the Egyptian-sponsored talks on
Palestinian reconciliation are not to reach a conclusion,
then we look forward to a new Government being
formed with a clear commitment to the peaceful
advance of the interests of the Palestinian people, as
resolution 1850 (2008) envisaged, and above all a
determination to improve their daily lives in advance
of Palestinian elections. This, too, needs support.

But, Israelis and Palestinians cannot deliver this
deal on their own. Israelis need peace with the whole
Arab world, as well as cooperation with the
Palestinians. Palestinians need support from the Arab
world as well as compromise from Israel. This is the
23-State solution that we need, and is embodied in the
Arab Peace Initiative, which is finally getting the
recognition that it deserves. We applaud the vision and
commitment of its principal author, King Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia. We welcome the determination and fresh
thinking of King Abdullah of Jordan to advance its
goals.

The Arab Peace Initiative is in fact an Arab
deposit that needs to be matched. The United Kingdom
has been proud to play its part alongside other
European countries, not just in arguing for a regional
resolution to all outstanding issues, but also in
supporting the economic and security strategies of the
Palestinian Authority. There is no issue that will
motivate Europeans more than the chance to support a
drive for peace in the Middle East. The European
deposit with all partners is an unyielding commitment
to be a force for practical help - money, training,
people, commitment - to all parties as they seek to
prepare for and then implement a final deal.

There is also a Russian deposit - its
commitment to work for an international conference to
support a peace plan and your role in the E3+3 and in
this Council in ensuring that Iran abides by its
commitments to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.

Since we last met in January, we have been in
what for us has been a holding pattern. This has been
understandable, but this, too, is a euphemism. For
people of the region, it has been lost time, and anyone
who thinks that a stable holding pattern can continue
indefinitely is gravely mistaken. The people of the
region do not need a new process; they need the
confidence that comes from a plan, with the timelines
and commitment to make it a reality. Our message to
Israelis, Palestinians and the region must be clear and
undivided. We support peace and we expect peace. The
challenges ahead are indeed great. Bold decisions will
be needed on all sides, but the consequences of
inaction will be even more severe.

