Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Ambassador Tagliavini and
Ambassador Apakan for their statements. We also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the Council.

The signing ofthe Minsk protocol, on 5 September,
and of the ceasefire memorandum, on 19 September,
under the auspices of the Trilateral Contact Group,
were steps that had broad support from the international
community and raised the hope that we could begin
to overcome the conflict in eastern Ukraine. Both
agreements established a basis and set broad criteria for
a negotiated exit from the crisis and for a reduction in
the levels of violence, including the decentralization of
power and the holding of an inclusive national dialogue.

Unfortunately, the implementation of the
agreements has been very slow. We are concerned about
the information indicating that the ceasefire, which
was never fully carried out, is at risk of completely
collapsing. That would be a tragedy. It would lead to the
loss of more lives, the aggravation of the humanitarian
situation and an entrenching of the positions, which
would lead only to a prolongation of the conflict.

In that context, avoiding any new escalation of
hostilities is a priority. The parties must demonstrate
moderation and refrain from taking unilateral actions
that run counter to the peace initiatives. All the relevant
actors must return to the letter and spirit of Minsk in
order to re-establish the conditions that make it possible
to renew dialogue.

It is also up to the international community to
do its utmost to facilitate the swift implementation
of the Minsk protocol and Minsk memorandum, in
the context of respect for international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Any
intervention in affairs that are within Ukraine's internal
jurisdiction - whether it be military, political or
economic in nature - must be avoided. In that context,
we appreciate the actions taken by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We underscore
once again the Council's political and institutional
responsibility to safeguard international peace and
security.

We deplore the fact that, until now, despite the
many times we have met to deal with this situation, we
have not been able to play a positive role and overcome
the divisions that prevent the Council from contributing
to the parties finding the necessary points in common
in order to move forward towards a diplomatic solution
and put an end to the confrontations, which are
especially punishing on the civilian population.

As we seek to move the crisis onto the diplomatic
track, there is a need to cotinue to respond to the
difficult humanitarian situation being experienced by
persons affected by the crisis. We recognize the work
being carried out by humanitarian workers to ensure
access to assistance to those who need it, in a context
that poses many security challenges. We call on all
parties to facilitate the distribution of humanitarian
assistance on the basis of non-discrimination and in
full cooperation with humanitarian actors.

At the same time, we underscore that it is essential
that independent investigations be conducted in
response to all reports of human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law, so that those responsible, no matter to whom they
report, be accountable for their actions.

The parties in Ukraine and those who have
influence on them are facing a critical moment.
They have two clear options before them - working
in a genuine fashion to restore calm and peacefully
resolve the crisis so that Ukraine may return to the
path of growth with inclusion, or immersing itself in
unnecessary and fruitless conflict. It is not too late to
choose the first path. Argentina will continue to firmly
support all efforts for peace and the decisions taken to
that end.

