Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Let me express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We cannot fail to
observe that the procedural problem we had to face this
morning had to do with an uneasiness- indeed, a
reluctance- on the part of many members of the
international community to deal with the regime in
Belgrade. We trust that the procedural decision we took
this morning has settled this issue once and for all. We
hope also that the procedural question will not deflect
us from discussing the substantive aspects of the issue
before us today.

We are grateful for the very useful briefing by
Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Balkans. We would also like to welcome to the
Council Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the
Council of the European Union and High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, and to thank him for his
statement, which has certainly contributed to enriching
our discussion.

My delegation is aware that discussions of this
issue have not been limited to the Security Council but
have also taken place in various other forums, in
particular the European Union, as Mr. Solana just
described. We, however, believe that the Council has
an important role to play, given its responsibilities
under the United Nations Charter; indeed, as Mr. Bildt
has stressed many a time, continued international
consensus and support are crucial to the overall efforts
to promote peace in the Balkans.

At the meeting the Council had with Mr. Bildt
last February, my delegation emphasized four core
areas that are vital to the success of the international
efforts to achieve self-sustaining peace and stability,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo.
Those areas relate to, first, the return of refugees and
displaced persons; secondly, the reconciliation process
and the important role of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in contributing to
the process; thirdly, the need for unstinted international
support for and active engagement in the current peace
process; and last but not least, the role of the leadership
of countries ofthe region.

We have paid particular attention to what
Mr. Bildt has said on these areas, because we believe
that progress on these issues will have a positive
impact on the peace process and on the overall
stabilization of the Balkan region. In addition to these
core areas, the success of the international involvement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo must be
based on a long-term comprehensive approach
encompassing many other aspects of the problem. We
have taken careful note of Mr. Bildt's analysis and
assessment, as well as of the proposed framework for a
comprehensive peace, especially in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Kosovo, and in the Balkan region
as a whole. We were also gratified to hear from
Mr. Solana the perspective and priorities of the
European Union relating to these critical issues.

Clearly, the strengthening of democratic
institutions and economic and social rehabilitation are
crucial factors for self-sustaining peace in all post-
conflict situations. That is where the international
community's efforts must be matched by a strong
commitment and a constructive attitude on the part of
local leaders. At the same time, good-neighbourly
relations, close cooperation and integration between
and among all the Balkan countries through appropriate
regional frameworks and structures are also important
ingredients in the consolidation of peace and
sustainable development. The early resolution of the
issue of succession of the countries of the former
Yugoslavia will certainly contribute to the attainment
ofthat goal. We share the views expressed this morning
by Ambassador Holbrooke of the United States on the
issue of the status of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in the context of the United Nations, which
predicated our position in the procedural vote taken
this morning.

Any meaningful discussion of the future of the
Balkans cannot but address the issue of the Belgrade
regime and how to deal with it. Indeed, the procedural
problem faced by the Council at the beginning of this
morning's meeting was symptomatic of that problem
and brought into sharp focus the uneasiness - indeed,
as I said, the reluctance- of the larger part of the
international community to deal with the regime in
Belgrade and its representatives. This conundrum of
how to deal with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
cannot be resolved so long as its Government continues
to be led by people who have been indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We entirely agree with what Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein said when he addressed the Council last
week:

"The Milosevic regime in Serbia remains
the fundamental obstacle to improved regional
peace and stability and a better life not only for
Serbs but for all people there". (S/PV4154, p. 7)

We also share the views expressed by Mr. Bildt, who
directly addressed the issue this morning.

The return of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
to a mainstream regional and international life will
clearly be facilitated by the trial of those indictees, by
the proper readmission of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia into the United Nations and by the
settlement of the outstanding issue of successor States
to the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In that regard, my delegation commends the position
taken by Ms. Carla Del Ponte, the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, opposing any move towards an
accommodation with Mr. Milosevic' with respect to his
indictment by the Tribunal. Such a deal would make a
mockery of the entire international tribunal process and
would be a travesty of justice for those on trial and
those already sentenced by the court. Only the meting
out of justice to those indicted by the Tribunal and
those to be indicted in the future, representing the
forces of extremism and disintegration as Mr. Bildt has
so eloquently called them, would strengthen the
process of tolerance and integration around which the
search for self-sustaining stability in the region as a
whole will revolve. It is the forces involved in that
process which should be embraced and strongly
supported by the international community, including
the Council, not those negative forces of
obstructionism.

