The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative of
Argentina.

Argentina supported the adoption of resolution
2182 (2014) because it endorses the need to renew the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia and
to reaffirm the arms embargo as well as the total ban on
the export and import of Somali charcoal. The resolution
contains an authorization to conduct inspections in the
territorial sea of Somalia and on the high seas, with the
aim of ensuring compliance with the arms embargo and
with the total ban on the export and import of Somali
charcoal.

By supporting the resolution, Argentina took into
account the request for assistance from the international
community made by the President of the Federal
Government of Somalia in his note of 8 October. At
the same time, I wish to highlight that the measure thus
authorized is one of an exceptional nature with respect
to the basic norm of the exclusivejurisdiction of the flag
State over its ships on the high seas and with respect to
the sovereignty of the coastal State over its territorial
sea and to its sovereign rights and jurisdiction in the
exclusive economic zone.

In that regard, it must be underlined that, as clearly
stated in the text of the resolution, the authorization
given is limited to this situation. It does not extend to
any other situation. It must not affect the rights and
obligations or responsibilities of States in accordance
with international law, including the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, with respect
to any other situation, and it does not constitute a basis
for customary international law.

In accordance with the exceptional nature of this
measure, the present authorization is limited to one
year. We believe that, in the normal way of things, it
should be superseded by some other kind of cooperation
with Somalia that would allow the latter to respond
appropriately to a situation that belongs essentially
within a State's own sphere of action.

Finally, the authorization is framed within the
powers of the Security Council, but it is also unavoidably
framed within the international law in force.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

