Mr. Mufioz (Chile): Chile would like to join the
condolences expressed here to the Palestinian people
and the family on the occasion of the sad death of
President Yasser Arafat. In Chile, about half a million
citizens are of Palestinian origin, and for them, this is a
particularly sad day and a tremendous loss. President
Arafat will be remembered as the man who
transformed the cause for Palestinian rights, uniting
diverse groups into a concrete and internationally
recognized process, leading up to an independent,
sovereign Palestinian State, hopefully living side by
side in peace with Israel. We feel that the best homage
to his passing away would be to reactivate,
unequivocally, the road map for peace.

(spoke in Spanish)

I am grateful for the complete introduction to the
report of the Secretary-General on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2004/807) provided by Lord Paddy
Ashdown, the High Representative for the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995).
We also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Mladen Ivanic'.

Today, Bosnia and Herzegovina is very different
from what it was in the 1990s, when we witnessed one
of the most brutal chapters in history there. In addition
to the priorities that the High Representative has put
forward with regard to moving towards the rule of law
and the adoption of economic reforms, we believe his
decision to focus efforts on improving the functioning
and effectiveness of government institutions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is wise.

From the report we see that this period has been
characterized by achievements that deserve our
appreciation. There has been significant progress in
legislative reform, and the beginning of important
structural changes with regard to the prevention of
crime, the justice system, the customs and tax systems,
the creation of a single economic space, and the energy
sector.

We think reform should continue in the defence
sector and in increasing the capacity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to develop intelligence activities in the
field of criminal justice, so that it can fight against
organized crime and corruption.

There have been advances made towards
normalization, through the transfer from the NATO
Stabilization Force to the European Union-led force
(EUFOR), a change that was supported by the Security
Council.

In spite of all of the progress, there is an ethical
imperative to continue to seek clarification with regard
to serious human rights violations. We say this as a
country that has had to confront the tremendous burden
of past violations of human rights. It is unacceptable
that the authorities of the Republika Srpska have not
been able to bring a single person accused of war
crimes before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is urgent to continue
to work against those who obstruct the work of the
ICTY and the implementation of its mandate and
against those who give material support to persons who
are accused of war crimes. For that reason we support
the special measures adopted by the High
Representative to identify and punish persons and
organizations that are supporting war criminals.

We are shocked to read in the report of the
atrocities perpetrated in Srebrenica between 10 and 19
July 1995. The killing of some 8,000 Bosnians,
according to the report, can not fail to shock our
conscience. We express our solidarity with the families
of the victims.

Although it is true that, for the first time, the
Republika Srpska has acknowledged the origins, scope
and nature of the atrocities - which is a positive
step - no effort should be spared until those who
committed the crimes, and their accomplices, are
brought before the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Lastly, the recognized progress in these nine
years of the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement bring us some distance from the atrocities
that we saw in Srebrenica, as well as in Zepa, Banja
Luka and Sanski Most, to name a few. Chile will
continue to offer its cooperation. In the past we did this
in the form of police officers for the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), and,
more recently, officers and troops of the Chilean Army,
so that Bosnia and Herzegovina can regain its
traditions of progress and peaceful coexistence.

