The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

Russia supported the resolution just adopted. We
are pleased to note that the serious work of the six
countries and the incorporation of the opinions and
proposals of a number of non-permanent members of
the Council, led us to a text that is balanced and meets
the tasks at hand.

The resolution is in fact a political signal to Iran
of the need to cooperate with the international
community by implementing the decisions of the Board
of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and the Security Council. That signal
should be understood in conjunction with the statement
issued by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the six

countries. It is important that the six countries be
prepared to formulate additional proposals for talks,
something from which Iran and the entire region can
only benefit - economically, politically and in terms
of security.

We note the recognition by the Council and the
six countries of Iran's legitimate rights under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
We confirm that, once confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme is
restored, that programme will be treated in the same
way as that of any non-nuclear State party.

Another point of principle is that today's decision
by the Council, like resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747
(2007), was taken under Chapter VII, Article 41, of the
Charter of the United Nations. It therefore calls for no
use of force whatsoever. There is a provision in the
resolution that says that, if necessary, the Council will
adopt further measures on an exclusively peaceful
basis. We remain convinced that an effective solution
to the Iranian nuclear problem can only be found in the
political and diplomatic spheres.

Russia favours a search for fresh approaches to
the talks. Together with partners from the six countries,
we are prepared to facilitate a serious and concrete
dialogue with Iran in order that all pending issues can
be effectively resolved. We hope that Iran's leadership
will carefully analyse the content of the present
resolution and of the statement issued by the six
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, and will choose to meet
the requirements of the IAEA and the Security Council,
continue active interaction with the Agency and help
launch a negotiations process conducive to the
settlement of the Iranian nuclear problem.

It is important that the members of the group of
six countries show a consistent willingness to engage
in constructive cooperation with Iran. The need for that
approach has been borne out by the content of our
discussion today in the Council and by the results of
the vote on the resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 2.55 p.m.
