Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
add the United Kingdom's voice to those who have
thanked and welcomed the Presidents of the Tribunals,
Judge Pocar and Judge Mose, and the Persecutors,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow, for their very helpful
and informative briefings. It is very good to see the
teams back in the Council. We very much welcome the
commitment that they and the staff who work for them
have shown to the important issue of addressing war
crimes.
I would like to begin with the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We congratulate
it for the progress made in completing its considerable
caseload. We welcome Judge Mose's confirmation that
the completion strategy remains on track. At the same
time, we remain deeply concerned that there are still 18
accused at large, including Felicien Kabuga. Those
individuals must not be allowed to evade justice. We
call on all States to fulfil their obligation to cooperate
with the ICTR. We would be interested to hear if there
are particular steps that the Prosecutor or the Judge
believe the international community could take to
assist the ICTR further in its work.

We also note that a significant aspect of the
completion strategy relates to the transfer of
appropriate cases to national jurisdictions for trial. In
this respect, we encourage the ICTR and the
Government of Rwanda to work closely together to
overcome all outstanding obstacles to the possible
transfer of cases to the Rwandan system.

Turning to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), I would like to start by
saying that it is welcome news that Mr. Seselj has
called off his hunger strike. We urge him to engage
constructively with the ICTY and to resolve any
complaints he may have through the appropriate legal
processes of the Tribunal. We have every confidence in
the Tribunal's ability to handle this issue and every
confidence in the Tribunal's impartiality and its desire
to discharge faithfully the mandate given to it by the
Council. We hope that no one in the region will be
tempted to exploit this incident for their own gain.

We underline the fact that cooperation with the
Tribunal remains an ongoing obligation for all States,
as emphasized most recently by resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004). The capture and transfer of
the six remaining indictees is essential. It should be a
top priority for all, and that includes any countries the
fugitive indictees might visit.

We understand that the Prosecutor thinks
Vlastimir Djordjevic is in Russia. We are confident that
the Russian authorities will be investigating that claim
and will do all they can to trace his whereabouts and to
transfer him immediately to the Hague Tribunal if he is
located.

We are disappointed by the lack of progress made
by Serbia this year, as reported by Ms. Del Ponte. Full
cooperation remains central to the reconciliation that is
required for long-term stability in the Balkans, and
long-term stability in the Balkans is a crucial part of
achieving a Europe that is whole and free.

I would like to reiterate that full cooperation is a
fundamental requirement for the countries of the
Balkans to make progress towards membership of the
European Union (EU). We call on the authorities in
Belgrade to increase significantly their cooperation,
including through ensuring the arrest of Mladic and
Karadzic and their transfer to the Hague Tribunal.
Nevertheless, we take some encouragement from
President Tadic's recent comments about improving
Serbian cooperation with the ICTY.

We also call on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular Republika Srpska, to fulfil
their obligations to cooperate. As the Prosecutor has
indicated, there is much more that the authorities of
Republika Srpska can and should do to ensure
cooperation with the ICTY and the swift detention,
arrest and transfer of Mladic and Karadzic.

We welcome the Prosecutor's comments about
the cooperation she has received from Croatia, from
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and from
Montenegro, and we trust that that cooperation will
continue next year and beyond.

The question of NATO's invitation of Partnership
for Peace was mentioned in respect of Serbia and
Bosnia. NATO has offered this to help the countries
make further progress on their Euro-Atlantic paths and
also to reflect the achievements of defence reform.
That invitation should not be construed by anyone -
especially by those in the region 4 as a weakening of
support for the ICTY. The NATO communique makes
clear that NATO expects both Serbia and Bosnia to
cooperate fully with the ICTY and that it will closely
monitor their efforts in doing so. Can I also make clear
that further EU and NATO integration will depend on
the extent of that progress. We are confident that there
are leaders in the region who understand this and who
will try to deliver on that goal, but we call on everyone
in the region to do their utmost so that further
European and NATO integration can proceed, as we all
hope to see.

I should now like to turn to the completion
strategy. The United Kingdom remains a strong
supporter of the ICTY. We believe that the orderly
completion of its important work is vital for the region
and for international criminal justice. The message of
the President and the Prosecutor on this today was very
clear. We underscore the fact that all fugitive indictees
must be brought before the Tribunal, as emphasized in
resolution 1534 (2004). Karadzic and Mladic in
particular should not be under any illusion that they
can wait out international justice. They will be tried by
the Tribunal, as required under the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We recognize and commend the considerable
efforts and achievements of all of the Tribunal's organs
to increase efficiency and the pace of trials. However,
we remain concerned about the slippage in the
completion timetable to 2009. We look forward to the
Tribunal continuing its efforts in that regard and to
hearing of further progress.

I should like to conclude by saying a word about
the transfer of cases from the ICTY to national
jurisdiction. We note that, in pursuit of the completion
strategy, so far nine individuals have been transferred
to the jurisdiction of Bosnia. We were also pleased to
hear that the Sarajevo Special War Crimes Chamber
recently delivered its first judgment on a case
transferred by the Tribunal.

The United Kingdom remains supportive of the
Special War Crimes Chamber and has to date
committed £2.6 million to the project, as well as
providing additional ad hoc assistance. We strongly
support Judge Pocar's call for other donors to make
similar commitments. I would just like to stress that the
transfer to national jurisdiction is not to be applied in
the case of Karadzic and Mladic.

