Mr. Gettu: I am grateful for the opportunity to
address the Council.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) continues to share the international
community's concerns about the situation in Rakhine
state and the plight of the Rohingya people. We fully
align ourselves with the view that there is a need to
create the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of refugees from Bangladesh, as
foreseen in the memorandum of understanding signed
by the Government of Myanmar, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and the United Nations Development Programme.

Myanmar faces multiple transitions today regarding
the ongoing peace process, economic liberalization and
democratic reforms. It is within that context that the
root causes of inequality and discrimination against the
Rohingya population need to be addressed. Competition
for land and resources in Rakhine, which is the second-
poorest state in the country, discriminatory laws and
institutions, as well as intercommunal mistrust and
tensions, contribute to some of those root causes.

Creating sustainable conditions for voluntary
returns requires comprehensive and durable solutions.
Addressing the significant development challenges of
all communities in Rakhine and removing local orders
that restrict the freedom of movement and access to basic
services are critical in creating such conditions. It also
requires that every refugee has the freedom to decide
when to return based on a free and informed choice.

Dealing with those issues may also go a long way
towards building greater intercommunal confidence
and trust among the people of Rakhine state. As noted
by the Secretary-General, the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission provide a road map for
addressing those issues. Recently, the Government of
Myanmar convened the United Nations system to take
stock of the implementation of those recommendations,
which was a positive step.

As a first step towards creating conditions
conducive for voluntary returns to Rakhine state,
UNDP and UNHCR have been working closely to
begin the implementation of the tripartite memorandum
of understanding. We have reinforced our capacity on
the ground to begin that important work. We have also
jointly held a range of preparatory consultations with
the Government of Myanmar at all levels, including
the technical working group set up by the Government
to support the implementation of the memorandum
of understanding.

In early July, we jointly undertook a first visit,
albeit symbolic, to the northern part of Rakhine,
which was followed by a joint familiarization field
visit with the technical working group later that
month. We welcome those preliminary measures
taken by Myanmar and look forward to moving ahead
constructively and meaningfully. However, effective
access and streamlined procedures are essential for us
to access entire village tracts and undertake area-based
programmes that are inclusive, in line with conflict-
sensitive methods, and that build social cohesion. That
remains outstanding.

Free and independent consultations with all
communities to identify their needs is a necessary step
to design and deliver community-based, quick-impact
projects that address livelihoods and basic needs to
build trust within and between communities. They also
lay the foundation for planning longer-term sustainable
development, as foreseen in the memorandum of
understanding. That, together with freedom of
movement and a pathway to citizenship, will be critical
benchmarks that must be achieved.

In addition to the memorandum of understanding
implementation, UNDP, UNHCR and several other
United Nations agencies have been working in other
parts of Rakhine state to implement wide-ranging
development and humanitarian assistance initiatives,
with major donor support. Part of the broader solution
in Rakhine lies in tackling some very challenging issues
in addition to the issue of freedom of movement, such
as access to livelihoods, education and health services;
respect for the rule of law; and respecting, promoting
and protecting human rights. UNDP is currently helping
to address some ofthose challenges through support for
resilience-based recovery and sustainable development.

We would like to acknowledge the Government of
Bangladesh for its generous hospitality and support to
the Rohingya refugees. As anticipated, the monsoon,
coupled with the limited resources made available to
the United Nations and its partners to meet the needs of
refugees and host communities, have made the living
conditions for refugees in Cox's Bazar very precarious.
Creating conditions conducive for voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable returns to Myanmar is a
process that requires at least medium-term planning.
Continuing to address the needs of all those affected in
Cox's Bazar is of primary importance.

In conclusion, we wish to underline the importance
of pursuing a comprehensive and durable solution, with
effective access, freedom of movement and a pathway
to citizenship being critical building blocks for the
sustainable development of Rakhine state. We reiterate
our strong commitment and continued constructive
engagement with the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh in creating an environment where people
of all communities can live together.

