Mr. Chungong (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
At the end of our 18 July 2002 meeting, the Council
unanimously decided, inter alia, to condemn violence
in the Middle East, including in Palestine, after the
Emmanuel suicide bombing and its consequences. We
hoped then that the appeal of the international
community calling for reason and restraint would
finally be heard by the parties to the conflict.

Recent events in Gaza dealt a regrettable blow to
this hope. The logic of violence seems to have built its
nest in the Middle East conflict. Blind violence on both
sides continues to create despair and cause the death of
innocent victims. Our duty in the Security Council, and
as Member States of the United Nations, is to
overcome this violent trend through the logic of peace.

The progress made in talks to restart the peace
process must not be called into question by the slipping
in one camp or another. My delegation recalls that
dialogue and negotiation are the only way to peace.
Violence can only breed violence.

In these circumstances, how can one approve of
the latest Israeli raid in which Palestinian civilians,
mostly children, found their death? What can justify
such an act, which can hardly contribute to peace?

We call Israel and Palestine to reason and
dialogue. For some time we have seen tiny movements
in that direction. Although dialogue is still fragile, we
call on the parties to commit themselves more to this
opening and to the future. It is easier to use the logic of
exclusivity and violence and remain alone, rather than
join together with others. But this kind of logic, based
on a simple power relationship, is precarious and
dangerous and will take the people of the region further
from the only solution encompassing a true vision of
the future.

My delegation fully subscribes to any initiative
which will bring about a dialogue and negotiations and
whose final objective would be to realize a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

Finally, Cameroon feels the intense suffering of
the Palestinian people, and we again express our
sympathy for them.

