Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and through
you your delegation for organizing this meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Timor-Leste. We
note with appreciation that Foreign Minister Mr. Paulo
Portas is here with us this morning. His presence and
that of His Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa,
Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, add even more
importance and standing to our debate this morning. I
would also like to note with appreciation the presence
of Vice-Minister Mrs. Vera Machado of Brazil. I also
thank Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for her
comprehensive briefing and for the Secretary-General's
report (S/2011/641).

We are encouraged by Foreign Minister Da
Costa's assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste. It is
a matter of great satisfaction that the overall situation
remains calm and stable and that the country is well on
its path to long-term peace, stability and development.
We appreciate the continued and active engagement of
all political parties in the democratic processes. Such
processes are essential to the consolidation of the
democratic framework, as well as to the rapid socio-
economic development of the country.

We are happy to note that the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) has successfully assumed
responsibility for the conduct, command and control of
all police operations in the country. As the transition
progresses, it is necessary for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to remain
steadfast in its commitment towards the institutional
development and capacity-building of the PNTL.
Moving ahead, it is critical that the necessary
legislative and operational framework is in place for a
clear delineation of authority between the military and
the police, so that they can effectively discharge their
responsibilities under the civilian Government.

The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled next year will be a major milestone in the
consolidation of the democratic transition of Timor-
Leste. The United Nations must provide the necessary
technical and logistical support for the smooth conduct
of those elections, in accordance with the priorities
established by the Government.
We appreciate and fully support the efforts of the
Government to enhance regional engagement and to
address the developmental challenges confronting the
country. We note with satisfaction that economic
growth continues to remain robust and that public
expenditure, including the proceeds from the oil and
gas sector, has continued to be a strong driver of
economic growth in the country.

India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute to the
country's development by providing expertise and
training in areas where our competence would be of
use and where we see complementarities in their
application. India has extended its support to the
Government of Timor-Leste, including through
assistance for the purchase of equipment and materials
related to socio-economic development and the human-
resource development sector.

As UNMIT moves towards a drawdown by the
end of 2012 and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner. The joint transition plan, which sets
out possible models for United Nations engagement
after UNMIT's withdrawal, needs to be finalized in
accordance with the priorities of the Government. The
progress made so far gives us hope and confidence that
we are moving in the right direction. We appreciate the
efforts of UNMIT, the international community and
bilateral partners towards peace, stability and
development in the country.

Before I conclude, I would like to express our
deep appreciation for the leadership of Special
Representative Ms. Ameerah Haq and for the
dedication and hard work of her team in supporting the
Government and people of Timor-Leste. I am confident
that we are well on the path to make UNMIT a real
success story.

