Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Mr. President, to thank you for convening this
public meeting on such an important issue and for this
opportunity to speak before the Council at such a
crucial moment in the history of our Organization - a
moment of change and united opinion. We express our
full support for the institution we created in search of a
better world for our children and for succeeding
generations.

The question under consideration is of vital
importance for the United Nations. We remember with
deep respect the officials and personnel of this
Organization who lost their lives helping civilian
populations caught up in armed conflicts of a religious,
ethnic, racial or political nature, who see in and expect
of the United Nations a helping hand to protect them
and ease their suffering.

These considerations inspire us, a founding
Member of the Organization, to speak before the
Council and, with our message, to raise awareness of
the urgent need to protect and safeguard the lives of
civilians and of the humanitarian personnel who strive
to alleviate the suffering caused by war.
The best protection of the civilian population is
the absence of war. Thus, the prevention of war should
be a priority. This question has long been studied in the
United Nations and by the Security Council. However,
we have not been able to prevent war. The resulting
humanitarian consequences have been devastating for
the innocent - women, children and the elderly.
Understanding the causes of conflict is today of urgent
necessity.

Acts of violence and abuses against non-
combatants are totally unacceptable as a strategy to
break the spirit of peoples in countries in conflict. Such
crimes are all the more heinous for being perpetrated
against defenceless, subjugated persons.

The emblem of the United Nations therefore at
times represents the only hope there is. Humanity, at
this stage of its cultural evolution, rejects with
indignation such criminal practices and strongly
condemns their perpetrators, be they the individuals
who commit the crimes or the States that tolerate them,
because such conduct is considered the world over as
inhuman and barbaric.

There must therefore be a strong response to such
practices. We share the View that the Council must
implement fully its resolutions, including resolution
1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, as well as the recommendations contained in
resolution 1325 (2000) relating, in particular, to the
protection of women and to the inhuman acts of sexual
violence perpetrated against them in times of conflict.

With respect to the role of the United Nations in
peacekeeping operations, the Secretary-General, in
speaking before the General Assembly on 8 December
on the report (A/59/565) of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change, entitled "A more
secure world: Our shared responsibility", said:

"United Nations staff serve in dangerous
environments not for my satisfaction, nor yet for
their own, but because you, the Member States,
have decided that their work is needed there."
(A/59/PV.68)

In addition, paragraph 239 of the Panel's report
states that:

"The ability of the United Nations to protect
civilians and help end conflict is directly related
to United Nations staff security, which has been
eroding since the mid-1990s. To operate
securely and effectively, the United Nations
needs four things: the capacity to perform its
mandated tasks fully; freedom from unwarranted
intrusion by Member States into operations; full
respect by staff of United Nations codes of
impartiality; and a professional security service,
with access to Member States' intelligence and
threat assessments."

Attacks against humanitarian workers and United
Nations staff represent serious violations. My
delegation shares every one of the concerns of the
Secretary-General as to the security of United Nations
staff as a vehicle for achieving our ultimate goal,
namely to protect the civilian population in conflict
areas.

The provision of humanitarian assistance is
considered essential to helping the civilian population.
We believe, therefore, that there is an urgent need for
effective coordination among the specialized agencies
of the United Nations in the area of humanitarian
assistance.

Political will is not enough; certain measures
must be taken, and in that respect we recommend the
establishment of a direct liaison office between the
World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. That would make it possible to act more
directly and effectively in a given conflict. This
proposal is aimed at more effectively protecting and
safeguarding populations at risk.

We listened carefully to Under-Secretary-General
Egeland and to the proposals he made. All of them are
deserving of our attention, particularly the 10-point
platform, which advocates joint response mechanisms.
One of the key actions should be aimed at predicting
requirements in high-risk conflict areas. We hope that
his next report, to be submitted in June, will highlight
actions that can be taken immediately in terms of
humanitarian assistance and coordination.

Chapter XII - entitled "Protecting civilians" -
of the Panel's report states, in paragraph 233, that:

"All combatants must abide by the provisions of
the Geneva Conventions. All Member States
should sign, ratify and act on all treaties relating
to the protection of civilians, such as the
Genocide Convention, the Geneva Conventions,
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court and all refugee conventions."

Responsibilities are therefore shared at the national and
international levels.
We deem it necessary to draw the attention of
Council members, particularly the permanent members,
to the need seriously to take into consideration, when
setting up peacekeeping operations, the socio-
economic conditions prevailing in Member States of
the Organization.

