Mr. Kyaw Tint Swe (Myanmar): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council for this month. I
would also like to thank you for having convened this
open debate.

I wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for having
updated the Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I also wish to take this opportunity to
express my deep appreciation to him for his leadership
and dedication in discharging his important task. His
contributions, and the noble mission that he has ably
carried out, will be remembered by the international
community.

Armed conflicts breed a cycle of violence and
bring untold suffering to innocent civilians. In the
years since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1296 (2000), the international community has faced
numerous challenges in providing security for and
ensuring the well-being of civilian populations. As
Under-Secretary-General Egeland has pointed out,
success depends on united action taken by all
members.

Armed conflicts, and the great harm they do to
civilians, are exacerbated by the easy availability of
illicit small arms and light weapons. In addition,
terrorism also causes great suffering to the civilian
population. The international community must
effectively address these serious challenges. Myanmar
joins other members of the international community in
condemning all such acts. We fully sympathize with
the Victims of armed conflict in various parts of the

06-6406]
world, as we ourselves endured the bitter experience of
insurgent groups committing atrocities against the
civilian population. We fully agree that the protection
of civilians must be depoliticized and must transcend
singular interests so as to become a core principle of
humanity for all civilizations.

The most efficient way to protect civilians in
armed conflict is to resolve the root causes and bring
armed conflicts to an end. Soon after regaining
independence in 1948, Myanmar had to face an
insurgency that lasted for over 40 years. Because of the
national reconciliation efforts of the Government, 17 of
18 insurgent groups have returned to the legal fold and
are now working together with the Government for the
development of their respective regions. The
insurgency that had plagued the country has come to a
virtual end. There now remain a faction of one
insurgent group, the Karen National Union (KNU), and
remnants of armed narcotraffickers, who are now
confined to small enclaves in the border areas.
Although their ranks have greatly diminished and they
currently control little or no territory, they continue to
target civilians and commit acts of terrorism.

In order to protect the civilian population, the
Government is conducting counter-insurgency
operations against those elements of the KNU and the
remnants of narcotrafficking armed groups that are
conducting terrorist activities against the civilians.

With regard to allegations that civilians suffer
from the repercussions of counter-insurgency
operations, we took the members of the diplomatic
corps and the United Nations country team to those
areas. We also invited Under-Secretary-General
Gambari to those areas, so that he could personally
witness the actual situation.

Let me conclude by expressing our strong
conviction that only through a comprehensive approach
to promote economic growth, poverty eradication,
sustainable development and national reconciliation
will we be able to put an end to armed conflicts -
which, in our view, is the best way to protect civilians.
To that end, our Government has, to date, spent over
81 billion kyats and some $550 million to develop the
border areas, where most of our ethnic nationalities
reside. The Myanmar Government will do its national
duty to protect its citizens and bring peace, stability
and prosperity to the country.

06-6406]

