Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
the United Kingdom on its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November and express to it
the sincere gratitude of the Central African Republic
for the convening of this meeting on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I also commend South Africa
on its presidency in October.

My delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2499 (2019), which renews the mandate
of MINUSCA for one year. In an environment that
continues to be marked by the persistence of extreme
violence and clashes among the armed groups that
were signatories to the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of
6 February, as evidenced by the horrific events of Birao,
which took a high toll on the population and led to
massive displacements, it is imperative that the Security
Council firmly reassert its support for MINUSCA and
the authorities of the Central African Republic.

Like previous resolutions, the one just adopted
maintains MINUSCA's robust framework and mandate;
that is important. MINUSCA, which operates in a
challenging environment, has repeatedly demonstrated
that when necessary, it is able to act proactively and
robustly to protect civilian populations, particularly
those segments of the population that are most
vulnerable, namely, women and children, from the
threats posed by armed groups.

The resolution renews the authorization of
additional support for MINUSCA and the authorities
of the Central African Republic in extending State
authority throughout the national territory. Thus far,
the prefects have been designated in all the country's
16 prefectures, and the number of officials deployed in
the field has more than doubled.

Despite such tangible progress in various areas,
important challenges remain that are hampering our
collective efforts to stabilize the Central African
Republic, including violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and several violations
of the peace agreement. That assessment has in no way
slowed down the implementation of the agreement,
which remains the framework of reference for the return
to stability in my country. My delegation welcomes
the commitment of the neighbouring countries of
the Central African Republic and the Economic
Community of Central African States to that effort and
calls for their continued support.

The holding of the 2020-2021 general elections
remains one of the challenges that the national
authorities, MINUSCA and the international
community must address. Like those of 2015 and 2016,
the upcoming elections will require much energy and
effort, given the undeniable fact that they will make
it possible to consolidate the democratic gains made
in the Central African Republic. The preliminary
timetable for the general elections has already been
made available.

In his briefing before the Security Council on
25 October (see S/PV.8646), the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic reported on the publication of the electoral
calendar by the national electoral authority, which
provides for voter registration from January 2020,
a first round of coupled presidential and legislative
elections on 27 December 2020, and a second round, if
necessary, on 14 February 2021.

In that regard, through me, the Government requests
that, as recommended by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 102 ofhis latest report on the Central African
Republic (8/2019/822) and called for in paragraph 32 (c)
of resolution 2499 (2019), MINUSCA be provided with
an adequate mandate so that it can ensure the necessary
technical, logistical, security and operational support
for the holding of the elections while honouring
constitutional deadlines in a peaceful environment.

There is no alternative to the holding of the 2020-
2021 general elections. Holding on to the gains of
the peace agreement depends on it. My delegation
appreciates the firm stance taken by the guarantors of the
agreement that have reaffirmed to all Central African
Republic stakeholders that no effort will be spared in
ensuring that the elections are held on schedule. The
support of the Security Council in the exercise of its
full authority is key so that the actors concerned, in
particular the political parties, respect the deadlines
and contribute constructively to the effective holding
of the elections.

We take this opportunity to welcome the convergent
positions and the coordinated work of the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union and the
entire international community, as well as bilateral and
multilateral partners, in their engagement with Central
African Republic stakeholders.
Allow me to conclude by citing Mr. Ndiaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who, in
presenting the report of the Secretary-General, stated,

"The Central African Republic needs all its partners
and friends in order to transform the dream of
peace, prosperity and development of millions of

Central Africans into a lasting reality. I know they

can also count on the unanimous and generous

support of the Security Council". (S/PV8646, p. 5)

The Council's support for the adoption of resolution
2499 (2019) renewing MINUSCA's mandate for an
additional year is an especially eloquent gesture for
which the Government and the people of the Central
African Republic are grateful to the Council.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
