Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
The topic that you, Madam President, have chosen for
today's debate, namely, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, was a well chosen and timely subject,
given the alarming events taking place throughout the
world, and in Africa in particular. My delegation would
like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to share
our thoughts on this subject with the members of the
Security Council.

First of all, however, we would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and to say
how admirably you are discharging your duties. We
also wish to extend our gratitude to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of the People's Republic
of China.

Every armed conflict necessarily takes its toll of
victims. However, the Geneva Conventions codify
conflicts and provide special legal protection for
civilians. Current conflicts, especially domestic ones,
are usually attributed to political demands or
opposition. Their main characteristic today is that
civilians, who are potential targets, are extremely
vulnerable in those conflicts. For example, many
domestic conflicts are merely a way of settling ethnic
or tribal rivalries and acting on feelings of religious
intolerance. Or, they may just be a way of getting rid of
foreign minorities who have been made scapegoats of
political or economic failure.

We know that zealous efforts to crush uprisings
and opposition often lead political regimes to order, or
cover up, excesses and atrocities against civilians.
There are many examples of that type of reaction in
quite a few African countries. How could one forget
the tragedies experienced in Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi
and other countries?

Closer to home, we stand by helpless - if not
resigned and aloof - as tragedies unfold in Cote
d'Ivoire, where killing fields have been discovered
where most of the victims were immigrant workers
from the subregion. Both sides accuse and blame one
another, but that hardly matters. Above and beyond
their contemptible and heinous nature, such actions
must be condemned and punished. Protection is
supposed to be provided to civilian populations,
particularly foreign civilians, who have nothing to do
with the conflict in that country.

The preamble to the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights states that disregard and contempt for
human rights have led to barbaric acts that outrage the
human conscience. Let us be clear: what is involved
here is human rights. Protecting civilians in armed
conflict means taking up the cause of human rights,
particularly in a world where the idea of ethnic
cleansing has increasing currency.

The duty - or, rather, the responsibility - to
provide protection is a sacred duty incumbent upon
States and parties to a conflict. States parties to the
four Geneva Conventions are bound by a number of
legal provisions whereby violations of international
humanitarian law can be punished by sanctions. How
international humanitarian law is applied depends on
how rigorously States try to ensure respect for that law,
whether it be international or internal conflicts, the
latter of course implying the adoption of appropriate
national legislation. Applying international
humanitarian law is a concern of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent, two institutions that we
commend and congratulate for their humanitarian
work.

However, with the many changes in the
international order, and with the increase in the number
of security issues, new actors have made their entrance
onto the stage, primarily the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to whom we
are greatly indebted for their commitment to human
dignity.

I would also mention the criminal tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, which will shortly
be supplemented by the Sierra Leone court and,
especially, the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Lastly, I would mention the very important part played
by non-governmental organizations working with
humanitarian matters. All of these players, in their own
way and in solidarity, help to protect civilians in
various armed conflicts.

This debate on humanitarian protection brings up
the controversy about the need for intervention. In a
word, does protection of human rights take precedence
over State sovereignty? The Secretary-General tried to
respond to this point in his Millennium Report, in
which he stated,

. if humanitarian intervention is, indeed, an
unacceptable assault on sovereignty, how should
we respond to a Rwanda, to a Srebrenica - to
gross and systematic violations of human rights
that offend every precept of our common
humanity?" (A/54/2000, para. 217)

The dilemma is a real one. Actually, everything
depends on the circumstances and gravity of the
situation. Most persons facing this classical tragedy
have advocated a reasonable approach. In other words,
if it is a planned genocide or a scheduled ethnic
cleansing, either by the State or else because the State
has been negligent or defiant, then it would be better to
intervene, given the situation. But, there is one
prerequisite. The Security Council, responsible for
maintaining peace and security, must endorse such
action. Finally, there is the problem of sanctions. All
those who violate humanitarian law, either by omission
or by commission, must be responsible for what they
have done. State parties to the Geneva Conventions
have to include in their criminal legislation the
punishable offences with regard to violations of the
Conventions.

States have the responsibility to seek persons
accused of such violations and bring them to justice or
to extradite them to a third country on the basis, of
course, of the principle of universal competence, that
is, regardless of the nationality of the offender or the
place where the offence was committed. Soon this kind
of recourse will be broadened to include the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

It is essential to punish violations of international
humanitarian law in order to deter and punish serious
breaches. Recently the High Commissioner on Human
Rights, when speaking about the atrocities against and
assassinations of civilians in the conflict in cote
d'Ivoire, said that those responsible for atrocities in
Cote d'Ivoire must remember that henceforth they are
liable to judgement before the ICC.

This anguished appeal by the primary person with
responsibility for human rights throws light on the
horrible tragedy being played out in Cote d'Ivoire,
where civilians, often foreigners, suffer inhuman and
degrading treatment and are subject to blind violence,
summary execution and arbitrary arrest, on the basis of
nationality, ethnic origin and religious intolerance. It is
high time for the international community itself to
become aware of this and shoulder its responsibilities
to ensure better protection for civilians in that country.

