Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As this is the first time I am taking the floor
in the Council since your assumption of the presidency,
allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on the well-deserved
trust vested in you by your peers. I thank you too for
allowing my delegation to participate in this meeting of
the Security Council.

I wish also to thank Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of South
Africa, who has briefed the Council on behalf of the
African Union on the mediation so admirably and
effectively carried out in C6te d'Ivoire by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, President of South Africa. Further, I wish to
welcome Mr. Pierre Schori to New York and to express
to him our appreciation for the heart and soul with
which he has embarked upon his mission in Cote
d'Ivoire. We commend his impartiality and wish him
every success in cote d'Ivoire. I also thank
Ambassador Simeon Adekanye, Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
whose President, Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, is the current
Chairman of the African Union. For my delegation, his
presence is one of the comforting signs of the
significant role being played by the African Union in
the restoration of peace and stability to cote d'Ivoire.

An objective comparative analysis of the various
settlement agreements concerning the Ivorian crisis
signed by those referred to as the Ivorian parties to the
conflict should convince the entire international
community that President Thabo Mbeki has been able
to achieve a result to benefit international peace and
security that would have been unheard of not too long
ago. Strengthened by the signatories' unconditional
trust in a mediator sensitive to the cultural and
sociological realities in Cote d'Ivoire, the Pretoria
Agreement does not lend itself to any partisan
interpretation. It therefore provides no pretext for
either inaction or the placement of obstacles on the
path towards national peace and reconciliation. Recent
developments on the ground lead us to believe that the
Pretoria Agreement is being implemented by all its
signatories. Peace and reconciliation will therefore be
achieved in Cote d'Ivoire through the unanimous
resolve of Ivorians and the renewed support of the
African Union and the international community, and in
particular that of the countries of the subregion.

As Mr. Aziz Pahad has just noted before the
members of the Council while speaking on behalf of

the African Union - whose Peace and Security
Council is honoured to be in partnership with the
Security Council - Cote d'Ivoire's defence and

security forces and the armed component of the Forces
nouvelles have resumed contacts and relaunched the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process from the point at which it was suspended
several months ago. In accordance with the
commitments undertaken at Pretoria and the DDR
timetable jointly agreed at Bouake on 14 April 2005,
heavy weapons were withdrawn from the front line
between 21 and 24 April and cantonment centres were
identified. Moreover, and also in keeping with the
Pretoria Agreement, the return to the Government of
Forces nouvelles ministers, however modest at present,
is today a reality, as evidenced by the last two meetings
of the Council of Ministers.

Other developments contributing to the
progressive and decisive completion of the DDR
process in Cote d'Ivoire will follow, resulting in the
reform of the security sector. In that regard, and just as
in the case of the DDR exercise, the experience of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
International Peace Academy and other international
observers on the international stage attests to the fact
that that reform, along with the DDR that precedes it,
is the longest, most multidimensional and sensitive
process in the protracted period of post-conflict
peacebuilding and national reconstruction. For these
processes to be successful, there will have to be close
cooperation between the national community
involved -Cote d'Ivoire in this instance - and the
international community. Both of those protagonists
will also have to demonstrate the same concerted
action evoked by the Secretary-General in his new
concept of collective and comprehensive security. The
relationship between Cote d'Ivoire and international
financial institutions will also have to be of the nature
described by speakers who took the floor before me.

As regards the very sensitive point of article 35
on the conditions of eligibility to the presidency of the
Republic, President Mbeki, the African Union
mediator, made a decision pursuant to article 14 of the
Pretoria Agreement and in consultation with the
Chairman of the African Union and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. He informed President
Gbagbo of that decision in a letter dated 11 April 2005.
President Gbagbo is preparing to make a statement to
the nation in support of peace, to be broadcast by radio
and television on 27 April, following his meetings with
the major stakeholders of the country.

Events in Cote d'Ivoire in the coming days and
weeks will attest to the irreversible commitment of our
people and Government to working for peace and
stability in the subregion. Today, however, Cote
d'Ivoire and West Africa need the active and creative
support of the international community, including
donors, the international financial institutions, the
United Nations system and the members of this
Council, which play a lead role and, whether they like
it or not, have a responsibility as a global driving force,
instigator and catalyst of the complementary
interaction of the world's components. Their help and
the steady political support of the great Powers are
essential if we in the subregion and in each of its
nations are to succeed in the political transition and
adaptation that our economies and societies require to
the globalization of the economy, trade and
information.

Extended to Africa as a whole, such joint
cooperation by the key actors of the international
community will restore peace and the conditions in
which the Millennium Development Goals and the
New Partnership for Africa's Development can be
achieved. From that perspective, and pursuant to article
10 of the Pretoria Agreement, Cote d'Ivoire would
greatly appreciate receiving expertise and assistance
from the United Nations in the elections to be held in
October 2005, in accordance with the terms of the
Constitution. I pay tribute here to the exemplary
cooperation being displayed by the Security Council,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States in seeking a peaceful solution to
the Ivorian crisis.

I cannot conclude without noting the need to
standardize the command structures of impartial forces
engaged in peacekeeping in West Africa and in Africa
in general. Unified command of such forces
strengthens their impartiality, makes their activities
intelligible to the peoples being assisted in their peace-
building processes, and creates conditions of trust by
the people in those forces and of close cooperation
with local populations. I hope that the Security Council
will take account of that reality on the ground in its
peacekeeping operations and of this request by my
delegation in its forthcoming draft resolutions on
African crisis situations.

