Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): In its
transition towards becoming a functional, reform-
oriented and modern European country, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress towards
European integration, despite all the complexities
present within its society.

A genuine commitment to the European path still
remains the highest priority for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that regard, we welcome the European Union's
increased engagement and reinforced role in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the enhanced combined
presence of the European Union Special Representative
and the European Union delegation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a potential
candidate for European Union membership. The
Stabilization and Association Agreement between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union was
ratified in 2011, but has not yet entered into force.
However, the Interim Stabilization and Association
Agreement, the trade-related part of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, came into force upon its
signing and has been successfully implemented ever
since 2008 in all its domains.

Nonetheless, political dialogue aimed at finding
solutions for all open questions has continued so that the
Stabilization and Association Agreement could come
into force, which in effect would enable our country
to submit a credible application for membership to the
European Union. Also, we continue to make additional
efforts necessary for completing the "5+2" agenda,
which is necessary for closure of the Office of the
High Representative and the resolution of all other
outstanding issues.

We can state with confidence that the security
situation in the country remains calm and stable. Our
authorities are fully capable of dealing with threats
that could impair a safe and secure environment in the
country. Let me remind the members of the Council of
the fact that, during the end of 1990s, around 60,000
international forces were deployed and present in my
country. Today, that number is only 600. We would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
Member States that participated in the multinational
stabilization force established in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

We are aware that national reconciliation and
trust are basic prerequisites for building a functional
State and society. We still insist on our common
goal of investigating crimes that were committed
and adequately prosecuting the perpetrators of those
crimes, regardless of their ethnicity. Additional efforts
have been made in order to enhance cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, as well as the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

We remain dedicated to further promoting regional
cooperation, which is in the common interests of the
countries in the region as well. We are certain that the
protocol on the exchange of evidence and information
on war crimes, signed between the Prosecutor's Offices
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, is
serving as an impetus in strengthening communication
and further enhancing coordination.

Moreover, the implementation of the existing human
rights instruments and the sustainable return and local
integration of refugees and internally displaced persons
remain the priority of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
continue to maintain good cooperation between partner
countries in the framework of the Sarajevo process on
refugees and internally displaced persons and believe
that the comprehensive and coordinated return of
refugees and internally displaced persons throughout
the region is crucial to lasting peace.

We are making additional efforts to solve the
remaining border and property issues with neighbouring
countries. Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations form an essential part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's process of moving towards the European
Union. We continue our active involvement in regional
initiatives and are further developing our bilateral
relations with other enlargement countries and
neighbouring European Union member States.

Bosnia and Herzegovina had the honour to serve
a two-year term as an elected member of the Security
Council from 2010 to 2011. Our experience is proof that
a growing number of countries are willing and capable
of contributing to dealing with issues regarding the
maintenance of the international peace and security.
We are fully determined to promote the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina has moved from
being a host country to peacekeeping operations to a
country that is now participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as in NATO and its
member countries' International Security Assistance
Force operation in Afghanistan.

As for the platform for the participation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in the General Assembly, as mentioned
in paragraph 27 of the report ofthe High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/646, annex), we
are surprised by the lack of understanding by the High
Representative with regard to that issue. We need to
point out that the platform for the participation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's delegation in the General
Assembly does not represent a legally binding
document, but rather serves as a kind of a plan that
is guiding the position of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
the General Assembly. To be more specific, a platform
for the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Genereal Assembly is not required by any constitutional
or legal provision. Therefore, it does not in any way
discredit any foreign policy decision of the Presidency,
the work of Bosnia and Herzegovina's representatives
in international organizations and institutions or the
participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the United
Nations framework.

Taking all that into consideration, we need to
remember that, according to the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Presidency, among others, is
responsible for conducting the foreign policy of the
country. Moreover, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina decides by consensus on all key foreign
policy issues. That mechanism proved effective during
two-year non-permanent membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Security Council. Therefore, we
believe that paragraph 27 of latest report can create
numerous misconceptions among Council members
and cause harmful interpretations that, we believe, are
unnecessary and counterproductive.

In the light of Bosnia and Herzegovina's foreign
policy activities, we express our regret that the report
does not clearly emphasize the obvious improvement
in regional cooperation, as one of the foreign policy
priorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
region. At the same time, we are happy that the High
Representative mentioned this in his oral statement
today. Regional cooperation is an important element
regarding the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. It also points to the capacity of our
country's foreign policy. The Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, by maintaining good-neighbourly
relations and exchanging visits at the highest level,
making efforts to resolve outstanding bilateral issues
and participating in the Brdo process, has confirmed
its commitment and dedication to the development of
friendly relations, the process of European integration
and the resolution of the outstanding issues in the
European spirit. We encourage the High Representative
to consult ahead of time with the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to acquire precise information
on the work of the Presidency and the foreign policy
activities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, so as to avoid
any harmful and counterproductive interpretations in
future.

In spite of all of the positive developments, we are
aware of the current standoff in the political process. In
that light, it is necessary to develop apositive atmosphere
that will foster constructive political dialogue and lead
to a resolution of the outstanding issues.

I would also like to point out that all the changes
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be based on the rule
of law. The full implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement is therefore imperative.

