Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is one of the Security Council's vital roles
in carrying out its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Iran's nuclear
activities and its history of concealment raise pressing
questions about whether Iran's programme is, as it
claims, solely for civil purposes. The United Kingdom
commends the continuing investigation of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and is
very deeply concerned about Iran's failure to cooperate
fully with the Agency. As today's resolution notes,
after more than three years, the Agency is still unable
to conclude that there are no undeclared nuclear
materials or activities in Iran. Important questions,
including on activities with a possible military nuclear
dimension, remain unanswered.

The international community has shown great
patience. We have given Iran many opportunities to
show that it has no intention to develop nuclear
weapons. Regrettably, Iran has not taken the steps
required by the IAEA Board and the Security Council
that would help build confidence.

The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
working for a negotiated solution. On 6 June, the
European Union High Representative, Javier Solana,
presented to Iran, on behalf of China, France,
Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United
States, a new set of far-reaching and imaginative
proposals for a comprehensive agreement that we
would negotiate with Iran. The proposals offer Iran a
way forward that would enable a solution based on
mutual respect and cooperation. They would give Iran
everything it needs to achieve its stated ambition of
developing a modern, civil nuclear power industry,
including active support in the building of light-water
power reactors in Iran, participation in a uranium
enrichment facility in Russia and legally binding
assurances relating to the supply of nuclear material;
address Iran's concern that it should not depend on a
single foreign supplier; and provide a substantive
package of cooperation in less proliferation-sensitive
nuclear research and development. In addition, the
proposals would also offer Iran significant political and
economic benefits, including a trade and cooperation
agreement with the European Union.

When Javier Solana presented those proposals, he
made clear that it was essential for Iran to take the
steps required by the IAEA Board in its repeated

resolutions and by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 29 March. Those include the
full suspension of all uranium enrichment-related and
reprocessing activities, including research and
development, to be verified by the IAEA. For our part,
we said that if Iran suspended all enrichment activity,
we would be prepared to suspend further action in the
Security Council. Suspension will not hinder Iran's
development of a modern, civil nuclear power industry
in any way, but the continuation of enrichment-related
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, would allow Iran to develop the know-
how to produce fissile material suitable for use in
nuclear weapons. Given the concern about Iran's
ambitions, that is not a risk that we can afford to take.
Our proposals suggest a procedure for reviewing the
moratorium once international confidence in Iran's
intentions has been restored.

The United Kingdom is deeply disappointed that
Iran has neither given any indication that it is ready to
engage seriously on our proposals nor taken the steps
needed to allow negotiations to begin. We concluded
that there was no alternative but to seek today's
resolution, which creates a mandatory obligation on
Iran to suspend fully all uranium enrichment-related
and reprocessing activities, including research and
development, to be verified by the IAEA. A full
suspension is required to help build confidence and to
create the atmosphere of trust necessary for
negotiations. Negotiations cannot succeed if Iran is
continuing the activities that are the main source of
international concern.

We have adopted a Security Council resolution
that makes the IAEA-required suspension mandatory.
Should Iran refuse to comply, we will work for the
adoption of measures under Article 41 of Chapter VII
of the Charter. Should Iran implement the decisions of
the IAEA and the Security Council and enter into
negotiations, we would be ready to hold back from
further action in the Security Council.

We reaffirm that the proposals that were
conveyed to Iran by the six countries on 6 June 2006
remain valid. The choice is now for Iran to make. We
urge and encourage Iran to take the positive path by
implementing the steps required by the IAEA Board
and the Security Council and to return to talks on the
basis of the ambitious package which we have put
forward.

