Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Ambassador of Sweden, Pierre Schori, will shortly
express the views of the European Union. I would like
to respond to the excellent statement made by Jean-
Marie Guehenno while developing a few points, which
I hope will in no way contradict the perspective he has
defined so well.

My first comment is on the matter of substantial
autonomy. It is very important that work in this area
proceed under the best possible conditions in order to
give shape to this essential element provided for in
resolution 1244 (1999). It is therefore well that
Mr. Haekkerup should be working on this in close
coordination with the representatives of all the
communities in Kosovo. The objective should be to
provide a clear-cut definition of the competencies to be
transferred to the future provisional institutions.

Mr. Guehenno has mentioned the desire for
participation by representatives of the Serb community.
In this context, we are encouraged by the fact that Mr.
Haekkerup received encouraging signs in Belgrade. We
believe Belgrade has an important part to play in the
context of the process led by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

My second comment relates to the general
elections. As Jean-Marie Guehenno has said, these
constitute an important, indeed indispensable, phase in
the process of ensuring that democracy takes root in
Kosovo, and minority participation is thus
indispensable. The elections must be prepared with
painstaking care; we are encouraged to note that much
has already been accomplished on the ground.

My third comment is that Mr. Haekkerup's visit
to Belgrade last Thursday was a very positive
development; Mr. Guehenno was right to highlight it.
We share his assessment of the meeting between
President Kostunica and Mr. Haekkerup, and we are
pleased that a positive relationship is developing
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the authorities in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Here, the opening of
an UNMIK office in Belgrade is a step forward; it will
facilitate needed dialogue on a day-to-day basis.

My fourth comment addresses ethnic violence,
which, as many members of the Council have said,
remains the crux of the matter. We are please to note
the good cooperation between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) in keeping the extremists on the
sidelines. But it is essential that elected officials in
Kosovo do even more: that they forcefully and
resolutely make their voices heard to condemn ethnic
violence and to promote harmony. The international
community has made a great effort to help Kosovo and
its population, and it is only normal that we should
expect everyone, and in particular those elected
representatives, to do everything in their power to
prevent violence, thus contributing to the success of the
task entrusted to UNMIK, to KFOR - and to those
very representatives, elected by their own people.

All these points will be made at the ministerial
meeting of the contact group, to be held the day after
tomorrow in Paris. That meeting will offer a good
opportunity to take stock of positive developments
since the last ministerial meeting, which was held in
Rome last August. But it will provide an opportunity
also to take a more general look at the situation in
south-eastern Europe. As other speakers have rightly
observed, the degree to which the international
community is united on this matter is striking in terms
both of its assessment of the situation and of its
determination to safeguard the stability, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all the States of the region;
this echoes the unity the Council displayed with the
adoption of resolution 1345 (2001). It is encouraging
and reassuring to hear the entire international
community speak with one voice to encourage the
forces of integration as they confront groups
advocating territorial fragmentation and ethnic
factionalism.

