Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to extend to you, Mr. President, and to your delegation, my
deep appreciation and thanks for the great efforts you made
in organizing this meeting, which is part of the follow-up
to the action taken since the ministerial meeting last year on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa.
I welcome the important statement of the Secretary-
General this morning. I also commend him on his progress
report on implementation of the recommendations in the
report regarding the causes of conflict in Africa. I
appreciate the report's valuable information about the
efforts made in this context.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) for having
participated in this meeting. This will undoubtedly help to
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
system and the OAU. It will also help us to find a
common denominator on how to implement the Security
Council decisions and presidential statements on how to
implement the recommendations of the Secretary-General.

Matters involving Africa have always taken up a large
share of the Council's deliberations. Peace and calm have
indeed been restored in some areas. We believe that those
successes were due to cooperation between the parties to
the conflict and the international and regional organizations
as they tried to find peaceful solutions. Also there was
compliance with the provisions of the peace agreements that
were signed.

In addition, the international community' s political and
material support is needed for African regional
organizations so that they can continue their efforts to end
armed conflicts and restore peace and security in the areas
of conflict.

The report shows clearly that the Secretary-General,
and thereby the organs of the United Nations, have made
many efforts to implement the recommendations regarding
support for regional and subregional initiatives that aim at
preserving peace and eliminating the causes of conflict in
Africa. Two Special Representatives participated very
effectively in different negotiations under the auspices of
the OAU and other regional organizations in Africa.

The Secretariat has also held special meetings on
how to help certain African countries avoid the outbreak
of conflict.

One of the steps taken by the Security Council to
put an end to conflicts, where the parties did not respond
to international and regional appeals to respect ceasefires
and to start negotiations that would lead to peace
agreements was the imposition of sanctions on those
involved in the fighting. In this respect, the Bahrain
delegation endorses the Secretariat's approach in
encouraging the efforts of the Member States and regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations to
make the sanctions imposed by the Security Council more
effective but less cruel. We would not like the sanctions
to have a negative impact on the people rather than on the
leaders, who are the ones primarily targeted.

Another factor that leads to conflict in Africa is the
problem of illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. We therefore approve the approach of
convening a subregional conference on the proliferation
and illicit trafficking in arms and drugs. We also support
the idea of understanding the consequences of illicit
trafficking in arms. In this context, we stress the need for
developing a strategy to deal with the problem, with a
view to eliminating it through setting up controls on the
manufacture, export and import of weapons.

On strengthening African capacity for peacekeeping
and post-conflict peace-building, we urge the United
Nations to intensify its work in organizing and training
civilian police for peacekeeping purposes.

We also support seminars on the administration of
missions. We believe that providing the necessary funds
to develop and complete this task is an important question
that should be studied carefully.

The offices established by the United Nations to
provide assistance in post-conflict peace-building
situations in various African countries play a very
important role, because they help to create appropriate
conditions for the re-establishment and consolidation of
peace by supporting national reconciliation efforts. Of
course, their success depends largely on greater
organizational and financial support from international
financial institutions.

 

Humanitarian assistance provided to African countries
is an important priority when we look at conflicts in Africa.
In this connection, we would like to emphasize the
importance of coordinating the assistance provided and of
ensuring free and unhampered access to humanitarian
personnel and supplies. We also have to make sure that
assistance actually reaches the people who need it.

The tragic humanitarian situation of many refugees
and displaced persons in various African countries -
particularly that of women, children and the elderly -
means that the international community, and donor
countries in particular, must provide the resources necessary
for humanitarian assistance prescribed by the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations.

We note that the report of the Secretary-General
highlights international efforts aimed at encouraging
economic growth in Africa. This involves increasing
transparency in public administration, strengthening
administrative capacities, creating an atmosphere favourable
to investments, enhancing competitiveness and introducing
proposals aimed at exploring strong initiatives to alleviate
the debt of highly indebted poor countries in Africa.

It is also worth noting that these efforts coincide with
the measures that have been taken by various African
countries to liberalize their trade, regulate their exchanges
and privatize their obsolete State corporations. We hope
that these positive changes will spur donors and developed
countries to provide assistance to States to encourage them
to persevere on the road they have chosen so that they may
become models for other African States. The goal here is
the realization of economic and social growth so it can lead
to averting potential conflicts.

In conclusion, while we welcome the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations in
Africa, and the strengthening of African peacekeeping
capacity, we would also emphasize the need for continued
assistance to African countries so that they may realize the
utmost possible state of security and stability, which are
essential to achieving prosperity and sustainable
development for their people in the near future.

