Ms. Wallstrfim (Sweden): I am sure members
vividly remembered when world leaders gathered here
in New York one year ago for the General Assembly.
The tensions on the Korean peninsula were alarmingly
high and dangerous. Since then, positive historic
progress has been made and we have new momentum,
but substantial challenges remain. As much as we would
like, this is neither a quick nor a simple process; it will
take time. The unity of the Council has been decisive
for the progress made so far, and continued unity will be
critical. Your personal engagement, Secretary Pompeo,
is very important. We thank you for that.

The Security Council has shown strong resolve
regarding the situation on the Korean peninsula,
including by adopting numerous substantial resolutions
by consensus. Sweden contributed to those efforts,
including by consistently pushing for diplomatic
solutions. Our resolve must now be geared towards
making further progress with the two pronged approach.
First, we need to effectively implement the six
existing sanctions until the demands of the Council
are met. There a widespread violations of the sanctions
regime in a range of areas, including arms exports, the
petroleum trade and financial transactions. We call on
all Member States to fulfil their obligations and ensure
full implementation.

There is no doubt that the responsibility for the
dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea fundamentally rests with the
Government. At the same time, there are concerns about
indirect negative impact of sanctions. Enhanced efforts
are therefore needed to ensure that the humanitarian
exemptions are safeguarded. A generation of North
Koreans must not be lost due to malnutrition and lack
of medicines.

Secondly, we must continue to encourage and
support diplomatic efforts. Progress in the inter-Korean
dialogue is very encouraging. Important agreements,
including most recently in the summit in Pyongyang
last week, have been achieved, and the summit between
the United States and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was indeed significant.
All parties must now work to maintain momentum and
build trust and confidence. A step-by-step approach is
needed to achieve complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. For the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea that means translating its commitments into
concrete undertakings without delay. It is important
that the International Atomic Energy Association be
given a role early in the process.

Creative diplomacy will continue to be critical,
and the parties should explore ways to move from
the armistice towards a peace agreement. The need
for regional collaborative arrangements, including on
security, as we have heard others say here, is evident. An
international framework that deals with all the different
aspects and can contribute to sustainability is essential.
We welcome the support of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations system. My country, with its
presence in Pyongyang, and as a long-standing member
of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, will
continue to assist diplomatic efforts.

The situation on the Korean peninsula has far-
reaching implications for international peace and
security. It is also vital for good neighbourly relations
in North-East Asia. Recent progress has shown that it
is possible to diffuse tensions through dialogue and
cooperation, and that should be recognized by the
Security Council. The newfound opportunity should
be seized. We must now work together and stay united
towards a peaceful, prosperous and nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula.

