Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to start by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I also thank you for your concept
note (8/2012/853, annex), which gives us sensible
guidance for the development of our debate.

As the note points out, the working methods
of the Security Council concern all United Nations
Member States. It is indeed in the interest of the whole
membership that the Council becomes more efficient
in order to meet satisfactorily the functions assigned
to it by the Charter. The greater the possibilities for
involvement of all Members in the work of the Council,
the greater the authority and influence of this body,
which is called upon in a very particular manner to
confront the threats to international peace and security.

The road taken during the past few years has had
positive developments in increasing transparency in the
Security Council. I wish especially to acknowledge the
role played by Portugal during the last two years at the
head of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, building on the basis
of the previous work of Belgium, Japan, Slovakia,
Panama and Bosnia and Herzegovina, just to mention
their predecessors in that endeavour.

The role being played by the group of five small
nations, composed of Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Singapore, and Switzerland, also deserves to be
highlighted. Their ongoing contributions are an impetus
to the necessary collective discussion. I support and
endorse the remarks made by the Ambassador of Costa
Rica this afternoon and thank him for them.
The members of the Security Council are committed
to implementing the measures contained in the note by
the President contained in document S/2010/507. Some
of the measures are being well implemented. That is
the case, for example, ofthose concerning the Council's
monthly programme of work, such as the tentative
forecast, the briefings of the incoming presidency and
the regular updates of the programme of work. Other
measures could be put into practice in a more consistent
way, such as the proposals contained in paragraph 28
on open debates, paragraph 44 on draft resolutions
and draft presidential statements or press statements,
paragraph 59 in fine on informal or interactive
dialogues, and paragraph 65 on the Arria Formula.

We believe that we should continue to update and
expand note 507 with additional measures. Some of
these were set out in the 25 March 2011 letter by the
group of five small States. I reiterate our support for
the following three points in particular - first, the
outgoing presidency's briefings on the implementation
of the Council's programme of work; secondly, the
establishment of a working group on lessons learned
that would assess compliance with resolutions and
propose mechanisms to improve it; and thirdly, the
inclusion of a specific section on the implementation of
working methods in the annual report of the Council to
the General Assembly.

As an additional measure, we believe it would be
advisable to update information on the composition of
the different groups in charge of writing the first drafts
of resolutions. We believe that such drafts should be
circulated before they are discussed by all Council
members in informal consultations.

It is a fact that there are no specific measures about
the veto in note 507. Spain is in favour of including
such measures in future updates of the note. We see
no drawback to permanent members of the Security
Council committing themselves to the implementation
of such measures, especially when these are supported
by the vast majority of Member States. Such measures
would include explanations of the reasons for using
the veto, which is equivalent to explanations of vote,
or the waiver of the veto in cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

We believe that the guidelines set forth in the
concept note are very timely. We trust that they will
be developed so that the ideas put forward in today's
debate will be used as a basis for the development of
proposals in the targeted areas in order to improve
transparency and effectiveness of the Security Council
and its subsidiary bodies. Those proposals, when duly
worked out, could be incorporated into note 507, which
I propose should be regularly updated - for example,
every four years.

To conclude, we believe that it is the responsibility
of all Member States to contribute to the objective of
making the Security Council a more transparent and
inclusive organ, as well as more efficient and effective.
We are certain that today's meeting will bring new
impetus and lay down valuable tracks leading to
progress towards that goal.

