Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
Mr. Nicholas Hayson, Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and the
Ambassador of Afghanistan, Ambassador Saikal, for
their statements.

We would also like to convey our condolences to
the families of the victims in the wake of the terrorist
attack perpetrated in the compound of the Embassy of
Spain in Kabul on 11 December. We robustly condemn
that terrorist act.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern in the light of the deteriorating security
situation in Afghanistan resulting from the activities
of armed groups operating in various regions. That
violence is reflected in the 19 per cent increase in
violent incidents, when measured against the same
period last year. Such soaring violence explains why
instability remains a negative feature in Afghanistan,
which impacts the peacebuilding process and the
development of that country.

The capture of the city of Kunduz last September
by the Taliban represented a setback for the Afghan
security forces, which saw their response capacity in
the face of the insurgent assault compromised. Such
events, together with the presence of groups associated
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
constitute a further factor of destabilization that raises
the stakes for the international community, particularly
the Security Council, leading to a pressing need for us
to adopt robust measures to curb the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters travelling into Afghanistan from
the armed conflicts in Iraq and Syria. Countering
terrorism means strengthening the capacity of the
Afghan National Security Forces as a core institution of
the State. The military actions of ISIS and the Taliban
represent a setback to the consolidation of peace
and to the national reconciliation process, which is
spearheaded by UNAMA together with the Afghanistan
High Peace Council.

The newpolitical phase facing the Afghan leadership
must be shaped by efforts to pursue compliance with the
reforms submitted last year, among which the electoral
calendar is one of the most important. We welcome the
fact that the Afghan Government has approved seven
of the ten recommendations submitted to them by the
Special Electoral Reform Commission. Raising the
quota for the participation of women in district and
provincial electoral processes to 25 per cent constitutes
one of the most important recommendations.

My country welcomes the recent appointment of
officials to various areas of the public administration.
Such decisions also strengthen the institutions of the
State. However, as pointed out in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/942), the Afghan authorities
must take appropriate measures in order to be able
to appoint officials to fill the vacancies in public
institutions that are of paramount importance for
the functioning of the country, such as the Ministry
of Defence and the Office of the Attorney General.
Likewise, it is extremely important to strengthen the
presence and role of the State across the entire country,
a step which would boost the trust of the Afghan people
in their national institutions.

Together with the threat of violent extremism, drug
trafficking represents a serious obstacle to the stability
and development of Afghanistan. That aforementioned
illegal activity is the main source of funding for the
Taliban, enabling them to engage in their terrorist
activities. Today, we welcome the fact that there has
been a decrease in the poppy harvests compared to
last year. Nonetheless, the trade and trafficking in
drugs across the region continue to represent a major
challenge to the Afghan authorities. In particular, we
acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the Government
in this area with the assistance of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. We reiterate that the
effective fight against drugs requires international
cooperation, including with neighbouring countries, to
prevent, combat and eliminate this scourge.

That is why, under the principle of common and
shared responsibility in the fight against global drug
problem, multilateral efforts involving both producers
and consumers countries need to be redoubled. The
reduction and eradication of crops must be accompanied
by simultaneous measures to reduce demand in the
drug-consuming countries. Only then can terrorist
organizations operating in Afghanistan be cut off from
financial resources resulting from the illegal trade in
narcotics.

Moreover, it must be remembered that achieving
a firm and lasting peace in Afghanistan goes beyond
simply using an military approach. Accordingly,
economic and social conditions must be created to
overcome the poverty, exclusion and discrimination that
have affected citizens for decades and have been major
drivers of conflict in the country. The international
community should continue to support the people and
the Government of Afghanistan by providing resources
and building capacity to promote the country's
comprehensive development.

Our country expresses its concern at the ongoing
attacks by terrorist groups. According to the report of
the Secretary-General, the number of people affected
rose by 26 per cent, with targeted attacks and clashes
being the greatest cause of violence against civilians. In
this regard, we are concerned by the 10 per cent increase
in the numbers of children killed in conflict as well as
by the sexual abuse to which this vulnerable group is
victim. We condemn these actions, as they constitute
a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, with criminal
consequences. Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to implement the National Action
Plan for Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000).
However, we regret that the Taliban is continuing to
perpetrate attacks and kidnappings against women in
Afghanistan.

In the field of international humanitarian law,
we join the Secretary-General's expressions of
condemnation on the air attack on a hospital run by
Medecins Sans Frontieres in Kunduz on 3 October,
which unfortunately led to the death or injury of some
30 civilians, including patients and medical staff. We
hope that, given the gravity of this unfortunate incident,
the investigations being carried out by Afghanistan and
the United States will shed light on this regrettable
event and apportion the relevant accountability in the
hopes that such actions are not repeated in the future.

Likewise, we express our concern over the
increasing number of internally displaced persons.
This year it reached the figure of 235,000 people, which
amounts to an increase of 70 per cent as compared to
the previous year. According to the Secretary-General's
report, the year 2015 will be the worst year since 2002
in relation to internally displaced persons caused by
conflict. While it has not been possible to put an end
to armed conflict with a View to achieving needed
stability, we have continued to see a steady increase in
such victims.

Finally, we encourage the Government of
Afghanistan to pursue its efforts within a comprehensive
and inclusive political process leading to the
establishment of a firm and lasting peace. We estimate
that achieving this goal is linked to the commitment of
the Taliban insurgency to resume the peace talks that
began earlier this year. To that end, the participation
of all sectors of Afghan society is required, together
with the assistance of the international community and
the United Nations, especially UNAMA, to which we
extend our gratitude for the work done. We pay tribute
to the officials of the Mission, who with professionalism
and dedication, have carried out their tasks in a setting
that is not without risks and challenges.

