Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me at the outset stress
that I appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, to
provide the members of the Council with an
opportunity to briefly reflect on the year that is almost
over and to consider what lessons have been learned
that might be useful for the year ahead. This
opportunity is particularly appreciated by my
delegation, which - along with those of our
colleagues from Ireland, Mauritius, Singapore and your
own country, Colombia - is leaving the Council. The
permanent five members of the Council can draw on
their extensive institutional memory, but the elected
members have to start almost anew every time they
serve on this body. Norway last served on the Security
Council in 1979 and 1980, and both the world and the
Council were very different in those days.

Our first lesson learned is thus the need for new
elected members to be assisted in every way possible
by other members of the Council. Elected members
should therefore do their utmost to give their
successors a flying start by sharing their experiences,
not only on the substantive issues before the Council
but also on procedural questions and on the working
methods of the Council.

Another lesson learned is the importance of unity
in the Council. It is when we are able to speak with one
voice that the impact of our decisions is greatest. This
has been demonstrated on several occasions during the
past year. Unity is particularly important with regard to
one of the most difficult issues before the Council -
the situation in the Middle East. Decisions made by the
Council in 2002 might not have had an immediate
impact on the situation on the ground in that very
troubled part of the world. However, the Council has
been able to express views that will be important when
the parties are again able to sit down and negotiate a
peace agreement that will benefit the peoples on all
sides. The fact that the Council has expressed a vision
for a Palestinian State is important. We should continue
to strive for unity in our deliberations on the Middle
East. The Council will have an opportunity to do so
again this afternoon and, I am certain, on several
occasions in the coming year.

A third lesson learned is the need for Council
members to assume a special responsibility for certain
issues. The Council's workload has now become so
great that we all depend on the expertise not only of the
excellent United Nations Secretariat but also of other
members to provide information and insight that will
be useful to us all. Norway has tried to carry its share
of this responsibility by trying to coordinate the
Council's work on the Horn of Africa. In Ethiopia and
Eritrea the Council has been instrumental in helping
the parties to move towards sustainable peace, but
there is still a lot of work to be done to complete the
peace process and reconcile the two countries. The
Council's continued engagement is needed to ensure
implementation of the Border Commission's decision,
and the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
still plays a crucial role in maintaining peace along the
border.

In Somalia, the Council has tried to support the
peace process, led by the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development, and to focus on attempts to limit the
flow of arms to the country. However, even if the
warring parties agree to a peace agreement in Eldoret,
there is a distinct need for continued and coordinated
pressure and assistance from the international
community to ensure stability and security. We
anticipate stronger coordination efforts concerning the
Somalia conflict to be carried out within the United
Nations framework, as well as in a regional context.
The Council continues to have an important role to
play in this connection, and we encourage it to act
resolutely on forthcoming recommendations from
United Nations experts monitoring the arms embargo.

A fourth and final lesson learned as we look to
2003 is the need to continue the work with so-called
thematic issues and to make our deliberations on these
issues as relevant as possible to the good work being
done in peace operations around the world. Norway
believes strongly in the importance of issues such as
protection of civilians in armed conflict and children
and armed conflict. Debates in the Council and reports
by the Secretary-General on these and other issues are
important in and of themselves. However, the impact is
much greater if we follow up with concrete action.
Norway did so in March of this year when it produced,
in cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat and
others, an aide-memoire on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We hope that in 2003 the Council
will also approach thematic issues with the aim of
translating words into concrete action.

Finally, the Norwegian delegation would like to
express its gratitude to the other members of the
Council for the cooperation they have extended to us. I
would like also to thank the Secretariat, and I would
like to like to express special thanks to my own staff
for their dedication and hard work throughout our two
years on the Council.

