Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank the Permanent representative of
Belgium in his capacity as Chair ofthe Security Council
Sanctions Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia, for his detailed briefing on the
Committee's activities and the relevant information on
its most salient work covering the period from June to
October. We reiterate our support for the efforts made
by the Chair ofthe Committee in effectively discharging
his responsibilities. As Chair of the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
we greatly appreciate his commitment to working in
an open, transparent and objective manner with all
members of the Committee, in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

As we heard from the Permanent Representative
of Belgium, the Committee pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) has a critical and vital role to play in establishing
security and stability in Somalia, particularly in
the context of implementing the sanctions regime,
insofar as this is an effective way to help the Federal
Government of Somalia prevent weapons falling into
the hands of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups, as
well as to dry up sources of financing to those terrorist
groups by imposing the embargo on Somali charcoal.

We commend the progress made by the Federal
Government of Somalia in the management of its
weapons and ammunition. We also commend the tangible
improvement in the notification system following
the partial lifting of the arms embargo imposed on
Somalia. Furthermore, we welcome the outcome of the
second Somalia Partnership Forum, held in Mogadishu
earlier this month. The Forum has important positive
implications for structuring the budget of the Federal
Government and national development plans, as well
as for supporting the transition plan for transferring
security responsibilities in the country from the forces
of the African Union Mission in Somalia to the Somali
security forces.

In conclusion, we hope to effectively participate in
the negotiations pertaining to the renewal of the Panel
of Experts' mandate in November. We hope to realize
our shared vision to support the Somali people so that
they can build an inclusive Federal State that safeguards
human rights and the basic freedoms of all its citizens.

The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
