Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): I would like
to begin, Sir, by congratulating you on behalf of the
Government of Angola, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Your diplomatic skills
are a guarantee that you will ably guide the work of this
body. I also congratulate the outgoing President, His
Excellency Ambassador Zbigniew Wlosowicz, for the
excellent work he performed during his mandate last
month.

I would like also to express our appreciation for the
efforts made by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for peace in Angola. His recent visit was a testimony of
his commitment to the rapid settlement of the Angolan
conflict, and contributed a great deal to speeding up the
peace process.

We acknowledge as well the performance of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye, and that of the member countries
of the troika of observers of the Angolan peace process:
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States.

Just a few days ago, this Council and the
international community witnessed an important turning
point in the history of Angola: the inauguration of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and the
return of UNITA members to Parliament finally occurred,
allowing for the first time the beginnings of the normal
operation of the democratic institutions that were put in
place after the general elections of 1992.

On behalf of the people and the Government of
Angola, we would like to reiterate our thanks for the
presence and solidarity of the Heads of State or
Government of Portugal, Zimbabwe, Zambia, South
Africa, Malawi, Mali, Gabon, Congo, Sao Tome and
Principe, Namibia, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau; the
Vice-President of Ghana; the Prime Minister of
Mozambique; the Secretary-General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU); and representatives of the
European Union and other Governments for being at the
swearing-in ceremony of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation.

These two important events can be viewed as an
indicator of the political stability in our country, and of
the fact that the Angolans, who in the past fought one
another with weapons because of their political

 

differences, now find themselves on the same side, fighting
for the higher interests of their country and of the whole
Angolan people.
We acknowledge that the inauguration of the
Government and the Parliament took place at a time when
there are important tasks still to be accomplished, but as
Prime Minister Franca Van Dunem stated,

"we wanted to instill more confidence in the
peace process with that gesture".

The premises are thus established for us to attain our
main objective, which is the establishment of the true rule
of law, under which the individual and collective rights of
all citizens will be respected and protected by law, and
under which the political differences and the different
parties can find in the Parliament an appropriate forum for
discussions and review.

The actual beginning of the mandate of the new
Government and the new Parliament, an event cheered by
our people, by the national political forces and by the
international community, is one of a series of significant
steps already concluded under the peace process for
Angola. That makes us assert that war is becoming a matter
of the past, while peace and stability are a day-to-day
reality.

The road that took us to that goal was a long and
difficult one. It demanded tremendous dedication, numerous
sacrifices and a high spirit of flexibility. The relative peace
that Angola has experienced for approximately three years
is the fruit of that effort, and it constitutes the most
precious thing that the people are enjoying after two
decades of violence and destruction.

It is also important, however, to underscore that the
inauguration of the new Government and the establishment
of the new Parliament do not mean that the peace process
in Angola has entirely reached its objectives, and certainly
do not signal its end.

There is still a lot to be done before we achieve
effective peace and stability country-wide. The priorities are
the extension of State administration throughout the
country, which will ensure free movement of people and
goods; the return of refugees and displaced persons to their
places of origin; and the re-establishment of normal social
and economic activity in those areas.

The conclusion of the formation of the Angolan
Armed Forces and the social reintegration of former
combatants is another fundamental issue to be tackled
during this current stage. We are confident that these and
other clauses of the Lusaka Protocol will be implemented
very shortly.

Angola is now entering a new era of its history, one
that will bring an end to the almost three decades of war
that have ravaged the country. The burden caused by the
war is very heavy, and given the current economic and
financial situation, the Angolan Government alone will
not be able to mitigate its negative impact. We therefore
appeal to the international community to continue to
render its valuable support.

In this context, the Angolan Government recalls that
it is time to speed up implementation of the programme
of community rehabilitation and national reconciliation,
adopted during the Brussels Round Table Conference,
where the international community pledged almost $1
billion for the programme.

In the same vein, we would like to thank the
Secretary-General for launching a consolidated inter-
agency appeal in the amount of $228.4 million, whose
goal is to meet the most pressing humanitarian needs of
the Angolan population.

The draft resolution before the Council today
contains important requirements for the completion of the
Angolan peace process. The pertinent recommendations
in paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/ 1997/304), regarding the phased and gradual
withdrawal of the contingent of UNAVEM. III, as well as
those in operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, are
proof of the sincerity and responsibility with which the
Angolan peace process has proceeded. The vigilance
therein reflects the situation on the ground, which leads
us to advance step by step towards the consolidation of
the peace process to which the United Nations as a whole
and the Security Council in particular have contributed,
for the sake of peace in southern Africa and in the world.

The future of Angola is now in the hands of
Angolans, and we believe we will be able to demonstrate
that all the statements made on 9 and ll April 1997 were
not just empty words. The courage, tenacity and spirit of
sacrifice with which we have always faced adversity in
the past will now enable us to move ahead towards a new
Angola and will bear the fruits of peace and prosperity
for all Angolans.

 

What I am going to say now is equally important.
Angola, which is in southern Africa, fought a bloody war
against South Africa for several years after its war of
independence from colonialism. After apartheid, Angola
entered its civil war, and today Angola is already
experiencing a trend of peace. This is very important
because Angola can now join the whole of southern Africa
in an atmosphere of peace, stability and development.
We would like to thank, in this regard, all the
Governments, United Nations humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations for their generosity towards
the population affected by the war and to pay tribute to
those who have sacrificed their lives in the service of peace
in Angola.

Finally, we would like to stress that it is no longer the
time, in this Council, to use language such as "both sides"
or "both parties", as we did before, because today we have
already sworn in a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. Operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution
before the Security Council, which reflects this idea, must
be clarified, naming those who are to blame and not left as
it is to give its current confusing idea.

