President Waqa: It is my honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island
developing States. We align ourselves with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Maldives on
behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.

At the outset, I would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the Government of Sweden for hosting
today's important debate. For nearly a decade, our group
has been advocating at the United Nations for a robust
response to the security implications of climate change
and so we fully appreciate the courage that Sweden has
shown in taking on this sensitive issue.

Since acknowledging that the adverse effects of
climate change may aggravate certain existing threats
to international peace and security, the Security Council
has begun to consider the issue according to specific
geopolitical contexts. In our view, it is essential that we
begin examining the ways that climate change interacts
with the drivers of conflict and how the United Nations
system can respond appropriately.

The Paris Agreement notwithstanding, climate
change is not going away. There will be no return to
a normal climate in our lifetime. In fact, the situation
will continue to deteriorate for decades, even if we
achieve our global goals. Extreme events are projected
to occur at a frequency and magnitude well outside
human experience and we must take seriously the
potential for abrupt climate change to cross dangerous
tipping points. There is strong scientific evidence
that natural systems are increasingly out of balance.
However, we do not have a good understanding of
how our human systems will be impacted by such new
and unprecedented stressors. Some of the greatest
threats posed by climate change may be not the actual
biophysical impacts, but rather the deficiencies in
our response to them. Greater competition for scarce
resources, the destruction of critical infrastructure, the
interruption of public services and human displacement
will all test the resilience of our institutions and
governance structures.

Climate change will be the defining issue of the
next century and our preparation is long overdue. That
is why the Pacific small island developing States are
calling for the appointment of a special representative
of the Secretary-General on climate and security.
The special representative would fill a critical gap
within the United Nations system, as well as provide
the Council with the information it needs to fulfil its
existing mandate. Monitoring potential tipping points at
the nexus of climate and security; facilitating regional
and cross-border cooperation on issues affected by
climate change; engaging in preventive diplomacy
and supporting post-conflict situations when climate
change is a risk factor are all critical functions that
a Special Representative could begin to address, in
coordination with other relevant United Nations bodies.

The Pacific small island developing States first
offered that proposal in 2011 and we have made every
effort to address the concerns of all countries, the
greatest of which has been the fear of encroachment by
Security Council on other mandates of other bodies. Let
me be clear: the appointment of a Special Representative
should not expand the Security Council's mandate. The
Special Representative serves the Secretary-General,
as the title implies. That being said, the Council
needs better climate-related security risk information,
analysis and early-warning mechanisms to be able
to make informed decisions and carry out its main
functions of preventing conflict and sustaining peace.
That is consistent with the intent ofthe 2011 presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/ 18) and fully supportive of
recent Security Council resolutions on the Lake Chad
basin, West Africa, the Sahel and Somalia.

Seven years ago, my predecessor sounded the
alarm in the Chamber (see S/PV.6587) and the Council
demurred. Since then, the security risks of climate
change - along with global emissions - have only
grown. The Security Council, along with the United
Nations system, as a whole, needs a coherent approach
to address this pressing issue. The Council has taken a

few tepid steps in the right direction, but it is not enough,
which is why the Pacific small island developing States
reiterate their call for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on climate and
security. We strongly urge all members of the Council
to join us.

