Mr. Dembassa Worogagoi (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of China, who did a remarkable job during
the month of November.

Once again, the population of Bangui woke up this
morning under heavy fire, which resulted in lives lost
and people injured and displaced. Nevertheless, I am
pleased to make this statement to the Council on behalf
of a country of 623,000 square kilometres, namely, the
Central African Republic, where 4.5 million women,
children and men now have the hope that a chapter of
humiliation, serious human rights violations, looting
and destruction in their history will soon be closed for
good.

The vote on the resolution just adopted (resolution 2127 (2013)) gives us reason to believe that a new dawn
will rise on the Central African Republic. That text
will help us deal with the four emergencies facing the
country.

The first emergency concerns security. Today's
events in Bangui highlight the urgency of action. We
trust the African force - the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic, which
is supported by French forces and has a mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations - to
restore domestic peace and protect all communities
irrespective of their ethnicity or religion. However,
we want to emphasize that in a country as large as the
Central African Republic, that cannot be done without
the contribution of the Central African armed forces,
which need to be restructured.

The second emergency is humanitarian in nature.
Non-governmental organizations must be allowed to
provide assistance to populations in distress and in
need, and the displaced populations must return.

The third emergency concerns justice, which is a
prerequisite for genuine national reconciliation. In that
respect, we welcome the steps already taken and the
actions to be taken, which are listed in the resolution.

The fourth and final emergency is has to do with
reconstruction and the revival of economic activity.
With the coming return of secure conditions, we call on
the country's development partners to help the country
break free from the vicious circle of poverty and
destitution that underlie rebellions and coups d'etat.

Today, our country is emerging from oblivion. The
people of the Central African Republic now feel that
they are full members of the community of nations.

I would like to pay special tribute to France, the
author and sponsor of the resolution just adopted. I
also take this opportunity to welcome the steadfast
commitment of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the search for lasting solutions to the
Central African crisis. The presence of troops from
its member States in the Central African Republic has
prevented the country from falling into total chaos.

Let me also thank the other sponsors of the
resolution and all the other members of the Security
Council, while not forgetting the countries that are
friends of the Central African Republic.

We express our sincere thanks to the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union, all our bilateral
and multilateral partners and non-governmental
organizations for their contribution to the search for
peace and development in my country. We express our
deep gratitude to the international press for helping our
country emerge from oblivion.

The Central African Republic wants to write a new
page in its history. We are ready to fight the battle for
freedom and against poverty, which is the legitimate
rebellion of the people, so that we can finally sing our
national anthem along with the Founding Father of the
Central African Republic, Barthelemy Boganda:

"Oh! Central Africa, cradle of the Bantu!
Take up again your right to respect, to life!
Long subjugated, long scorned by all,

But, from today, breaking tyranny's hold.
Through work, order and dignity

You reconquer your rights, your unity,
And to take this new step

The voice of our ancestors call us."

