Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this meeting on
Europe Day, and of course High Representative Federica
Mogherini for her briefing and her words. As a member
of the Security Council and a founding member of the
European Union, Italy attaches great importance to
this meeting and to the cooperation between the United
Nations and the European Union..

About one month ago we celebrated in Rome the
sixtieth anniversary of the Rome Treaty and signed
a new declaration that affirms the tangible value
and current relevance of the European project. As
highlighted by Ms. Mogherini, the EU stands today
as a key world player and as a provider of peace and
development throughout the world.

In that vein, together with our European partners,
we are committed to making a constructive contribution
to strengthening the European voice at the United
Nations and in the Security Council. The decision to
split our term in the Council with another founding
member of the European Union, the Netherlands, was
shaped by our shared European values.

We live in a time of interconnected, evolving
challenges that require transnational comprehensive
solutions. The complexity of destabilizing factors
threatening our societies entails a multidimensional
response in which security, human rights and
development are closely intertwined. The United
Nations, as well as the EU and its member States, have
developed and incorporated a holistic approach into
their strategies - the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the sustaining peace agenda and
the European Union Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy, which was mentioned by the
High Representative.

(spoke in French)

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the European Union, under and beyond Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, is based on a
natural partnership that links the two organizations
as communities of shared values and principles. That
cooperation could be further developed today on the
basis of that shared understanding of the complexity of
current challenges.

(spoke in English)

First, the European Union and its member States
contribute to United Nations missions, supporting them
with a common security and defence policy mission and
working closely with regional organizations such as the
African Union. The European Union has noteworthy
engagement in international peace efforts, especially
in Africa, for instance in Somalia and the Central
African Republic, in Mali with EU military training
mission, and in Libya with an EU border assistance
mission. As the High Representative stated, the recent
decision to establish a military planning and conduct
capability will provide an additional tool to improve the
effectiveness of the EU as a security partner.

In strengthening those capacities we should never
forget or compromise our values. That means, first and
foremost, protecting and saving lives. That is what we
are doing relentlessly every day in the Mediterranean
off the Libyan coast, thanks to Operation Sophia. In less
than two years, with 25 EU members participating in
the Operation led by Admiral Credendino, over 34,000
people have been rescued and more than 100 smugglers
arrested. Those figures are clear proof of the added
value provided by the European Union. The decision
of the High Representative to give the Operation the
name of a baby born aboard a vessel reminds us that
combating human-trafficking networks is a collective
moral duty and a shared security priority. Italy will
continue to address that plight through a comprehensive
approach aimed at tackling its root causes, dismantling
the business model oftraffickers and saving lives at sea.

Secondly, the European Union is a global driver
of peace. As a union of half a billion people, among
the main economic powers in the world and the
first investor in development corporation, the EU
is a builder and keeper of the peace, security and
development continuum. That gives the European
Union unparalleled potential to contribute to the surge
in diplomacy advocated by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Antonio Guterres. We strongly support his push for
a shift from crisis management to crisis prevention. We
believe that this approach should drive the reform of the
United Nations peace and security pillar, including its
partnerships with regional organizations.

The European project has displayed its magnetic
force since its foundation. Along with the widening of
its borders, democracy, stability and development have
stretched all over the continent. Today it continues to
exert the same power of attraction, moving towards
enlargement to neighbouring countries. I underscore in
that regard the vital role it plays in the Western Balkans.
A credible EU enlargement policy represents the unique
path for countries in the Western Balkans to consolidate
inclusive, democratic and resilient societies. The United
Nations and the European Union should be resolute in
encouraging them to work together for a better future.

Moreover, the European Union is endowed with
a set of diverse and effective tools to facilitate the
political solution of crises - a goal that is at the top
of the agenda of the Union and its members, starting
with Syria, Libya and the Middle East as a whole.
In coordination with other international regional
actors, the Union is proactively engaged in diplomatic
efforts to find a peaceful settlement to protracted and
unresolved conflicts in Europe. Ending the crisis in
Ukraine remains a top priority for the European Union,
which is providing its utmost support to the Security
Council's call for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

Last but not least, I turn to development. The
European Union is the world's leading donor, as was
recalled here, and provides more than 50 per cent
of global development aid. Bridging humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation while
promoting human rights, the rule of law and good
governance, the European Union is a major partner
of the United Nations and its agencies in the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Our common endeavour to eradicate extreme poverty,
tackle the effects of climate change, strengthen fragile
institutions, protect human rights and build confidence
and dialogue among communities is the primary
antidote to the spread of conflict.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, in all of the areas I mentioned,
we think that corporation and coordination between
the United Nations and the European Union could be
further strengthened in order to take full advantage of
their respective potential, in keeping with the principles
of complementarity and subsidiarity.

