Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, and your delegation on organizing this high-
level meeting to review the journey in Iraq. I would
also like to acknowledge the remarkable effort of the
Secretary-General on behalf of our Organization, and
welcome him to this meeting.

Today's Iraq bears little resemblance to its image
at the outset of Operation Iraqi Freedom. A new Iraq
has emerged, with a fledgling democratic system
supported by the presence of international combat

troops and the United Nations. It is evident that Iraq
enjoys stability and self-governance to a far greater
extent than it did a decade ago. In spite of the phased
withdrawal of the bulk of international combat troops
from its territory, it appears that the country is
regaining its strength and operational capacity.

After months of political stalemate following the
elections of 7 March, it is heartwarming that Iraq's
political leaders have finally agreed on the formation
of a new, inclusive partnership Government. Nigeria is
encouraged by this demonstration of unity in the
country, involving the Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish
communities. This, we believe, is a long-awaited and
important milestone.
The path to true and lasting political stability and
economic independence is a difficult one for any
nation, not least for a country emerging from war. By
way of example, the provision of basic infrastructure
and services presents ongoing challenges to the Iraqi
people. We are therefore pleased to note the planned
implementation of a five-year National Development
Plan. We are convinced that the implementation of the
Plan within the context of the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework will help to
address the current gaps in infrastructure and service
provision.

Given the recent history of Iraq, there is a
continuing imperative for international support and
partnership. We welcome the extension by six months
of the immunity granted to the Development Fund for
Iraq (DFI) to support the Government's efforts in
setting up the successor mechanism to the
DFI/International Advisory and Monitoring Board. We
particularly welcome the adoption of the resolutions
bringing the oil-for-food programme to an end and
removing Iraq from numerous Chapter VII measures.

While we are encouraged by the progress that has
been made in terms of Iraq's relationships with its
neighbours, we hope that these positive measures will
help to reinforce the confidence of the international
community in Iraq's Government and its people. To
ensure sustainable outcomes, it remains important that
Iraq's Government work assiduously to fulfil all of its
remaining obligations under Chapter VII, including
those owed in respect of Kuwait. We are pleased that
this morning His Excellency Mr. Zebari totally
reaffirmed Iraq's commitment to meeting its
international obligations.

The security situation in Iraq remains dire. We
commend the Iraqi forces for assuming leadership of
their security following the end of the United States
combat operation in August 2009. However, insurgent
elements continue to feature in Iraqi life, causing
mayhem with targeted terror attacks against innocent
civilians, including minorities and religious
sanctuaries. Such incidents are a grim reminder of the
fragility of the security situation and the obligation to
guarantee the rights of minorities, particularly
Christians and other vulnerable persons.

The Government of Iraq should thoroughly
investigate and hold accountable the persons behind all
acts of violence in the country. In cooperation with the
Iraqi authorities, we must bring to justice all
perpetrators, organizers, financers and sponsors of
terrorism who seek to dismantle the hard-won
democracy in Iraq.

Iraq's future hangs in the balance for several
reasons, not least of which the fragile security
situation. Although 50,000 United States troops will
remain in Iraq, their role will be essentially
non-combat. This shift will create a window of
vulnerability in the country's security framework that
extremists could possibly exploit. The Council should
therefore lend its weight to further operational and
logistical training and counter-terrorism support for
Iraq's security sector. Now more than ever, Iraq needs
the backing of the international community in order
that we might declare with one voice that no terrorist
act can reverse the path towards peace, democracy and
reconstruction in Iraq - a peace representing the
shared aspiration of the people and Government of Iraq
and the international community.

