Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes the
ongoing focus of the Security Council on the issue of
children and armed conflict. We are grateful for the
opportunity provided by this open debate to highlight
our concern regarding the impact of armed conflict on
children around the world.

We are encouraged by the report of the Secretary-
General on this issue, the creation of a monitoring and
reporting mechanism and, in support of a framework of
compliance, the development and implementation of
time-bound action plans. Those efforts reflect the
progress made since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) and represent concrete steps to
improve the security and rights of children affected by
armed conflict.

We encourage efforts to sustain the momentum
and progress achieved to date as we move from the
first phase of implementation of that important
resolution. Central to that is the effective operation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, and we
encourage full cooperation with United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel as they undertake the
collection and verification of information on
recruitment practices and other grave violations against
children. Their safe and unhindered access is
paramount to the ongoing implementation of resolution
1612 (2005), but is a common impediment cited in the
Secretary-General's report.

Situations of armed conflict give rise to a number
of grave violations against children, not only through
their recruitment as soldiers, including that undertaken
by terrorist organizations, but also at the hands of those
who take advantage of their extreme vulnerability.

In that vein, we agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation that equal weight should be
given to all categories of grave violations. No
hierarchy can be ascribed to the violations suffered by
children in times of armed conflict. Physical abuse,

sexual abuse, attacks upon schools, abductions and the
denial of access to humanitarian assistance all
represent grave violations of children's rights that
deserve and demand the attention and response of the
international community. Such violations also leave a
lasting imprint on health and psychological well-being,
with untold consequences for a child's future.

No individuals or groups can be outside the law.
Against that background, we note the laying of charges
against one individual by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, regarding the enlisting
and conscripting of children under the age of 15 years
and using them to participate actively in hostilities.
This case, which is currently in a pre-trial hearing
phase, is a landmark in the fight against impunity for
these crimes. This important step builds upon
jurisprudence of other international criminal tribunals
such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which
confirmed in 2004 that the recruitment of child soldiers
has for some time entailed individual criminal
responsibility. Australia welcomes these developments
in international law which highlight the plight of
children forced to fight adult wars and which further
the fight against impunity.

Australia is supporting a number of measures to
mitigate the impact of conflict on children in the Asia-
Pacific region. In the northern and eastern conflict-
affected areas of Sri Lanka we are supporting
UNICEF's efforts to prevent and respond to all forms
of conflict-related violence with activities including
psychosocial care, community-based protection and
recruitment-prevention efforts. In East Timor, we have
provided financial support for child protection officers
to work in camps for internally displaced persons to
ensure the safety, security and well-being of children
displaced as a result of the recent conflict. In the
southern region of Mindanao in the Philippines,
Australian funding to UNICEF is assisting conflict-
affected communities to ensure their children have
access to immunization, education and protection. We
commend the role of UNICEF in these and other
similar situations to ensure that children's rights are
upheld both in principle and in practice and that the
physical and emotional needs of children affected by
armed conflict are met.
Australia also supports calls by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to look beyond "band-aid"
solutions to long-term development responses that
comprehensively address the critical reintegration and
rehabilitation needs of children affected by armed
conflict. We thank the Special Representative for her
leadership and commitment.

On a positive note, I am pleased to report to the
Security Council that, following Australia's deposit of
its instrument of ratification, the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict entered
into force in Australia on 26 October 2006. This
highlights the Australian Government's continuing
commitment not only to the promotion and protection
of children's rights in this area but also to the broader
objectives of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and the gravity with which we view violations
of the Convention.

As a prosperous and vigorous democracy,
Australia is recognized for the protections it affords
children through its laws and institutions. At the
international level, we are also strongly committed to
efforts aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of
children. We call upon States to make serious efforts to
report in detail violations of children's rights and to
implement action plans, as outlined in Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005). The efforts of States will
determine the success of these measures in preventing
the abuse of children and in alleviating their suffering
during times of armed conflict.

