Ms. Lee (Singapore): The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, is one of the
most complex and intractable problems on the Security
Council's agenda. It is therefore both appropriate and
opportune for the Security Council to hold this open
debate to take stock ofthe deteriorating situation on the
ground, the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions - in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) - as well as the intensive diplomatic
efforts that are ongoing to help bring the parties back
to a political process. The situation demands the
continued and sustained attention and engagement of
the Security Council.

The current situation remains worrying, even if
the events there are not grabbing the headlines on a
daily basis. In fact, the lack of attention being paid by
the international community is a cause of grave
concern. A sense of normalcy should not be created in
an extremely abnormal situation. The Palestinian
people are put through daily humiliations as they move
through closures and checkpoints, and often suffer
casualties as a result of frequent Israeli military
incursions. At the same time, we cannot but imagine
the fear and horror that the Israeli population is
subjected to as suicide bombings continue unabated.
Singapore deplores in the strongest terms all acts of
terror and the targeting of civilians. We look forward to
receiving the Secretary-General's report mandated by
General Assembly resolution ES-lO/lO on the recent
events that took place in Jenin and other Palestinian
cities. Establishing the facts objectively would help the
parties move forward.
Singapore believes that the best way of
addressing the situation is through the implementation
of existing Security Council resolutions. Non-
implementation of Security Council resolutions
weakens the authority of the Security Council,
including its ability to ensure full compliance with its
other resolutions. While the necessary political will and
courage from the parties are ultimately needed to do so,
it is also clear that the Security Council and other
international players have a role in helping the parties
implement the resolutions.

That is amply demonstrated by the diplomatic
efforts that helped lift the restrictions placed on
Chairman Yasser Arafat in his Ramallah compound and
the siege on the Church of the Nativity by the Israel
Defence Force. Similarly, international assistance is
urgently needed to strengthen and reform the
Palestinian Authority, in particular its security
structures, to help it take action against acts of terror.
We welcome current efforts to reform the Palestinian
Authority, which should continue while steps are taken
to advance the political process.

In that regard, we look forward to a positive
outcome from the next meeting of the "quartet" in
Washington, D.C., which is scheduled for tomorrow,
Friday, 14 June. We hope that meeting will further the
preparations for an international conference on the
Middle East. Through the efforts of the Secretary-
General, the quartet has truly become an important
political reality and instrument. We hope that the
quartet will continue to be strengthened, both as a
forum to consolidate the views of a broad and
influential range of international players, as well as a
catalyst for peace initiatives. We pledge our full
support to the role played by the Secretary-General and
his envoys, who have so ably represented the United
Nations and our collective voices in the quartet.

The international conference should build on
existing peace agreements and understandings reached
between the parties, including the negotiations at Camp
David in 2000 and the subsequent discussions at Taba,
as well as Arab peace initiatives. It is important that
the international conference build on a framework that
addresses security, peace and economic distress in
parallel. Only by adopting such a comprehensive
framework can the security needs of the Israel and
political aspirations of the Palestinian people be
addressed simultaneously.

At the end of the day, it bears repeating that there
is no military solution to the conflict and that violence
cannot take the place of negotiations. There will be no
real improvement in the situation except by giving both
the Israeli and Palestinian people hope. Public opinion
in both societies is being radicalized by events on the
ground. While hope remains that credible peace
negotiations could swing such public opinion around,
the longer it takes for a political process to take root,
the more entrenched such extremist public opinion will
become. It is therefore more urgent than ever to move
beyond the crisis-management phase to a crisis-solving
phase. We hope that the Security Council will be able
to contribute to turning things around in the Middle
East by speaking with one voice, a point that has also
been emphasized by previous speakers.

