Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I thank Ambassadors Quinlan,
Loulichki and Oh for their briefings and their leadership
of their respective Committees. I also associate myself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

I should like to speak briefly about each of the
three Committees, beginning with the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. The threat of Al-Qaida is unfortunately still
alive, as the Nairobi attack a few weeks ago and the
murder this month of two French journalists near Kidal,
Mali, reminded us.

Ifthe fight against Al-Qaida is to progress, we must
remain vigilant in the implementation of sanctions.
It is therefore crucial that the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee continue to work closely with all Member
States in order to ensure the effective implementation
of the sanctions regime and the regular updating of the
list, which must optimally reflect the state ofthe threat.
In this regard, we welcome the Committee's holding of
meetings dedicated to the fight against the spread ofthis
threat, such as that held in April on Mali and that to be
held in early December on the Sahel. The organization
of such events, involving the States of the region in
the debate on sanctions against Al-Qaida, ensures that
the regime responds to the new challenges in the fight
against that organization in areas particularly affected
by this threat.

Above and beyond the importance we attach to the
effective implementation sanctions, we also feel it to be
essential that they respect the fundamental freedoms
of persons on the list and that the sanctions regime
has adequate procedural safeguards. Ambassador
Quinlan was right to insist on that point in his briefing.
We welcome the outstanding work of Ombudsman
Kimberley Prost, who has been doing critical work to
that end for more than three years.

Over the past year, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism has done rich work and focused on pursuing
several initiatives, in perfect tune with topics of interest
to the Council. On the Sahel, for example, several events
have taken place, including a conference convened in
March in Rabat on border control in the Sahel, and
the organization of a special meeting on the Sahel in
September.

Next month, the Security Council will renew the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. I
wish to make two comments in that regard.

In its new mandate, it is essential that the Committee
continue to attach the greatesy importance to the due
implementation by Member States of the Council's
decisions concerning the fight against terrorism,
namely, resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).
In recent years, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate has carried out a significant
number of visits to inform the Committee on the status
of implementation of those resolutions by Member
States. It will now be crucial to pursue that dialogue
with Member States by ensuring regular follow-up to
those visits.

The second point I would like to make is that it
is essential that the Committee continue to accord the
highest importance to respect for human rights in the
fight against terrorism. In that respect, I would like to
welcome the fact that on 24 October Ms. Pillay, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, paid a
visit to the Committee. I wish to highlight that regular
dialogue between the Committee and the Office of the
High Commissioner is an excellent practice, one that
should continue.

I would like to pay tribute to Mike Smith, who has
done an outstanding job at the head of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. I take this
opportunity to congratulate his successor, Mr. Jean-
Paul Laborde, on assuming his functions and wish him
every success.

Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
1540 Committee. I wish to recall that the proliferation
of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and their
means of delivery and related materials and the risk
of them falling into the hands of terrorists are real
threats, and that States should maintain and strengthen
their commitment to fighting those threats. The
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) plays an
important role in the prevention of those threats, and
the progress achieved since its adoption in 2004 is
important.

Today, a majority of States around the world have
adopted measures to include the provisions of that
resolution in their national legislation. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts of the South Korean chair
aimed at encouraging the handful of countries that
have not yet done so to report to the Committee on
the implementation of that resolution in their national
legislation.

However, for those reports to be relevant, they must
above all be sincere, and that is not always the case. In
that respect, the 1540 Committee received a new report
from Syria in May. In that report, as in previous ones,
Damascus once again failed to mention the existence of
its military chemical programme. Since the chemical
attack at Ghouta, in August, Syria has acknowledged
that it owns several tons of chemical weapons. Under
international pressure, it agreed to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention and, consequently, to destroy
those weapons. Syria's use of chemical weapons against
its own population reminds us that we must remain
vigilant with regard to Syrian statements. We must not
lower our guard.

I note that the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), on the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons,
which requires that the Council be informed of any
violation of resolution 1540 (2004), will contribute to
improving the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and thus to strengthening our collective security.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the fight
against terrorism must be coordinated. We also rely
heavily on the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and its working groups to make concrete progress
in that coordination. That will strengthen the coherence
and visibility of the United Nations efforts in the fight
against terrorism.

