Mr. Serry: We meet today against the backdrop of
a restive region with heightened political tensions and a
severe security threat from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front, as well as the
recent attacks by violent extremist groups from Syria
against the Lebanese Armed Forces and the internal
security forces in the Lebanese town of Arsal. Given
that the Security Council has already been seized of
those very worrisome situations, with its adoption on
15 August of resolution 2170 (2014), on countering the
threat of ISIL and the Nusra Front, and with its press
statement of4 August on Lebanon (SC/11507), I would
like to focus my briefing today on the situation in Israel
and Palestine, with an emphasis on Gaza.

As we meet, the temporary ceasefire between Israel
and Gaza, now on the fifth and last day of its current
extension, is holding, with Israeli and Palestinian
delegations in Cairo meeting separately with the
Egyptian authorities in a crucial effort to break the
deadlock of violence and retaliation. I recently travelled
to Cairo in support of those important talks, and the
Secretary-General has continued to engage with the
parties and the stakeholders to end the violence and
to reach a durable ceasefire. The hopes of the people
in Gaza for a better future and of the people in Israel
for sustainable security rest on those talks, and we
call on the delegations to live up to that responsibility.
By the deadline later today - midnight Cairo time,
or 5 pm. here in New York - we urge the parties to
reach an understanding on a durable ceasefire that also
addresses the underlying issues afflicting Gaza, or to
make substantive progress towards it. At the very least,
we hope that the ceasefire will be extended and that the
situation remains quiet.
I think we all share the relief that no blood is being
shed at the moment, but we also all regret that it has
taken too much time and too many lives to achieve
this pause. The toll of this third major escalation in
Gaza in six years is appalling. A total of almost 2,000
Palestinians have been killed, of whom 459 are children
and 239 are women. Civilians represent more than two
thirds of that total. Some 10,000 - again, roughly a
third of them children - have been injured. Sixty-
four Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers, two Israeli
civilians and one foreign national have reportedly been
killed. A few dozen Israelis have been directly injured
by rockets or shrapnel.

In the face of that devastation and loss of life, the
United Nations has mobilized its every effort, including
through the personal engagement of the Secretary-
General, and is working closely with regional and
international stakeholders to end the Violence. We did
not relent, despite setbacks, because the loss of civilian
life was so unbearable. On two occasions, we were
successful. On 17 July and 26 July, humanitarian pauses
provided civilians with a much-needed respite from
the violence. The temporary ceasefire that currently
prevails has granted civilians another such reprieve for
the past eight days, and I would like to commend the
Government of Egypt for brokering it. It is essential
that the guns remain silent to allow civilians to resume
the necessities of their daily lives and to allow for
increased humanitarian and early recovery efforts to
address the manifold needs of the people in Gaza, such
as urgent repairs to water and electricity networks and
efforts to find more viable shelter for those displaced
who are not able to return to their destroyed homes.

It remains my conviction that we must not leave
Gaza in the condition it was in before this latest
escalation. Otherwise, the restrictions on the Strip on
the exit and entry of goods and people will continue
to fuel instability, underdevelopment and conflict, and
I am afraid the next escalation will be just a matter of
time.

As I told the General Assembly recently from
Cairo, the basic equation must consist of ending the
blockade on Gaza and addressing Israel's legitimate
security concerns. That has become even more urgent
given the unprecedented amount of destruction
wrought on the Strip during this latest escalation and
the corresponding unprecedented level of humanitarian
needs. The assessment of Gaza's reconstruction needs
has not yet been completed, but there are indications
that the volume of reconstruction will be approximately
three times that needed after operation Cast Lead in
2009. Approximately 16,800 housing units have been
destroyed or severely damaged, affecting some 100,000
Palestinians.

Reconstruction is the main priority, while exports
and transfers are crucial to help Gaza's economy get
back on its feet. Construction materials - aggregate,
bar and cement - must be allowed into Gaza to that
effect, and their access to Gaza must be facilitated in
such a way that it fulfils Israel's security concerns.

The United Nations stands ready to lend its support
in that regard. For years, the United Nations has been
importing construction materials for United Nations
projects under a mechanism agreed with the Government
of Israel, which comprises robust measures to monitor
the exclusively civilian use of all materials entering
under that mechanism. That system has demonstrably
worked, prevented the diversion of materials, allowed
the successful implementation of crucial projects
and built trust. Reconstruction of the magnitude now
needed can be addressed only with the involvement at
scale of the Palestinian Authority and the private sector
in Gaza, which means that larger quantities ofmaterials
entering Gaza are required. We stand ready to explore
with the relevant stakeholders how the proven United
Nations mechanism can be expanded to monitoring
a Palestinian Authority-led, private-sector-driven
reconstruction programme in Gaza.

The engagement of the donor community will
also be indispensable to help Gaza back get back on
its feet. We support today's announcement by Norway
and Egypt that they will co-host a donor's conference
once a durable ceasefire is in place and adequate access
conditions have been established.

I am heartened that the Government of national
consensus has resolved to spearhead the reconstruction
agenda for Gaza as part of assuming its rightful
responsibilities as the legitimate Government of
Palestine, in cooperation with the United Nations and
other international partners. Last week, I met with
Deputy Prime Minister Ziad Abu Amr in Gaza. I
appreciate that he was able to enter Gaza via the Erez
crossing. After seeing with my own eyes the massive
destruction, in which entire residential neighbourhoods
were flattened, I discussed the way forward with the
Deputy Prime Minister and his Cabinet ministers.
Mr. Abu Amr assured me that the Government of national
consensus was committed to addressing the urgent and
daunting challenges of governance, reconstruction
and security as part of bringing Gaza back under one
legitimate Palestinian Government that adheres to the
Palestine Liberation Organization's commitments.
I reiterate the appeal that I made last week in Gaza.
I call on all in Gaza to rally behind the Government
of national consensus and empower it to take charge
and effect the positive, transformative change that
Gaza so badly needs. Right now, Gaza urgently needs
houses, hospitals and schools, not rockets, tunnels and
conflict. We expect Hamas and all other factions to act
responsibly in that regard and refrain from any actions
that run counter to that agenda.

We have been extremely troubled during this
escalation by breaches of the inviolability of United
Nations premises. On three occasions, there were direct
hits on United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools
that were being used at the time, with full knowledge
of the parties to the hostilities, as shelters for Gazans
who had fled their homes to seek safety from the
fighting. A total of 38 people were killed in those
three incidents, and 317 were injured. Eleven UNRWA
colleagues were killed in the line of duty. They, as
many others, have paid the ultimate price for their
heroic efforts aimed at protecting the most vulnerable
and to alleviate suffering, for which we honour their
memory. An estimated 108 UNRWA installations have
been damaged. On 29 July, the Gaza branch of my
own office, the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, was
hit by a number of projectiles, which caused damage
to the main building and to United Nations vehicles.
On three occasions, rockets were found in UNRWA
schools that were vacant at the time. Those incidents
are intolerable, and they are examples of the parties'
disrespect for the vital provisions of international law
that safeguard United Nations installations and staff
and protect civilians. The Secretary-General has called
for a thorough investigation into those incidents to
ensure full accountability.

It is not yet clear what kind of ceasefire
understanding will emerge from the talks or whether
it will be reached by the fast-approaching deadline. In
any case, we believe that a sustainable solution must
address the issues of governance, reconstruction and
security - all in the context of the return to Gaza
of one legitimate Palestinian Authority that will
undertake institutional restructuring, including of the
security sector, and that should also gradually assume
the effective and exclusive control of the use of force
through the deployment of Palestinian security forces
to border crossings and throughout Gaza. None of that
will be easy, but we see no other way to change the
dynamics in Gaza. As needed, in cooperation with
other partners such as the European Union, the United
Nations will support the Government of national
consensus in those tasks, while taking advantage of our
presence on the ground. We are ready to take on that
role provided that we are given the relevant resources
and mandate. We also underline the importance of an
international monitoring arrangement in support of the
ceasefire understandings. Given the implications for
peace and security in the region, I trust that the Council
will consider taking whatever action is needed in
support of a durable ceasefire at the appropriate time.

The flare-up in Gaza has also been accompanied
by increased tensions and violence in the West Bank.
Since 23 July, demonstrations against the Israeli
military operation in Gaza have taken place across
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, on an
almost daily basis, especially around checkpoints and
refugee camps, often resulting in clashes with Israeli
security forces. The most significant took place on
24 July during the holiest night of Ramadan, when
approximately 4,000 to 5,000 Palestinians, including
some Palestinian Authority officials, marched on the
Qalandiya checkpoint. Demonstrations and clashes
have spread as well in East Jerusalem. A total of
17 Palestinians were killed, including two children,
and some 1,400 injured during this reporting period.
Israeli security forces conducted almost 300 search-
and-arrest operations, arresting 623 Palestinians.
Seventeen Israeli security forces personnel were also
injured. Settler attacks resulted in 1 Palestinian killed
and 19 others injured. Twelve settlers were injured by
Palestinians.

On 4 August, on a street near the Green Line in
Jerusalem, an excavator driven by a Palestinian ran
over and killed an Israeli pedestrian and then turned
over a bus, injuring five Israelis. The Palestinian was
shot dead by Israeli police on the scene. On the same
day, an unknown motorcyclist shot and injured an IDF
soldier in the Mount Scopus area in Jerusalem.

Last but not least, we must not lose sight of the
bigger picture. The increasingly restive situation in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, together with the Gaza
crisis, should be a bleak warning to all concerned of
what the future will bring if we do not reverse the current
negative trend towards a one-State reality, which is now
on the parties' doorstep. The slide towards a state of
permanent conflict and hopelessness must be halted
at once. The conflict and the occupation that began in
1967 must be ended. The two-State solution is the only
viable scenario in that regard. We must urgently call
upon and support both parties to return to meaningful
negotiations towards a final status agreement in which
Israel and Palestine live side by side in peace and
security.

