Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of
the Security Council. My delegation welcomes the
presence of the Ministers of the Bahamas and Jamaica.

First, Spain expresses its profound concern at the
grave situation affecting Haiti at this moment.
Unfortunately, the crisis has only deteriorated since the
Council issued a statement on 18 February (press release SC/8004), urging both the Government and the
opposition to reach an agreement and expressed its
unanimous support for the initiative of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and the Organization of
American States.

At this afternoon's meeting, we must ask
ourselves what the Security Council can do, faced with
this grave situation, which we believe is the result of
the combination of two crises: a political crisis that has
persisted since 2001 and a security crisis generated by
the weakness of the State and triggered by armed
paramilitary forces.

In that connection, with respect to what the
Security Council can do, we have the following
comments.

First, Spain considers essential the mediation
efforts of CARICOM, whose plan of action holds the
key to a possible solution. The unfolding of events in
recent days, the grave risk of bloodshed, as well as the
catastrophic humanitarian situation and the violations
of human rights, require urgent measures to be taken in
order to find a peaceful solution to the crisis that
respects the existing constitutional framework.

Secondly, we support the dispatch of a civilian
peacekeeping force in accordance with the principles of
the Charter, which would guarantee security both for
humanitarian missions and for OAS and CARICOM
mediation missions. It would make it possible to arrive
at a political solution to the crisis and at a peaceful
outcome.

Thirdly, we consider that a United-Nations-
coordinated humanitarian assistance programme is
urgently needed.

So that all of this can take place, Spain would
support the adoption of a Security Council resolution
setting out such measures making it possible to resolve
the present situation.

Finally, in the longer term, a more ambitious
strategy must be formulated to seek to overcome the
structural problems that give rise to the recurring
political crises and outbreaks of violence in Haiti.

