Mr. al-Istrabadi (Iraq): At the outset, I should
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, for her tenure last month.

In making this statement, I am mindful that, only
two weeks ago, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, the Foreign
Minister of Iraq, made a comprehensive report about
the situation in Iraq. I shall endeavour, therefore, not to
revisit the issues he raised. I am also aware that since
the last time I addressed the Council, in September
2004, it has become a matter of routine for Iraq's
representatives to do so on occasions such as these.

Two significant events are now under way in
Baghdad. The first relates to Iraq's domestic evolution
and internal transition to democracy. I refer, of course,
to the process of writing a permanent constitution. Let
me assure the Council that my Government is keenly
aware of the need to open the process of drafting to all
segments of Iraqi society. We understand the need for
wider acceptance of the process of drafting, as well as
the substantive results. Several proposals are now
under consideration for ways and means of
accomplishing this all-important task.

In the meantime, the work of establishing the
general mechanisms of drafting - such as the creation
of committees to consider various individual issues -
has begun. We are aware that the transitional
administrative law requires the work of drafting to be
completed by 15 August, and that resolution 1546
(2004) endorsed that schedule. The Government of Iraq
remains committed to producing the draft text of a
permanent constitution by 15 August 2005.

The second event now being planned is the
international conference to be held in Brussels next
week. It will be a major step towards the reintegration
of Iraq into its rightful place in the community of
nations. The invitations to the conference were issued
to 85 participants, based upon the request of the
Government of Iraq, which has been playing a leading
role in organizing the conference. The purposes of
convening the conference, pursuant to resolution 1546
(2004), are to garner international support for Iraq
generally; to extend practical assistance in
implementing the political, economic and
reconstruction processes; and to promote the rule of
law. I am pleased to note that, in support of those aims,
the European Troika visited Baghdad on 9 June 2005.

Allow me to discuss a few salient points made in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2005/373) about
Iraq's transition to democracy. The report states that
there is ongoing concern about the state of human
rights in Iraq. Let me assure the Council and the world
community that the Government of Iraq is also
concerned about, and committed to continually
improving, the state of human rights. While we have a
way to go, we have also covered much ground in the
past two years.

We have created a Ministry of Human Rights to
assist in implementing Iraq's commitments under
international human rights law. Civil society
organizations committed to promoting human rights,
tolerance and women's rights have flourished in Iraq
over that time. International human rights
organizations, which had to work outside the country
in the past, relying on anecdotal evidence gathered
from expatriates, are now free to work within Iraq.
They have offices in Baghdad and throughout the
country, and have also had unprecedented access to
governmental institutions, including our judicial and
penal systems. Such access may well be unparalleled in
our region.

We will continue to explore ways of improving
the state of human rights in our country, and we look to
the world community to assist us in this endeavour.
After 35 years of utter brutality, it will take some effort
for our State institutions again to be acculturated
towards respect for basic human rights, but we are
determined to accomplish that goal, so vital to our
transition.

The Secretary-General notes in his report that
many of the funds expended in Iraq by the United
Nations Development Group (UNDG) and the World
Bank have been for capacity-building and the training
of trainers. My Government welcomes those
disbursements and notes that enhancing capacity is an
important part of our reconstruction. However, funds
expended on the ground in Iraq - developing
infrastructure, for example - should be the priority at
this time. Capacity-building does not have the
multiplier effect of dollars spent in direct economic
development, an essential element for stability.
Although we appreciate that UNDG and World Bank
disbursement rates may be higher than those of some
other donors, we believe it essential to increase rates of
disbursement and to increase the amount of dollars
spent inside Iraq.

We welcome the appointments to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq noted in the
Secretary-General's report. Nicholas Haysom, as the
head of the Office of Constitutional Support, and
Michael von der Schulenburg, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Political
Affairs in Iraq, will bring a wealth of technical
expertise to bear as we begin drafting the permanent
constitution and complete the political process. My
Government notes with particular satisfaction that at
least those two officials have taken up their
responsibilities within Iraq, and once again urges all
their United Nations colleagues in neighbouring States
to join them - if not in Baghdad, then in Basrah or
Erbil. We welcome the appointment of an elections
adviser to assist in preparations for the constitutional
referendum and end-of-year elections.

Over the past two years, whenever a
representative of Iraq has sat in this Chamber, we have
called for an ever-greater assumption of
responsibilities and duties by the United Nations in
Iraq. It is now appropriate for Iraq - with its first
elected Government in 51 years - to raise the issue of
its own obligations and the duty it owes to this
Organization.

Aside from being a good world citizen, the first
among these is the duty of all Member States to pay
their dues to the United Nations in a timely fashion.
While the previous regime allowed itself to accrue
arrears for over 11 years, my Government regards the
full payment of Iraq's dues as an essential step towards
our continued reintegration into the community of
nations and the assumption of our normal
responsibilities like any other Member State. To
accomplish this step, Minister Zebari addressed a letter
to the Secretary-General asking him to transfer a
sufficient amount of funds from the escrow account
established by resolution 986 (1995) to extinguish all
of our outstanding contributions to the United Nations.
We greatly appreciate the positive responses of the
members of the Security Council and the Secretariat
with respect to that issue.

Last month, the Security Council appropriately
considered the mandates of the multinational force and
the International Advisory and Monitoring Board.
Resolution 1546 (2004) mandated that review. Yet we
respectfully remind members of the Council that, in
paragraph 22 of the resolution, the Security Council
asserted its "intention to revisit the mandates of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification, and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency".

We recognize that this is one of the more complex
issues relating to our full reintegration into the world
system. Yet we believe that it is appropriate to begin
discussing this issue and ways of garnering consensus,
we hope, in the relatively near term.

In this regard, I refer to the national report of Iraq
submitted in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004),
document S/AC.44/2004/(02)/ 116, in which Iraq stated
that it is "strongly committed to the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and ready to
cooperate with the Committee established under that
resolution".

There are thus certain fundamental considerations
that should guide the discussion for which I have
called. The first fundamental consideration is that Iraq
has no desire to acquire, manufacture or stockpile
weapons of mass destruction. The people of Iraq were
among the first to suffer from the use of those
weapons. I need only to mention Halabja to make the
point. The second fundamental consideration is that, as
Iraq continues to reintegrate itself into the world
system, including by accepting international norms
governing those weapons systems, Iraq expects to be
treated no differently than any other Member State.

I cannot help reflecting on the fact that next
month it will be two years since the first Iraqi
Governing Council delegation arrived from Baghdad to
meet with the Security Council. It has been a long road
for us, and, despite many difficulties, we have made
remarkable progress. We have gone from occupation to
reasserting our sovereignty, a year ago. Now, for the
first time in my lifetime, we have freely elected a
Government in elections whose outcome was uncertain
and unknown until after the votes were counted. The
Government's term of office is fixed and known. By
the end of the year, we expect to have a permanent
constitution in place and another set of elections. It has
been a remarkable journey, from a rogue and outlaw
State whose Government retained power by terrorizing
its citizens to an elected Government substantially on
the way to reintegrating us, with the help of the
international community, into the society of civilized
nations. Our transformation is not yet complete, but I
believe the process is by now irreversible. We have
tasted freedom, and we will not turn back.

