Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month.

I would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, the representative of China, for his
distinguished efforts during his presidency in the
month of October.

I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Zalmay
Khalilzad for the briefing he presented to the Council
on behalf of the multinational force in Iraq (MNF-I)
and for its efforts to support security and stability in
Iraq.

Our thanks also go to His Excellency Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq, as well as to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in
Iraq and New York for their tireless work to assist the
Government and people of Iraq.

My delegation took note of the report of the
Secretary-General and the work of UNAMI in
document S/2008/688 and would like to present the
following comments.

On the political and security levels, my
Government, according to its constitutional
responsibilities to guarantee security and stability for
all Iraqi citizens, continues to execute these
responsibilities all over Iraq through several security
operations in Baghdad and other provinces.

This has led to a tangible security improvement
by decreasing the insurgents offensive abilities to
target civilians and the Iraqi security forces (ISF). The
last security report mentioned that security in the
country during the last two months indicates that there
were ten activities conducted by the ISF versus one
activity by the insurgents.

Furthermore, there has been an 89 per cent
decrease of violent activities during the month of
August 2008 in comparison to 2006 and 2007. This
clearly reflects the Iraqi security forces' ability to
control events on the ground.

My Government recognizes that to maintain the
security achievements on the ground, it must continue
its plans to train the ISF and to provide them with
needed weapons and equipments in the best possible
way.

The number of officers in the army has increased
from 9,800 to 13,911 and the number of soldiers from
116,135 to 217,176. As for the police force, during the
most recent period 4,047 officers and 40,004
policemen have also been trained.

The most recent period has witnessed many
significant developments in relation to the transfer of
security responsibilities from the MNF-I to the Iraqi
security forces. The Iraqi Government took over
security responsibilities in Al-Anbar Province in
September 2008 following the security improvement
achieved in that province, which was one of the most
violent provinces in western Iraq.

Such violent activities have decreased by
approximately 90 per cent. The Iraqi security forces
also took over security responsibilities in Babil and
Wasit provinces in October 2008, in accordance with

the timetable agreed upon by the Iraqi Government and
MNF-I. In total, the Iraqi Government has now taken
over security responsibilities in 13 out of 18 Iraqi
provinces. This accelerating security improvement in
Baghdad and other provinces has assisted a return to
normal life for people in most areas of Iraq.

The number of Iraqi displaced families who have
returned to their homes in Baghdad has reached
22,442, including 431 Christian families, in October
2008. This improvement is taking place in conjunction
with the Iraqi Government's efforts to consolidate
national reconciliation between all components of Iraqi
society.

Having said that, the Iraqi Government has
transferred 98,223 officers and soldiers from the
former army to the military service, and the
Government has also integrated 51,135 members of the
awakening Forces in the civilian and security
institutions to bring them to normal life and to play a
positive role in the reconstruction in Iraq.

Owing to the terrorist attacks targeting the
Christian community in the Mosul province, the Iraqi
Government has sent security forces to protect civilians
from those attacks. For that purpose, the Interior
Ministry sent two brigades to protect families and
churches in the city and sent special investigation
teams.

Prime Minister al-Maliki announced that
Christians in Iraq are an important component of Iraqi
society and stressed his commitment to sending
emergency assistance and security forces to ensure the
protection and safe return of the Christian families to
their homes. Accordingly, more than 300 Christian
families have returned to their homes after security and
stability were restored in their neighbourhoods.

The adoption of the provincial council election
law on 24 September 2008 is one of the most
significant legislative developments to have taken
place in Iraq during the past two months. According to
this law, 427 political entities, representing all Iraqi
components, will participate in local elections. Article
50 of the provincial council election law has been
amended and adopted in order to guarantee equal
representation to all minorities in Iraq.

As regards the social and economic situation,
tangible improvement in the political and security
situation has had a positive effect on the National

Development Strategy. Iraqi economic indicators have
witnessed a clear improvement during the past few
months. The rate of economic growth is expected to
reach 8 per cent by the end of 2008, according to
International Monetary Fund estimates. The inflation
rate has decreased from 16 per cent in 2007 to 12 per
cent in the most recent quarter, and the unemployment
rate has decreased from 22 per cent in 2007 to 17 per
cent during the most recent quarter. These economic
indicators reflect a comprehensive improvement in the
Iraqi economy.

Investment is a priority for the Iraqi
Government's national financial and economic
policies. The Government has allocated $19 billion of
the national budget for investment activities for all
Iraqi ministries and has established a national
monitoring mechanism to encourage Iraqi ministries to
spend the allocated investment funds on their projects.
This has led to an increase in the spending percentage
of the ministries' budgets from 24 per cent to 63 per
cent.

The Iraqi Government has established a social
security network to support various social segments of
Iraqi society, including orphans, widows and the
unemployed. The Government allocated $812 million
to this project, including $76 million for displaced
families. This network has witnessed a 25 per cent
expansion in the number of individuals included and in
the funds allocated to it during November 2008.

Within the framework of economic policies
aimed at reconstructing the Iraqi industrial sector, the
Ministry of Industry recently signed a number of
investment contracts with local, Arab and foreign
companies to the value of $1 billion in order to
diversify the sources of national income.

The Iraqi Government has adopted new policies
to reconstruct and develop the oil industry field. Oil
production has increased by 11 per cent, according to
the latest reports issued by the Iraqi Oil Ministry, and
the Iraqi Government has joined the international
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative to place a
monitoring mechanism on oil revenue and on ways of
spending it.

In the area of basic services, the Iraqi
Government has reduced the number of people
deprived of water and sewage systems to 10 per cent in
the urban areas and 30 per cent in the rural areas. The
production of electricity has risen significantly during
the past three months, and the Iraqi Government
increased the funds allocated to building new power
stations.

Within the framework of Government efforts to
combat financial and administrative corruption, Iraq
ratified the United Nations Convention against
Corruption in 2008. The Iraqi Government started
cooperating with the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to implement the new anti-corruption
programme in Iraq, which was adopted by the United
Nations in September 2008 to strengthen the
Government's anti-corruption activities in the next five
years.

The Iraqi Government is keen to promote a new
culture of respecting human rights in Iraqi society,
based on the concepts of tolerance and mutual
acceptance among the various components of Iraqi
society. The Government achieved significant progress
in establishing a national system to monitor human
rights violations through professional teams in the
Ministry of Human Rights. This mechanism revealed
many cases of human rights violations and, to
guarantee a high level of commitment to human rights
within the Iraqi security institutions, the Ministry of
Interior dismissed 27,690 officers, and another 4,012
are to be put on trial for their involvement in cases of
human rights violations.

On the regional and international levels, the Iraqi
Government continues its efforts within the framework
of the support mechanism, which was adopted at the
expanded meetings of Foreign Ministers of
neighbouring countries of Iraq, held in Sharm el-
Sheikh and Istanbul, to monitor and coordinate the
work of the committees on refugees, energy and
security. The energy committee held its last meeting on
11 October 2008, and the refugees committee plans to
hold its next meeting in Amman on 15 November 2008.
The security coordination committee meeting will be
held in Damascus on 22 and 23 November 2008. In this
regard, I would like to stress my Government's
commitment to full cooperation with the neighbouring
countries to reach solutions on all issues of mutual
interest.

The last few months witnessed several important
official visits to Iraq, such as the visit on 8 July of the
Turkish Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, to promote cooperation between Iraq

and Turkey and which established a High-Level
Strategic Cooperation Council between the two
countries. Other visits were made to Iraq by His
Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, on 11 August; the
Lebanese Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Fouad
Siniora, on 20 August; the Egyptian Foreign Minister,
His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit on 5 October;
and His Highness Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed
bin Zayed al-Nahayan of the United Arab Emirates, on
7 October. These visits highlight the significance of
continued cooperation with Iraq's regional partners in
securing common interests.

Following the Iraqi Government's efforts to
encourage Arab States to reopen their embassies in
Baghdad, several Arab ambassadors arrived in
Baghdad for that purpose, including those of Jordan,
Bahrain, Kuwait, Syria and the United Arab Emirates.
The League of Arab States appointed a new
representative to Baghdad on 6 October. The
Organization of the Islamic Conference has also
reopened its offices in Iraq.

With regard to the International Compact with
Iraq, the Iraqi Government, following the first review
conference, which was held in Stockholm, took many
steps to enhance national policies to meet all the
requirements through the shared monitoring matrix. In
this regard, my delegation would like to encourage all
Arab countries to help their brothers in Iraq by
forgiving Iraq's debts and reducing the percentage of
the compensation imposed on Iraq due to the invasion
of Kuwait in 1990, a crime committed by the former
dictatorial regime. My Government welcomes the
agreement of the Kuwaiti Government to address the
issue of compensation through bilateral negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations Compensation
Commission.

With regard to cooperation between Iraq, the
United Nations and our brothers in Kuwait, the Iraqi
Government invited Mr. Gennady Tarasov, High-level
Coordinator for missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
property, to Visit Baghdad from 12 to 15 October 2008.
The visit was successful, and Mr. Tarasov met with
high-level Iraqi official to address this issue.

As a demonstration of my Government's
keenness to facilitate UNAMI's execution of its
mandate, the Iraqi Government has decided to allocate
$25 million from this year's budget to contribute to the
cost of building the UNAMI headquarters in Baghdad.
This reflects our great appreciation of UNAMI's role in
Iraq and our readiness to cooperate with the United
Nations. I would like also to confirm my Government's
readiness to provide the needed protection to the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for UNAMI's role in Iraq and
for Mr. de Mistura's support, which is offered upon the
Government's request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms. I would like to reiterate our thanks to the
support of the multinational forces in Iraq for the
people and the Government of Iraq.

