Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to join other
delegations in expressing my wishes for a successful
presidency to you, Sir, and to all of your colleagues
from the Greek Mission. We would like also to pay
tribute to the Ambassador of France, Mr. de La
Sabliere, for his successful presidency in June. We also
are grateful to Assistant Secretary-General Turk for his
substantive briefing on the progress made in the
Bougainville settlement and for his contribution to that
end.

We welcome the successful holding of elections
in Bougainville and the establishment of an
Autonomous government on the island. Bougainville's
acquisition of fully fledged autonomous status
represents a historic milestone in the Bougainville
peace process and launches a new phase in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We also
welcome the efforts made by the Government of Papua
New Guinea and the leaders of Bougainville to achieve
the complete and timely implementation of their
obligations.

We thank the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville, which is completing its work, and its
predecessor, the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville. Following completion of the political
role of the United Nations in the peace process - a
priority area in the work of the Organization -
Bougainville will continue to require assistance in
restoration and long-term capacity-building in the
autonomous province. We believe that the efforts of the
relevant organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, as well as regional and international
partners and donors, must aim specifically to achieve
those goals.

In conclusion, I should like to echo the heartfelt
words addressed to Mr. Turk, who is completing his
mission in the Department of Political Affairs. We
thank him for his effective and fruitful cooperation
with the Security Council and in particular with our
delegation, and we join others in wishing him every
success in his future work.

