Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted
to welcome to the Council Her Excellency President
Atifete Jahjaga and His Excellency President Tomislav
Nikolic'.

We recognize that President Nikolie's visit comes
at a very difficult time for Serbia, following the
catastrophic flooding and tragic loss of life that his
country has experienced in recent weeks. It has been
devastating for the hundreds of thousands affected
in Serbia and across the region. My Government is
providing support in response to the floods through the
coordinated approach of the European Union (EU). A
team from London has travelled to Belgrade to look at
how we can assist in a needs assessment to make the
best possible use of the international support now and
in future reconstruction efforts. The United Kingdom
expresses its solidarity with the Serbian people, and
indeed all those in the region who are suffering as a
result of this natural disaster.

Turning to the subject of the debate, the United
Kingdom welcomes Kosovo's continued progress both
internally and on the international stage. We welcome
the fact that Kosovo is recognized by more than half the
United Nations Member States, and we encourage those
countries that have not yet recognized Kosovo to do so.

Regarding internal progress, the United Kingdom
notes in particular the conclusion of local elections
in Mitrovica North, and looks forward to similarly
successful parliamentary elections next month. Before
its dissolution, the Kosovo Assembly undertook two
significant steps towards strengthening Kosovo's
relationship with the European Union. The United
Kingdom welcomes its ratification of an exchange of
letters to extend the mandate of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) for two
years, and the signing of the agreement on the content
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the European Union and Kosovo. We continue
to support the important work of EULEX, including its
assistance in the implementation of the EU-facilitated
dialogue agreements. In particular, we urge continued
cooperation with EULEX operations on the part of
communities and elected leaders in the north of Kosovo.
We strongly condemn the attack on the EULEX convoy
last month, and call on those with information about
that incident, and about the murder of the Lithuanian
customs officer last September, to help the police with
their inquiries.

We are pleased to note the Kosovo Assembly's
decision to establish the framework for a special court
to hear any cases that may arise from the report of the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force, led by Clint
Williamson. This has been a major achievement, and it
demonstrates Kosovo's willingness to confront difficult
rule-of-law issues. We urge all parties to continue to
support this important judicial process.

The United Kingdom congratulates both Serbia and
Kosovo on their efforts so far to normalize relations
through the EU-faciliated dialogue. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/305) rightly refers to the
remarkable progress achieved since the start of the
dialogue at prime-ministerial level in October 2012. It
is now vital to sustain and build on that progress. It
is perhaps inevitable that the combination of Serbian
elections and forthcoming elections in Kosovo have
resulted in a slowdown in the pace of the dialogue;
nevertheless, we hope that the next meeting will
take place soon, and we urge both sides to redouble
their efforts, to avoid losing the impressive earlier
momentum.

We urge both Belgrade and Pristina to continue
implementing the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. We recognize that steps have been taken, but
full implementation of the dialogue agreement is not
yet in sight. It is essential that the establishment of
the association of Serb-majority municipalities and its
statute be agreed on soon, and that other commitments,
such as on the judiciary and on telecommunications and
energy, are concluded without further delay. We also
call on both sides to ensure the maximum participation
of all communities in Kosovo's upcoming national
elections.

I would like to react to concerns that have been
expressed by some about the proposed transition of the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
Neither the Kosovo Security Force nor the Kosovo armed
forces is mentioned or prohibited by resolution 1244
(1999). The resolution does make specific reference to
armed Kosovo Albanian groups. The Kosovo Security
Force cannot, in our view, be classed as such, given that
it is multi-ethnic and controlled by the civil State.

Reference has been made in statements today to
Kosovo Albanians participating in foreign conflicts.
We welcome the fact that there has been strong
condemnation of such participation by numerous
local and international actors, including the Islamic
community of Kosovo. We also note the stated intention
of the Kosovo authorities to establish clear legislation
prohibiting such participation.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
launch by President Jahjaga in Kosovo on 7 March of a
national council for survivors of sexual violence. I also
note subsequent legislative amendments adopted by the
Kosovo Assembly to recognize and protect survivors of
sexual violence.

The Council is rightly very focused on the
prevention of sexual violence. The United Kingdom
supports efforts to deal effectively and sensitively with
the consequences of sexual violence on those tragic
occasions where it has happened. The United Kingdom
welcomes the fact that the challenge is being addressed
in Kosovo.

Finally, the United Kingdom reiterates its view that
the Council should consider reducing the frequency with
which we meet for these debates. The overall positive
backdrop makes that, in our View, an appropriate step.

