Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I take this
opportunity to congratulate you and your country, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia; the countries ofthe Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania

and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Thank you very much, Mr. President, for having
organized this timely and important briefing.

Let me begin by expressing our appreciation to the
Committees' Chairs for their extensive updates and
summaries of actions and initiatives taken during the
past six months.

The recent attacks in Boston, Iraq and Libya are
dreadful evidence of the fact that terrorism remains one
of the major global threats. Those were unjustifiable
acts of terror that serve as yet another grim reminder
that the terrorist threat remains real. That is why the
fight against international terrorism shall remain one
of our highest priorities, just as it should continue to
be a priority for the United Nations. The work of all
three Committees is therefore of vital importance, as
it contributes to the prevention of and the response to
terrorist threats.

We are committed to the idea that the scourge of
terrorism can be overcome only by democratic measures
that remain in compliance with the rule of law. Terrorism
needs to be fought as a crime by the law and within the
law, with full respect to due process and fundamental
rights. We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has taken significant steps to further reinforce fair and
clear procedures in the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We
take this opportunity to commend the Ombudsperson's
work and reiterate our support for her unwavering
efforts. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2083
(2012), which introduced some additional important
changes to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, in particular
extending the mandate of the Monitoring Team and the
Ombudsperson and making their work more effective
and transparent. We reiterate our call on all Member
States to extend full cooperation to the Office of the
Ombudsperson in each and every case.

We welcome the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular the vast
array of counter-terrorism endeavours and activities.
In the period under consideration, we participated
with great interest in a number of events focused on
countering the financing of terrorism - for instance,
in the special meeting focused on strategies regarding
preventing and suppressing terrorist financing, held in
November 2012 here in New York. In the same area, we

also participated in a briefing on preventing abuse ofthe
non-profit sector for the purposes of terrorist financing,
in March 2013, followed by an event one week later
focused on protecting non-profit organizations from
being exploited by those seeking to finance terrorism
were of great importance.

With regard to State capacity-building, which is
another crucial aspect of the fight against terrorism, we
welcome the conference on border-control cooperation
in the Sahel and the Maghreb that took place in Rabat
in March and was organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Government
of Morocco. We participated actively in that important
and successful event.

As mentioned previously, we stress that all
counter-terrorism efforts must comply with the rule
of law, including international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law. We therefore welcome efforts
aimed at underpinning that precept - for example, the
event on combating terrorism and the pursuit ofjustice
through cooperation organized by the Committee on
5 April.

Last but not least, we thank the Committee
and CTED for last week's briefing on the revised
documents and procedures related to the assessment
of Member States' implementation of Security Council
resolutions relating to counter-terrorism. It was a very
useful presentation of the improvements that have been
made to the organization of reports so as to render them
clearer, more transparent and more useful. Like others,
I wish to thank Mr. Mike Smith in particular for the
positive and useful work he has been doing as head of
CTED.

I would now like to share a few comments regarding
the regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). The risk of the proliferation of
weapons ofmass destruction to non-State actors remains
a significant threat to international peace and security.
We should spare no effort to increase our capacity for
preventing proliferation. To that end, the work of the
1540 Committee remains of vital importance. That
goal requires a truly multi-stakeholder approach. We
therefore commend events such as the 1540 civil society
forum on opportunities for engagement held in Austria
from 8 to 10 January, as well as the Committee's conduct
of 1540 workshops engaging civil society organized in
Pretoria and Bangkok.

We would also like to highlight additional events
organized by the Committee around the world in
recent months, which include workshops in Riyadh and
Minsk as well as numerous events related to chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear defence, among
others, in Washington, DC, Tokyo, Hong Kong and
Rome.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Saudi Arabia for organizing last
month's comprehensive high-level event on preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors and on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the Arab world, in which we
had the pleasure to participate.

I would like to conclude my statement by
underlining that our resolve to defeat terrorism must
never weaken or falter. All acts of terrorism are
criminal and reprehensible, wherever they take place
and whoever commits them. The active promotion of
counter-terrorism policies and actions must therefore
remain a priority for the United Nations and its States
Members, as it will for us.

