Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
Judges Meron and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow, and to commend them for their
important work.

We appreciate their briefings and comprehensive
reports (S/2014/343, S/2014/350 and S/2014/351) on the
work of the Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the reporting
period.

In the course of the 21 years since it was
established, the ICTY has been highly praised for its
remarkable achievements, as well as criticized, more
than once, justifiably or not, with occasionally even its
very existence put under question. So, it could be said
that the important legacy of the Tribunal is still being
scrutinized and is not entirely without flaws. However,
that should in no way tarnish the historical record of the
Tribunal, but should rather serve as an important lesson
learned for the benefit of international criminal justice.

Croatia has been among those who have occasionally
voiced criticism of the Tribunal. Nevertheless, we
strongly believe that the ICTY has played an important
historical role in the region and beyond, and we praise
its work.

In that context, I would like to point out the
following matters.

The establishment of the ICTY represented a
breakthrough in the development of international
criminal law. It has made valuable progress in the
last two decades in improving international criminal
procedures and in narrowing the impunity gap for
international crimes. The experiences of the ICTY and
ICTR were the starting point for the creation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), the work of which
Croatia strongly supports.

The practice of the ICTY is important for the
interpretation of international humanitarian law. In
that respect, we would like to particularly emphasize
the contribution to international jurisprudence on
sexual violence, as mentioned today by Prosecutor
Brammertz. Before the establishment of the ICTY and
the ICTR, sexual Violence was a marginalized issue in
international law. The ICTY established case precedents
for the prosecution of rape as a crime against humanity,
a war crime and an act of torture.

The ICTY has played an important part in
establishing a judicial network for dealing with war-
Crime cases in the States that emerged from the former
Yugoslavia. It was a paramount instrument against
the culture of impunity, setting high standards of
responsibility for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. That has not only helped national courts
to increase the quality of war-crime proceedings, but
has also led to a general rise in legal awareness and the
quality of the judiciary.

Last, but not least, let us not forget that the ICTY was
established under resolution 877 (1993), unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, as a response
to gross violations of human rights and humanitarian
law and the horrendous scale of atrocities and human
suffering. The Tribunal was created because it was the
right thing to do, and there was sufficient political will
on the part of the international community.

Can we say today that the same will is present in
2014 when we deal with war crimes and crimes against
humanity in other parts of the world?

Croatia advocated for the establishment of the
ICTY from the very beginning. We strongly supported
the main purpose of the ICTY - the prosecution
and punishment of individuals responsible for acts of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
as well as the delivery of justice for the victims of
those crimes. Croatia also supported the Tribunal's
more global functions aimed at the restoration and
maintenance of peace and stability in the region as well
as the promotion of justice.

We believed then, as we believe today, that it is
of the utmost importance to put an end to the culture
of impunity and to ensure accountability for the most
serious crimes, wherever they have been committed. It
is precisely because of our own difficult experience that
we believe that accountability should be ensured for the
most serious crimes under international law, which are
now being committed in ongoing conflicts, especially

in Syria. That is why we rendered our support to the
initiative for the referral of that situation in Syria to
the ICC.

One must always keep in mind that the Tribunal
provided the victims the opportunity for their voice
to be heard and their suffering to be recognized,
respected and eased. Unfortunately, the establishment
of the Tribunal did not stop or prevent future war
crimes, including the genocide in Srebrenica, the worst
massacre to occur on European soil since the Second
World War. However, due to the existence of the
Tribunal, some of those responsible for the crimes have
been brought to justice. The voices of the victims are
being heard and historical records established. That is
not a small achievement.

In conclusion, Croatia welcomes the results
achieved by the ICTY to date, especially the fact that
all those indicted by the Tribunal have been arrested
and transferred to its custody. However, the work of the
Tribunal is not over yet. Some of those most responsible
for the carnage, deaths and suffering are still waiting
for the verdicts to be rendered. We hope that that will
happen soon. Finally, let me reiterate our undisputable
support for the work of both Tribunals.

