Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the High Representative forthe Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing on
his latest report (S/2017/379, annex) concerning the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

As this is the first time that we we speak on the
issue, we would like to affirm our support for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We would also like to welcome the signing of the
protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU),
which took place during the reporting period. We believe
that progress demonstrates the country's commitment
to the EU integration process and offers far-reaching,
long-term and positive contributions to the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We
also take note of the continued exchange of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders ofthe countries
in the region, which, in our view, will strengthen good-

neighbourly relations and enhanced cooperation in the
Western Balkans.
We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that undermine the political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, we
take note of the continued deterioration of the rule of
law, including actions that challenge the constitutional
order and integrity of the State-level judiciary system
in the country. In that regard, the authorities and
political leaders should fully respect the decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
our hope that the ruling issued by the Constitutional
Court on the review of the country's election law will
be implemented while taking into account the equality
and interests of all constituents. It is important that
all parties refrain from any provocative statements
and actions that could undermine the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Respecting the rule of law and the authority of State
institutions, which are established under the Dayton
Peace Agreement, is fundamental for the State-building
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hence, there is a
need for all parties to demonstrate a serious political
commitment to the matter.

We also take note of the political crisis and
stalemate that occurred within the Presidency and
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
over the reporting period. We believe that such a
paralysis in the normal functioning of State institutions
serves the interests of no one. We therefore urge all
parties to resolve their political differences amicably
and to work constructively towards reconciliation and
actions that safeguard the interests of their citizens.

In conclusion, we would like to express our full
support to the High Representative and his Office in
the discharge of the mandate and in monitoring the
implementation of the civilian aspect of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. We call upon parties to extend the
necessary cooperation, which is vital to the work of
the High Representative. We also recognize the vital
role played by the EU military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA, in maintaining safety
and stability in the country.

