Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking
all the briefers this morning: Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO); Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, President
of the Commission electorale nationale independante
(CENI); Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, Mr. Malanji; and Monseigneur Marcel Utembi,
President of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo. I thank them for their valuable briefings.

I wish to focus on three main issues: first, the
political situation and the electoral process; secondly,
the security situation; and thirdly, the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With respect to the political situation and the
electoral process, we have followed the conduct of the
electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the issuance of the electoral timetable on
5 November 2017 and the commitments undertaken by
CENI to implement the timetable until the elections,
which were held on 30 December 2018. The elections
took place, despite the fire that occurred on 13 December
2018 and destroyed nearly 8,000 electronic voting
machines in the capital, Kinshasa. That postponed the
date of the election from 23 to 30 December 2018, in
addition to the acts of violence that compounded the
situation in some parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the election campaign and on
election day.

As for 30 December, elections were held in a
relatively peaceful environment. That said, we wish to
commend the efforts undertaken by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
Electoral Commission. We commend their commitment
and their organization of the elections as scheduled.
We also laud the support extended by the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern Africa Development Community
and other international partners that made positive
contributions in election day.

On Wednesday, 9 January, we took note of the
statement issued by CENI, in which it noted the
provisional outcomes of the presidential election held
on 30 December 2018. We commend the responsible
and committed approach of the Congolese people
during the three electoral processes - the presidential,
legislative and municipal elections - as well as of all
the candidates and the large-scale participation by the
political parties. We call on all parties to demonstrate
the same degree of responsibility and to refrain from
any acts of violence. That is necessary to move on to
the next stage of challenging the outcomes with the
relevant authority, in line with the Constitution of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the applicable
electoral law.

We hope that the efforts undertaken by all
stakeholders will be completed and that CENI, the
Congolese Constitutional Court, the Government,
political parties and civil society will shoulder their
responsibility so as to safeguard stability and democratic
practices until the culmination of the electoral recourse
procedure and the announcement of the final results in
an official and transparent manner. That would lead to
fulfilling the aspirations of 38 million Congolese who
turned out at the polling stations on the day of the vote.
We hope that the results will reflect their will and lead
to the realization of their aspirations.

Turning to the security situation, the ongoing
incidents of violence and armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are very disturbing,
specifically in the eastern part of the country, a
region that has witnessed armed escalations directly
threatening the lives of unarmed civilians, exposing
them to danger and depleting the natural resources
of the State. We call on all stakeholders to cease such
hostile acts so as to safeguard the lives of unarmed
civilians and to achieve stability and security. In that
context, we commend the efforts of MONUSCO and its
troops to ward off those armed attacks and to protect
Congolese civilians.

We strongly condemn the acts of violence
perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
yesterday, which claimed the lives of a number of
policemen and civilians. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint during this sensitive period in the
history of the country.

As for the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is of a concern in some
regions, especially after the decision to close certain
camps for internal refugees, the spread of the cholera
epidemic and other diseases, as well as the ongoing
armed conflict in certain regions, particularly in the
east of the country.

We are deeply concerned also at the continuing
spread of Ebola in the east of the country. That has been
compounded by deterioration in the security situation,
which is preventing the disease from being addressed.
The number of people contaminated by the Ebola
virus, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO), is 563, of whom 326 have died. Despite the
fact that the epidemic still represents a great danger
to Congolese civilians and neighbouring countries, we
highly appreciate the concerted efforts undertaken by
the Congolese Ministry of Health, WHO and the United
Nations through MONUSCO to combat the virus. We
hope that efforts will continue in order to fully eradicate
the epidemic as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks
and appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, as well as to all the Mission personnel,
for their tireless efforts and consistent support to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish them
every success.

