Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin for his briefing and Minister Kuburovie and
Ambassador Citaku for their detailed statements.

For Italy, the prospect of European integration is
a crucial driving force in efforts aimed at reform that
the States of the western Balkans are expected to carry
out with the goal of making stability in the region a
lasting achievement together with the institutional
consolidation in and economic and social development
of the area. A few days ago, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, spoke very clearly about the
European Union commitment to those objectives (see S/PV.7935).

We firmly believe that the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, which is crucial to the
stability of the entire region, can be accomplished only
through tangible progress in the process of dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). Important and
concrete results have been achieved, and we appreciate
the commitment reiterated by the parties to the process.
At the same time, we share the Secretary-General's
hope of seeing more consistent and sustained efforts
from both parties to reactivate the talks and deliver
more substantial results.

In that respect, with the perspective of the
anticipated elections coming up in Kosovo, we call on
Pristina to focus on the swift implementation of all
measures agreed in the framework of the European
Union facilitated dialogue, with special regard to the
association/community ofSerb-majority municipalities.
Also, it is important for Pristina to continue along the
path of reform, from strengthening the rule of law
and the fight against corruption to socioeconomic
development. We hope those reforms will be swiftly
pursued by the new elected Government, with the
constructive cooperation of all parties.

Underscoring the priority of the European track
and acknowledging the substantial progress achieved
by Kosovo in recent years, we encourage the Security
Council to consider a review of the United Nations
presence in Kosovo, including a reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) that is consistent with overall
peacekeeping reform. That, in our view, will obviously
have to be done in close coordination with other
international organizations in the region, notably,
the European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

We would like to once again request that the
Secretary-General make recommendations in that
regard, given that UNMIK is already refocusing its
efforts on confidence-building and collaboration
among communities, and to draw his attention, and that
ofthe Council, to the opportunity to improve UNMIK's
synergy with the European Union and its coordination
with other international actors. We equally support
the proposal to revise the frequency of the Secretary
General's briefings and reports submitted to the
Security Council in order to better reflect the current
situation on the ground.

I conclude by highlighting the relevance of the
regional dimension. As Chair of the Berlin process in
2017, Italy will work with all western Balkan countries
to identify priorities to boost regional integration,
stability and economic growth. Both Belgrade and
Pristina are actively participating in that process.
On 24 May, the six Ministers of the western Balkan
countries will visit Rome to meet with the Italian
Minister for Foreign Affairs in preparation for the
summit we will host in Trieste on 12 July. The summit
will provide added value to the regional cooperation
process and to the European integration path of the
western Balkans.

Italy will continue to be proactively engaged in
the western Balkans - in Kosovo, with our long-
standing contribution to the activities of the United
Nations, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, as well as at th
bilateral level. The future of the region matters to all of
Europe, particularly Italy. For that reason, we strongly
condemn the nationalist and divisive rhetoric recently
reignited throughout the region. In order to avoid
political instability inside countries of the region, and
to counter any further deterioration of the relations
among the western Balkans, we call on all parties to
refrain from any unilateral initiative or declaration that
could hinder common efforts to improve cooperation
and consolidate stability. We believe that it is time for
all western Balkan countries to turn the page and work
together in the interest of all of their people.

