Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): I address this Council
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community, CARICOM.

CARICOM. welcomes and appreciates the
comprehensive report of Ambassador Sandra Honore,
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti. We note with interest
her comments on developments in Haiti, especially as
they relate to the first round of parliamentary elections
that were held in August. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report, S/2015/667, on the mandate of
MINUSTAH during this reporting period.

CARICOM. is very much encouraged by the recent
developments in Haiti during this transformative
period, and particularly by the conduct of elections.
This augurs well for the prospects for the second round
of parliamentary, presidential and municipal elections
later this year. In our view, the holding of elections
that are free and fair and free from fear is not only
the bedrock for any democracy but also a condition
and precedent for the sustainable development of the
peoples of all States. Accordingly, CARICOM. applauds
the efforts of the Provisional Electoral Council of
Haiti, which is charged with the responsibility for the
administration of elections in our sister member State.

The work of the Provisional Electoral Council
is not without its challenges, one of the main ones
being the availability of adequate financial resources
to do its work. CARICOM. wishes to thank all those
States that have made financial contributions to the
fund administered by United Nations Development
Programme to aid the electoral process in Haiti,
including, I might add, the contribution earlier today
from the Government of Trinidad and Tobago of
$1 million.

MINUSTAH, under the leadership of
Ambassador Honore, must be commended for its
continued stewardship in Haiti, where it has assisted
the Haitian authorities not only with matters relating to
the conduct of elections but also the strengthening of
the rule of law, the promotion of justice and the training
of the Haitian National Police, the latter to ensure that
that organization will be in a position to assume total
control of policing activities in that State in the near
future.

Even as we continue to applaud the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH for their efforts to
stabilize Haiti during this transformative period, we
are mindful of the need for the mandate of MINUSTAH
to be renewed with the requisite resources to enable it
to engage in less peacekeeping and more developmental
activities. In closing, we request that members of the
Council act with prudence in this matter so that the
services of MINUSTAH are not curtailed abruptly,
and that there be a smooth transition period that would
prevent any possible reversal of the hard-won gains that
Haiti has made during this transformational period.

