Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to join you, Madam
President, and the other colleagues who spoke before
me in expressing my thanks and appreciation to
Ms. Norma Chan, who was always an indispensable
reference-point for my delegation. I truly appreciate
her efforts, and in particular her unflagging assistance,
especially on Libya's first day as a member of the
Security Council, when we assumed the presidency.
Certainly, we will miss Norma in the Council. We
regret her departure, but wish her good health,
happiness and success - here or elsewhere.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive and detailed report (S/2009/475)
before us, and Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing to the
Security Council. I welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan to the
Council, and I thank him for joining us.

I would like to commend the United Nations
Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan for its
outstanding efforts to rebuild the country despite the
many security challenges and the various problems that
the Mission has faced in obtaining the funding it needs.

Once again, we are considering the situation in
Afghanistan, which has not changed greatly from when
NATO forces drove the Taliban from power.
Unfortunately, the Afghan people continue to
experience a lack of security and the unjustified killing
of civilians. Most regrettably, that killing is by both
sides - by the international forces on the one hand,
and by the Taliban on the other. Both have offered
justifications. The international forces either claim that
there were mistakes or say that the intended targets
were Taliban elements. For their part, the Taliban say
that they are fighting the foreign forces and their
collaborators. However, the innocent Afghan people
are always the victims.

Once again, the Secretary-General's report
reaffirms the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan and the increasing number of civilian
casualties owing to attacks by armed groups and air
strikes by the international forces. We should like to
reiterate our deep regret over the killing of civilians, in
particular by international forces, who, we believe, can
clearly avoid this. However, it continues unabated
despite appeals both from within and from outside
Afghanistan.

We are also greatly concerned to read in
paragraph 5 of the report of the Secretary-General that
"Efforts undertaken over the past several years to
increase the number of national and international
security forces have failed to stem the insurgency".
War planners in Afghanistan have attempted to achieve
military victory regardless of the number of civilian
casualties, and therefore the number of foreign forces
in Afghanistan has increased in the past few months.
However, the result has been only an increasing
number of both civilian and military casualties.

At the beginning of this meeting, Mr. Eide stated
that the present security situation is the worst since
2002. Mr. Eide added that many Afghans have joined
the insurgency owing to a sense of political and social
marginalization. I would add another reason: the

09-53 153
occasional atrocities committed by foreign forces
against Afghan civilians.

That leads us to something that my delegation has
constantly stressed in the Security Council: that the
solution is not related to the number of forces or to the
amount of equipment provided to them. On the
contrary, it requires a comprehensive review of the
situation, ranging from national reconciliation to
sustainable development. We agree with paragraph 8 of
the Secretary-General's report, which mentions the
calls of some political forces in the country for a
ceasefire with the Taliban as a first step towards
stability in the country.

The international community's ultimate objective
is to help the Afghan people to build a democratic,
stable and prosperous State in Afghanistan. The war
against the Taliban and others is not an objective in
itself, especially since the use of force alone will
definitely not achieve stability or security. Those can
only be achieved through a dialogue that seeks national
reconciliation among all sectors of the Afghan people
and all those who are ready to renounce violence and to
accept dialogue, and by fighting corruption, drug
trafficking and other ills.

We therefore believe that the international
community must adopt programmes that enable
Afghanistan to fully shoulder its responsibilities as a
sovereign country capable of ensuring security and a
dignified life for each and every one of its citizens and
that create the conditions for the withdrawal of foreign
forces as soon as possible. We believe that to be a
fundamental condition for national reconciliation,
without which security and stability will not prevail.

Some previous reports of the Secretary-General
have mentioned the conditions of those held in various
detention centres in Afghanistan. The report before us
today states in paragraph 52 that the Special
Representative visited several detention centres,
including the detention facility at Bagram, run by the
international forces, but makes no assessment of the
conditions in those detention centres or of respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights there.
I would ask Mr. Eide to tell us, however briefly, about
the conditions in those detention centres.

