The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Martin Andjaba,
Permanent Representative of Namibia to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October 2000. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Andjaba
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month. I am grateful for the
opportunity of telling him this today, for this year again
Ambassador Andjaba will be absent during half of my
presidency, as he will be chairing his annual Security
Council mission to Indonesia.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Sierra Leone

Report of the Security Council mission to Sierra
Leone (S/2000/992)

Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(S/2000/1055)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rowe
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, document
8/2000/1055, and the report of the Security Council
mission to Sierra Leone, document S/2000/992.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the continued fragile situation in Sierra Leone
and the related instability in the wider subregion.
It condemns the continued cross-border attacks
along the border area of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. The Council stresses that only
through a comprehensive regional approach can
security and stability be restored. In this regard, it
expresses its support for the efforts undertaken by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to address the situation, and calls on
Member States to provide support.

"In this context, and following the return of
its mission to Sierra Leone, the Security Council
welcomes the recommendations made in the
mission's report (S/2000/992). It in particular
expresses its support for the establishment of a
continuous, United Nations-based process for
overall strategic coordination on Sierra Leone,
bringing together Security Council members, the
United Nations Secretariat, ECOWAS, troop-
contributing countries to the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the
Government of Sierra Leone. The Council notes
the Secretary-General's support for this proposal
in his report of 31 October 2000 (S/2000/1055)
and encourages him to take early steps to put
such a process into effect.

"The Security Council underlines that such
a coordinated strategy for lasting peace in Sierra
Leone must combine both political and military
elements. The Council fully supports efforts to
strengthen the State institutions of Sierra Leone
and to maintain the principles of democratic
accountability and the rule of law. It also places
emphasis on the humanitarian and human rights
aspects. It welcomes the current efforts of
ECOWAS to explore the possibilities of dialogue
towards peace, but stresses that this should only
be pursued under terms acceptable to the
Government of Sierra Leone. In this context, the
Council underlines the importance of the
Revolutionary United Front relinquishing control
of the diamond-producing areas, full freedom of
movement for UNAMSIL leading to its
the

deployment throughout the country, proper
provision for the disarmament and demobilization
of all non-governmental forces, full and secure
humanitarian access and the extension of the
authority of the Government throughout its
territory. The Council also calls upon those armed
groups responsible for continuing human rights
abuses to put an immediate end to such activities.

"The Security Council is convinced that the
continuation of a credible military presence of the
international community in Sierra Leone remains
an indispensable element of the peace process.
The Council concurs with the Secretary-General's
view that a key aspect of the overall approach on
Sierra Leone is the continued provision of
security by UNAMSIL in key areas of the
country. The Council reiterates its view that to
achieve this UNAMSIL requires strengthening.
The Council also underlines the importance of
continued action to improve the effectiveness of
UNAMSIL through the full implementation of the
recommendations of the May assessment mission.
The Council notes the decisions by the
Governments of India and Jordan to end their
troops' participation in UNAMSIL, and expresses
its appreciation for the important contribution
made by these two contingents. It also warmly
welcomes the new commitments made by
Bangladesh and Ghana of additional battalions,
by Ukraine of equipment and support personnel
and by Slovakia of equipment to enhance the
force's capability. The Council urges both
departing and incoming contingents to display all
possible flexibility to ensure that force capability
is maintained as UNAMSIL moves into this
period of transition.

"The Security Council supports the appeal
by the Secretary-General to Member States, as set
out in paragraph 55 of his report, urgently to
consider participating in UNAMSIL or otherwise
contributing to its reinforcement, and encourages
him to intensify his consultations to this end. The
Council reiterates its firm intention to take action
to strengthen UNAMSIL at the appropriate time,
taking into account the readiness of troop-
contributing countries to provide sufficient forces
to this end."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/3l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

