Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (8/2018/465) and Special
Representative Virginia Gamba for her tireless efforts
in taking the children and armed conflict agenda
forward. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2427
(2018), which we co-sponsored.

Unfortunately, children continue to be
disproportionately affected by armed conflicts around
the world. We are deeply troubled by the increase in
the number of violations committed against children in
2017. As we speak, millions of children seek to survive
under unprecedented challenges arising from conflicts
and related displacement. We see the suffering and
hopelessness very vividly in the eyes of Syrian,
Palestinian, Rohingya and other children. However,
despair cannot and should not prevail. If hope is to
triumph, we must continue to work hard to provide
hope for a better future for the children who suffer
under armed conflict.

The crisis in Syria has taken the biggest toll on
children. The findings of the Secretary-General's
report prove that the conditions of Syrian children are
alarming. They are facing violence imposed upon them
not only by the regime but also by terrorist groups.
The responsibility of the international community in
terms of its failure to protect and prevent cannot be
overlooked either. In that context, we observe the side
effects of empowering terrorist entities. It is therefore
worth mentioning one of the important findings of the
Secretary-General's report.

During the reporting period, verified cases of the
recruitment and the use of children by the terrorist
organizations of the Kurdish People's Protection
Units (YPG/YPJ) increased fivefold from 46 to 224,
compared to 2016. In fact, the Kurdish Workers Party
(PKK), the Democratic Union Party (PYD)and the
YPG/YPJ terrorist organizations have a long-standing
practice of forcefully recruiting young girls and boys,
in violation of international law and norms. Forty per
cent of PKK recruits are children younger than 18,
while 10 per cent are under the age of 15. Recently,
the PKK terrorist organization, under the pretext of
fighting Da'esh in Iraq, has forcibly recruited minor
Yazidis, transferred them to battlegrounds far from their
homeland and mercilessly punished those unyielding to
that horrendous attempt.

The PYD and the YPG/YPJ resort to the same
tactic in Syria. As a recent case in point, I would like
to bring to the Council's attention a press release issued
by the World Council of Arameans on 29 May, which
drew the attention of the international community
to the abduction of as many as 50 young Arameans
by the PYD and and the YPG/YPJfor the purpose of
forced recruitment.

To protect children from falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations, the international community
shouldexercisefullsolidarityandcooperationinfighting
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It should
also be underlined that references to non-State armed
groups within the context of the children and armed
conflict agenda, including resolution 2427 (2018), which
we co-sponsored today, should not be construed in any
way to indicate that terrorist organizations are subjects
of international humanitarian law. We shall resolutely
continue fighting against terrorist organizations, in
accordance with applicable international law and our
national counter-terrorism legislation.

Meeting the fundamental humanitarian needs of
children in conflicts and emergencies, including for
the provision of health services, must be one of our
priorities. In the meantime, investing in the education
of all children, including girls, requires particular
attention. Last but not least, it is clear that the best way
to keep children from harm's way is to work to prevent
the outbreak of armed conflicts in the first place. In
that understanding, Turkey will continue to support the
Secretary-General's focus on prevention.

