Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
organizing this debate on the vitally important issue of
the rule of law. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his valuable comments.

Respect for the rule of law is critical for the
establishment of stable, secure and democratic post-
conflict societies, but it takes hard work, sustained over
a long period of time, to build a culture of respect for
the rule of law in a post-conflict context, and it takes
the support of the international community. As a result,
it is important for us to consider what tools the United
Nations can use to help foster the rule oflaw in nations
emerging from conflict.

In the wake of conflict, United Nations involvement
often comes in the form of peacekeeping operations,
and peacekeeping operations are particularly well
positioned to spearhead the strengthening of rule-of-
law institutions. Peacekeeping missions should always
include rule-of-law experts who can serve on the
front lines of efforts to support national justice and
accountability.

For example, the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) assisted the Government
after conflict in restoring a civilian policing presence
throughout the country and restructuring the internal
security services. It also supported the Ministry of
the Interior and Security in developing draft laws and
regulations on the organizational structure, jurisdiction
and functioning of the national police. As part of that,
with the United Nations country team, UNOCI provided
training to some 500 members of the national security
forces on the protection of civilians. Meanwhile, in
Haiti, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti's investment in the Haitian National Police as
part of a broad effort to promote the rule of law has
reduced Haiti's reliance on international military forces
to provide day-to-day security.

Against that backdrop, peacekeeping missions can
also play an important role in supporting national and
international efforts to bring tojustice those responsible
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
including through support for the apprehension of
fugitives.

In addition to peacekeeping, United Nations
development programmes have made significant
contributions to the rule of law. For example, the
United Nations Development Programme rule of law
programme in Darfur raises awareness of human
rights and the rule of law. It works with local leaders,
organizations and authorities to help end violations
of international human rights law. The goal is both to
restore people's confidence in rule-of-law institutions
and to gradually build a culture of rule of law and justice
in the region. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United Nations has assisted in the establishment
of mobile courts that have helped the country's justice
system tackle the challenge of sexual and gender-based
violence in the conflict-ridden east.

While it is important to consider the individual
tools that are available, it is also important that the
United Nations rule-of-law activities take a holistic,
integrated and balanced approach. The Secretary-
General's institutional reforms in that respect are
especially welcome. The strategic role of the Rule of
Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by
the Deputy Secretary-General, and the United Nations
global focal point arrangement on the rule of law, where
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations works
with the United Nations Development Programme,
could help enhance coordination and lead to concrete
results on the ground. We are encouraged that those
United Nations entities are joining forces to develop
and implement common police, justice and corrections
programmes. We hope that those efforts will remove
the disconnect that sometimes exists between New
York and the field. In that context, we understand that
the global focal point is now coordinating on rule-of-
law issues in Mali, and we look forward to the outcome
of that work.

Ultimately, national ownership is essential in
successfully advancing the rule of law. Governments at
all levels must buy into the core tenets ofthe rule of law.
That includes the central principle that Governments
are accountable to the law and that no person is above
the law. Only through a commitment to the rule of
law at the highest levels can the rule of law permeate
through all levels of society.

Let me reiterate that we strongly support the United
Nations doing its part in promoting the rule of law and
encourage it to foster a culture of accountability in all
of its work.

