Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Like my
colleagues, I wish to thank State Secretary Hans
Dalhgren for his presentation of the results of the
Stockholm Process. I wish also to thank Mr. Danilo
Tiirk for the remarks he made.

Allow me briefly to make a few comments. First,
we welcome the way in which the debate on targeted
sanctions has been conducted, because the
consideration of this issue, which has been under way
for some time, has been enriched by a large number of
constructive exchanges of View between members of
the Security Council and non-members, and between
the United Nations and civil society. The work that we
now have before us is therefore the outgrowth of
intensive exchanges of View which owe a great deal to
the contribution of academics, private-sector
professionals, non-governmental organizations and
research institutes. We welcome this.

Overall, France endorses the approach and the
conclusions of the Stockholm Process. The approach is
based on targeted sanctions, and we believe that
targeting sanctions means better increasing pressure
where we wish it to be exerted, while identifying and
hitting specific actors and at the same time reducing
the risk of collateral impact on innocent civilian
populations.

As the Council is aware, we support a philosophy
of sanctions that is based on certain principles:
sanctions should be targeted and time-limited, and their
impact should be evaluated regularly, both in terms of
their political objective and from the humanitarian
standpoint.

Thirdly, in the work that we have before us today,
I should like to stress our particular interest in certain
recommendations. This is true of the second
recommendation concerning the international support
that any sanctions regime must receive.
Similarly, we welcome the fact that the proposals
concerning panels of experts and enhancing the
capacity of the United Nations Secretariat are in accord
with the French-British proposal for a semi-permanent
monitoring mechanism for the implementation of
targeted sanctions and other associated issues. The idea
of setting up a United Nations special coordinator for
sanctions also merits close study.

I wish to conclude on two points. First, I wish to
say how important we believe it is for the Security
Council to complete its normative work on sanctions
and to adopt the conclusions of the Working Group on
sanctions. Secondly, and very specifically, I would like
to stress the value of working to implement proposals
aimed at improving existing arrangements. In this
regard, allow me to state this once again: it would be
appropriate to strengthen the capacities of the
Secretariat and to learn all the lessons inherent in the
success of expert panels.

Likewise, allow me to urge the members of the
Council to work on the basis of the French-British
proposal and the pertinent recommendations of the
Stockholm Process.

