Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank President Touadera
for sharing his point of view regarding the situation in
his country. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the Permanent Representative of Morocco
for their briefings, which were quite instructive.
The situation in the country remains precarious.
Reprisals between tribes continue, crime and banditry
are widespread, and sectarian and ethnic violence is
rife. Government bodies and security forces in many
parts of the country are failing or totally lacking. In
spite of some breakthroughs on the security front in the
capital, in the central and northern parts of the country
there are ongoing deadly battles between armed groups
engaging in turf wars. Last month's events around
Bambari were a sad illustration of that reality.

It is evident that in a difficult military and political
situation in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic is playing an
important stabilizing role. However, given the situation
on the ground, we note that Blue Helmets must often
act as firefighting brigades. We are concerned about
the deteriorating social, economic and humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, along with
the ongoing lack of financing to meet the humanitarian
needs of the country. We call on all sides to ensure
unhampered humanitarian access, and the Government
to create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes.

The Central African authorities have to work on
several fronts simultaneously in order to ensure the
adequate functioning of the judiciary. In that context,
the focus should be on rebuilding national capacity.
Peacekeepers taking emergency temporary measures
and the long-awaited creation of the special criminal
court are not cure-alls for the country's problems in
combating impunity. Furthermore, as world history
shows, various types of courts with international
participation are extremely costly and, in general, not
very efficient.

We would also like to call attention to the demand
of armed groups with respect to the awarding of general
amnesty. In that regard, we must proceed with caution.
Let us not forget the Bangui Forum of 2015, which
culminated in an appeal for fighting against impunity.
It is clear that the country needs fundamental
reforms and modernization. The disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation process must be jumpstarted with the full
assistance of the international community and with
regional mediation. In that regard, we welcome the
initiative of the African Union to launch the process
of reconciliation between the Central African Republic
Government and the armed groups. The sponsors of
that initiative include the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Chad.

We also welcome the initiative of President Touadera
to make national reconciliation more inclusive, as well
as his intent to work with all armed groups. This is a
window of opportunity that must not be lost. Those
groups must be integrated into the political life of the
country in order to put an end to the violence.

