The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Guatemala.

It is very encouraging that the important subject
we have selected has attracted such great interest and
so many participants. Guatemala, as the latest State
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, suggested the topic as a contribution to the fight
against impunity and to strengthening the rule of law,
particularly in the work of the Security Council. By
doing so, we are raising to the international level our own
domestic struggle against impunity, an effort in which
the United Nations and many donor countries - some
represented in the Security Council - have contributed
through the International Commission against Impunity
in Guatemala. We have chosen a topic that seems to
some to be philosophical. For our part, we find that it is
very practical and relevant in the current state of world
affairs.

The Rome Statute recognizes the essential link
between peace and justice. Every day the Security
Council faces situations that demand justice so
that a lasting peace may prevail. The concept note
(S/2012/731, annex) that we prepared for the Council
attempts to identify links common to both bodies, along
with challenges and proposals as to how to address
them. Today is the first time the Security Council is
addressing the relationship between both bodies in a
comprehensive manner, even though they have been
formally collaborating with each since 2005. We expect
that the debate will initiate a dialogue that would draw
the Council and the Court closer together, especially
noting that 2012 is the tenth anniversary since the
Rome Statute entered into force.
As a tool of preventive diplomacy, the Court is
within the reach of the Security Council, and offers its
members a powerful option that serves to restore the
confidence of Member States in the ability ofthe United
Nations to prevent and resolve conflicts in an efficient
manner. It also contributes to reaffirming the primary
responsibility of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security, and it recommits the
Council once again to fulfilling that responsibility in
cooperation with its partners.

We also believe that any debate on the use of tools
available to the Security Council to fulfil its mandate
should not be focus on whether States are or are not
parties to the Rome Statute. In our view, the stability
of the relationship between the Council and the Court
should not depend on what countries take turns sitting
at this table every two years. Rather, it needs to be
founded upon the universal conviction that some crimes
are so heinous that they must not go unpunished.

I would therefore underscore three principles
that we believe are in the interests of the Security
Council to promote: complementarity, cooperation and
universality.

With regard to the first principle, we consider it
necessary to support the primacy of national criminal
jurisdictions in investigating or prosecuting perpetrators
of crimes covered by the Rome Statute. It is not only for
reasons of respect for State sovereignty, but also due to
the practical constraints of limited resources. The sad
reality is that the Court does not have the capacity to
take up all the most serious crimes in the world, just as
the Security Council cannot remain seized of all crises.
It is a Court of last resort, and we should all work to
ensure that the situations before it do not arise again.

Considering the second principle, it is essential to
take the measures necessary to intensify cooperation
at all levels in order to end impunity and ensure that
those responsible for the worst atrocities are brought to
justice. We consider cooperation critical if the Council
is to at least follow through on its own decisions
and adequately follow up on its referrals, especially
where there is evident reluctance to cooperate. Such
cooperation can also serve as a deterrent against the
commission of future crimes.

With regard to the third principle, we believe that
the Security Council should promote the universality
of the Rome Statute. With each State that ratifies the
instrument, there will be a diminished need to resort
to referrals, which in turn will also decrease the cases
of breach of the Court's decisions. Universality would
also serve to further other fundamental principles of
the United Nations, including respect for the rule of
law, human rights and accountability.

In the light of all this, we call on the entire
membership to maximize the advantages the Court
offers the Security Council as a tool for preventive
diplomacy. We hope that this aspiration will extend
beyond this debate. The Council can undoubtedly
facilitate the Court's work, but its true effectiveness
will depend for the most part on broad ratification,
proper financing and independence in its functioning.

I now resume my capacity as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the Vice-Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Grant Duchy of
Luxembourg.

