Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): With a great
feeling of sorrow and sadness, my delegation extends its
condolences on the passing of His Majesty Hassan II of the
sister Kingdom of Morocco, who passed away in the
afternoon on Friday, 23 July. At the time of this great
tragedy, we extend condolences to the people and
Government of the Kingdom of Morocco and to the noble
Alawis royal family, asking God Almighty to make
paradise his abode together with the saints and good people.
With his passing, Morocco has lost a first-class statesman,
who spent the greater part of his life in the service of his
people and in the service of Arab and Islamic nations. His
passing is a great loss for the Arab nation, which this year
lost three of its great leaders: His Highness Sheikh 'Isa ibn
Salman Al Khalifa, Emir of Bahrain; His Majesty King
Hussein ibn Talal of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
and His Majesty King Hassan II of the Kingdom of
Morocco.

King Hassan II during his lifetime expended tireless
efforts to preserve the unity, prosperity and progress of
Morocco. He also played a major role in the service of
Arab and Islamic causes, and among his prominent efforts
is his part in the Jerusalem Commission. We cannot but ask
God for forgiveness and mercy for the dear departed and
ask success for His Majesty King Mohamed VI, confident
that he will continue the great march begun by his late
father in building the modern Morocco. We also wish
progress and prosperity to the people of Morocco under
its new sovereign, who is the best successor to his
illustrious father.

Mr. President, we appreciate your convening of this
important plenary meeting in conformity with the wish of
my delegation and those like-minded delegations in
opening up the work of the Council before the Member
States who are not members of the Council and to the
outside world in general. We thank Mrs. Ogata and all the
staff of the humanitarian organizations for their noble
efforts. My delegation regrets the continued military
conflicts in some countries on the African continent,
which increase the numbers of refugees day in and day
out. At this plenary meeting we would like to raise
several questions of importance, in our view, relevant to
the refugees.

First, as regards the need to open safe corridors in
the States in conflict, we believe opening such safe
corridors is essential for the delivery of assistance to
refugees. The States should guarantee the opening of
these safe corridors, without which the assistance cannot
be delivered to the needy refugees.

Second, we believe that the necessary technical
assistance should be provided to staff affiliated with the
humanitarian organizations, in order to enable them also
to deliver assistance to those refugees in need.

Yet, and this is my third point, we want to
emphasize the need for all humanitarian organizations to
comply with international law and the local laws of those
States where they work and of the States through which
they work. Organizations must also respect the
sovereignty and international legitimacy of these States
and not violate domestic calculations, respecting the need
to cooperate fully with the local authorities of these
States.

Fourth, we urge the international community and the
donor States to increase the humanitarian assistance
provided to the States experiencing conflicts, which have
refugees and displaced persons, and to those States
receiving refugees in order to mitigate the burdens
shouldered by those States. The example was given of the
burden born by Mali in this regard. We also urge the
international community and the donor States to provide
technical and material assistance to the African States and
States in conflict in order to assist them with economic
and social development, which are main components of

 

establishing stability and safety in States in conflict, for
averting the recurrence of such conflicts there and, hence,
for preventing an increase in the number of refugees.

My delegation would like to pose a question in this
regard to Mrs. Ogata concerning the View of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on a solution to the plight of, on the one hand,
those refugees who have been massed against their will in
camps within these theatres of conflict, where they are
perhaps forced to participate in the conflict, and, on the
other hand, those refugees participating willingly in the
conflict as a means of earning a living, however fraught
with risks. Thus, we have two kinds of refugees living
under unenviable circumstances. Their fate may not be
within jurisdiction of UNHCR in the strict sense, but they
are, in the first place, refugees.

It is of concern to us that there is news of increasing
numbers of refugees participating in a number of conflicts.
We feel that it is high time to consider finding a means of
saving those refugees who have been forced into the
theatres of conflict, first in the interest of those refugees,
and second, to prevent their participation in conflict,
willingly or unwillingly.

