Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency, and pledge our full support in the
effective discharge of your responsibilities. We also
express our appreciation to Italy for effectively steering
the work of the Council last month. We would like
to thank Judge Agius, Judge Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their respective briefings today.

In countries emerging from conflict, weak justice
and security institutions struggle to manage the wider
socioeconomic and political challenges inherent in
recovery processes. Institutional actors may prove to
be incapable or unwilling to pursue accountability
for serious crimes of the past. In such contexts, the
contribution of international or regional mechanisms
that function on the principle of complementarity, such
as the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals or previous similar tribunals, such
as the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
are important.
We recognize that the continued support of
the Council to such mechanisms has enabled them
to contribute to combating impunity and ensuring
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Such support from the Council, which
could be complemented by cooperation from States,
continues to be critical for the Residual Mechanism in
fulfilling its mandated residual functions.

We welcome the readiness of the Mechanism
to assume the residual judicial mandate and work
transferred from the ICTY, and the preparation of the
Mechanism to fully stand on its own for the first time
since its establishment by the Security Council in 2010.
We also welcome the smooth transition from the ICTY
to the Residual Mechanism and the work done by the
ICTY and the Mechanism to that end. We also welcome
efforts by the Mechanism to increase its efficiency
and to streamline its internal working methods and
processes within chambers.

We note with appreciation that the cooperation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia
with the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism
remained satisfactory during the reporting period.
It is important that States continue to provide the
necessary assistance to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism, including in the tracking of the
three fugitives to be tried by the Mechanism and the
five fugitives to be tried by Rwanda. However, we note
with concern the denial of the extradition request by
Rwanda in relation to those suspected of committing
crimes during the Rwandan genocide. We concur with
the Special Prosecutor that Rwanda has taken extensive
measures to reform and ensure that its courts meet
international fair trials standards. We also concur with
the Prosecutor that Rwanda should have been informed
concretely of what is required and given an opportunity
to continue to demonstrate its commitment to fair trials
in its courts.

In that context, we would like to underscore the
importance of strengthened cooperation that ensures the
principle of complementarity and national ownership
in the framework of post-conflict accountability in
relation to transferred cases. We have noted from
the report (see S/2017/66l) the challenge faced by
the Mechanism in relation to relocation of acquitted
and released persons. Therefore, we would like to
underscore the need for such issues that require follow-
up during the completion of the mandate of tribunal to
be given proper consideration in the upcoming review
of the Residual Mechanism.

While noting the challenge encountered by the
ICTY in fulfilling its mandate, including delays in case
management, we recognize its contribution to ensuring
accountability and fighting impunity. We also recognize
that the ICTY has made significant legal achievements,
and we commend the judges, the principals, the Office
of the Prosecutor and the staff of the ICTY. We also
commend the ICTY for meeting the completion strategy
within the time frame specified. As the ICTY concludes
its activities on 31 December after 25 years, we are of
the View that the challenges, best practices and lessons
learned by the Tribunal could serve as a basis for future
similar accountability mechanisms.

Finally, we support the Council's acknowledging
the significant contributions by ICTY by marking its
closure through a press statement, as was the case
for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
We wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation
to Ambassador Rosselli and his team for all the
dedicated efforts over the past two years in guiding
the work of the Council's Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

