Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I was not going to
respond until I heard the Foreign Minister of Syria
make what I can only describe as the most grotesque
and insensitive comparison between the situation in
which the Government of Syria now finds itself and the
positions of the United States Government on 11
September 2001, the Government of Spain on 11
March 2004 and the Government of the United
Kingdom on 7 July of this year. To compare the state of
knowledge or lack of knowledge of those three
Governments in the face of those appalling and
unprovoked terrorist atrocities with the position of the
Government of Syria is at best absurd. And I think if
any colleagues around this table had any misgivings
about making resolution 1636 (2005) a Chapter VII
resolution, those misgivings were entirely allayed by
the lengthy statement that we have just heard - which
appeared to be resisting at each stage, until its closing
paragraphs, any suggestion that there would be - in
spirit as well as in letter - the full cooperation with
the Mehlis Commission that the resolution requires.

Commissioner Mehlis makes it clear, and I
quoted him, that the presumption of innocence still
obtains. But what he is dealing with here is not a
medieval inquiry, as Mr. Al-Shara' suggests, but what
is commonplace in all proper investigations: the
establishment, first of all, of prima facie evidence to
see whether a further investigation is required.

Because of what Mr. Mehlis spells out as a lack
of cooperation on substance, he has found it necessary
to refer this matter to the Security Council. Had there
been that full cooperation on substance by the
Government of Syria, the report by Mr. Mehlis would
have been very different, and I am absolutely certain
that there would have been no requirement for a
ministerial meeting today - probably not even for a
resolution.

Let me give just one example of the lack of
cooperation that, I notice, Mr. Al-Shara' failed to
mention in his lengthy speech: lack of cooperation that
Commissioner Mehlis spelled out between the Syrian
Foreign Ministry and the Commission on the subject of
interviewing suspects. Commissioner Mehlis spells out
the fact that, in June, he wrote to Mr. Al-Shara'
requesting meetings and cooperation with regard to
interviews - that is referred to in paragraph 32 of the
report (S/2005/662). He then spells out further details.
Finally, he says that the interviews were indeed
conducted between 20 and 23 September - but at the
Syrian Foreign Ministry. Paragraph 34 states that

"Each interview was conducted in the presence of
the Legal Adviser to the Syrian Foreign Affairs
Ministry or another representative of the Foreign
Ministry, one interpreter, two note takers and, at
times, an additional person whose affiliation was
not identified. At the end of the interview
process, it was apparent that the interviewees had
given uniform answers to questions. Many of
those answers were contradicted by the weight of
evidence collected by the Commission from a
variety of other sources. The Commission has not
had the opportunity to follow up on these
interviews or pursue its investigation regarding a
possible Syrian involvement in the crime."
The report then goes on to say, in paragraph 35,

"The Commission has concluded that the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic's lack
of substantive cooperation with the Commission
has impeded the investigation and made it
difficult to follow leads".

Just to be clear about this - and this is why I
wholly reject any comparison between the position of
the Governments of the United States, of Spain and of
the United Kingdom and that of the Government of
Syria - the independent commissioner concludes, in
paragraph 124, that

"There is probable cause to believe that the
decision to assassinate former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri could not have been taken without
the approval of top-ranked Syrian security
officials".

If Mr. Al-Shara' is suggesting that what happened
on 11 September 2001, 3 March 2004 and 7 July 2005
happened with the approval of the Governments of the
United States, of Spain and of the United Kingdom, I
think that he ought to say so. Otherwise, his
comparison is entirely worthless. We could, indeed,
talk about terrorism and the lack of full application of
previous Security Council resolutions by Syria in
respect of fighting terrorism - something that was
mentioned in the Quartet conclusions just last week.

Like all of my colleagues, I look forward to full
cooperation by the Government of Syria, in substance
as well as in form, with the Mehlis Commission. But I
have to say, after what I have heard, that I am not
holding my breath.

