Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/783) and his
Special Representative Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing today.

Pakistan shares the universal concern regarding
the grave situation in Afghanistan. The Secretary-
General's report highlights the fact that the Afghan
people continue to face a deteriorating political,
economic and security situation in their country. The
Government's inability to control the narcotics trade
and arms smuggling is compounding the situation.
It is with deep regret that I am obliged to reject the
insinuations made by the Afghan Foreign Minister
directed at my country. The fundamental sources of
insecurity in Afghanistan lie inside the country, not
outside. The Afghan Government would therefore be
better advised to focus more seriously on its persistent
challenges and embark on a path of course correction,
rather than blaming others.

The Secretary-General's report refers to Da'esh and
its expanding reach in Afghanistan, including in Kunar
and Nangarhar provinces. It also talks of its increased
influence in the northern and western provinces. These
are worrying signs for Afghan security and for regional
stability, particularly for Afghanistan's immediate
neighbours. As the Afghan Government itself has
acknowledged, more than 20 terrorist organizations are
operating from its soil, including the Tehreek-e-Taliban
Pakistan, otherwise known as TTP, and Jamaat-ul-
Ahrar (J UA). Those organizations are conducting
terrorist attacks inside my country and pose a threat to
Afghanistan's other neighbours.

Wars and turmoil in Afghanistan over the past
four decades have afflicted and infected our region
with extremism and terrorism. Apart from the people
of Afghanistan, it is Pakistan that has borne the brunt
of it all. Terrorism, the arms and drug trade and the
influx of millions of Afghan refugees have undermined
my country's security and retarded our economic
growth and development. Pakistan has a vital stake in
building peace and security in Afghanistan. We have
supported, and will continue to support, all regional and
international efforts to promote a peaceful settlement
to the internal conflict in Afghanistan.

For its part, Pakistan has fought a very successful
war against terrorism. Our military operations, the
largest anti-terrorism campaign anywhere in the world,
involving over 200,000 of our troops, have crushed and
eliminated terrorist groups in our frontier regions and
in our towns and cities. We have paid a heavy price. In
all, 27,000 civilians and soldiers have been martyred,
50,000 injured - many of them maimed for life.
Our economic losses over the past several years are
estimated at $120 billion.

Unfortunately, Pakistan continues to face terrorist
attacks from across the Pakistan-Afghanistan border,
which are conducted by the TTP, the JUA and Islamic
State-related groups, operating from sanctuaries
and safe havens in Afghanistan. We urge the Afghan
Government and coalition forces to take decisive action
to eliminate terrorist safe havens in Afghanistan.
Pakistan is undertaking steps to strengthen border
controls and end sponsored terrorist attacks against
my country. We expect the Afghan Government and
coalition forces to extend full cooperation in ensuring
an end to cross-border attacks from Afghanistan into
my country.

The Secretary General has affirmed the strong
international consensus that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. A peace process
between the Afghan Government and the Afghan
insurgency must be promoted and fully supported. An
intra-Afghan dialogue can succeed only if the Afghan
Government itself endorses the global consensus that
peace can be achieved only through negotiations and
not by the force of arms. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan can play a critical role in
forging that consensus in Kabul.

Pakistan also calls upon the Taliban to abandon
violence and agree to resume talks in one or more
negotiating forums. An agreed de-escalation of the
conflict and a negotiated settlement offers the best
chance to end the suffering of the Afghan people and to
restore peace and tranquillity within Afghanistan and
the region. However, as my Prime Minister stated in
the General Assembly last week (see A/72/PV.14), what
Pakistan is not prepared to do is to fight the Afghan war
on my country's soil. We cannot endorse any strategy
that has repeatedly failed in the past and would only
prolong and intensify the suffering of the people of
Afghanistan, as well as further destabilize the region.

We believe that the strategy to restore peace in
Afghanistan should focus on the following three
elements. First, there must be a coordinated effort
to contain and defeat Da'esh and Al-Qaida and their
associates, including the TTP, the JUA, the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement and the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan. Secondly, Afghanistan must promote a
sustained dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Afghan Taliban and other insurgents willing
to negotiate a peaceful settlement. Thirdly, effective
measures must be taken to prevent cross-border
attacks by terrorists and militants travelling from or
to Afghanistan.

Pakistan remains committed to extending all
possible assistance to our Afghan brothers and sisters,
including by facilitating the transit of Afghanistan's
imports and exports through our ports, helping with
the construction of infrastructure projects through the
utilization of the $500 million commitment we made in
Brussels and by extending our assistance to the Afghan
forces in securing their country. We believe that the
meeting last week here in New York between the
Foreign Ministers of our two countries opens a window
of opportunity to work together to address both security
and economic issues to our mutual benefit.

The bonds of religion, culture, history and
geography that bind the peoples of Pakistan and
Afghanistan are strong and immutable. They will
survive the episodes of external intervention and
external manipulation. Pakistan has struggled together
with the Afghan people to uphold their freedom from
foreign occupation and intervention. We strongly
support Afghanistan's sovereignty. We strongly oppose
its use in games of geopolitical power. While others
can afford to orchestrate a proxy war to destabilize
Afghanistan and its neighbours, for Pakistan a stable
Afghanistan is vital for its own peace, stability and for
our progress.

