Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Under-
Secretary-General Gambari for his briefing.

In the past month the Middle East region has
undergone two bloody conflicts. The peoples of
Palestine, Lebanon and Israel all incurred heavy and
saddening costs. We are deeply distressed and gravely
concerned at this. With the concerted effort of the
international community, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1701 (2006) on this issue on 11 August,
requiring parties to the Lebanese-Israeli conflict to
cease hostilities in a comprehensive manner.

In the past week both Lebanon and Israel
basically abided by their ceasefire commitments. We
should say that this is a victory of diplomatic efforts.
We hope that the Lebanese and Israeli parties will both
earnestly honour their commitments, demonstrate the
greatest good will and do their utmost to implement
resolution 1701 (2006).

The adoption of resolution 1701 (2006) opens a
new chapter in the settlement of the Lebanese-Israeli
conflict. Whether the current peaceful situation can be
consolidated depends on the political will and efforts
of the parties concerned. The next few weeks will be
critical. We believe the top priorities for the
international community lies in the following four
areas.

First, the Lebanese Government must be helped
to exercise effective control over its entire territory. To
that end, the capacity and role of the Government's
forces should be strengthened so that they can truly
shoulder the responsibility for maintaining peace and
security in Lebanon.

Second, the expansion of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) must be stepped
up. Countries in a position to do so should swiftly
contribute troops to ensure UNIFIL's early deployment.

Third, humanitarian assistance to Lebanon must
be increased. Parties to the conflict should cooperate
with the efforts of the international community,
including ensuring safety in the humanitarian corridor.
Israel should also lift the various blockades imposed on
Lebanon as soon as possible.

Fourth, Lebanon should be helped to undertake
post-war recovery and reconstruction. Currently the
country is a scene of devastation and suffering, with
everything screaming to be rebuilt. The international
community should extend a helping hand so that
Lebanon can re-emerge from the rubble of war.

While paying attention to the conflict between
Lebanon and Israel, we should not forget the suffering
of the Palestinian people. We are deeply concerned
over the steadily deteriorating humanitarian and
economic situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Once again we urge all parties concerned to
abide strictly by international humanitarian law, avoid
harming innocent civilians and assist and facilitate the
humanitarian relief activities of the international
community.

Both Israel and Palestine should create conditions
for political settlements. The Israeli side should release
the democratically elected Government officials of
Palestine at an early date, while the Palestinian side
should take measures and work towards an early
release of the abducted Israeli soldiers.

The question of Palestine has always been at the
centre of the Middle East issue. Without success and
reasonable settlement of the legitimate rights and
interests of the Palestinian people, tension in the
Middle East cannot be eased at its roots and genuine
peace will not be realized. We hope that with the joint
efforts of Israel and the Arab countries, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and on the
principle of land for peace, the Middle East peace
process can be revitalized and a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace will be achieved in the region soon.

