Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the delegation of Nigeria for convening this important
debate to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. The Kuwait
delegation aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf ofthe Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of Arab States.

The holding of periodic debates on this agenda
item promotes international interests in the stability
of the region and the Palestinian question, which
is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to defy the resolutions of
international legitimacy. The peoples and States of the
region are therefore hopeful that the Security Council
will shoulder its responsibilities and implement its own
resolutions in that regard.

The Middle East peace process is at a delicate,
unpredictable stage. Israel is fully responsible for the
grave deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations
because it refuses to commit to the terms of reference
for the peace process, the two-State solution and the
establishment of a Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It also
refuses to release the fourth tranche of Palestinian
prisoners. It pursues its policies of provocation and
aggression, which weaken the peace process and set
the stage for serious turmoil in the Middle East in
which peace and security cannot prevail. The Arab and
Palestinian peoples are fed up with Israel's defiance
towards any real initiative to establish a just and lasting
peace.

Among the most salient provocations are Israel's
current policies against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
violation of its commitments under the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law. The
international community should pressure the occupying
Power, Israel, to abandon its systematic extremist
policies for the Judaization of Jerusalem because they
are dangerous, threaten the stability of the region and
intensify hatred, racism and extremism in the region.
Such actions, which seek to change the demographic
and legal character of Jerusalem, are illegal. We call
upon the Council to take immediate action to protect
Jerusalem and to hold Israel to its commitments as per
the resolutions of international legitimacy and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. Israel is also continuing its
settlement policies and to confiscate Palestinian land,
homes and farms. And it continues to hold Palestinians
without trial in Israeli prisons. All such policies and
practices of are not only a challenge to the international
community and a breach of international humanitarian
law but constitute a threat to any real chance for peace
in the Middle East.

General Assembly resolution 68/12, which
proclaims 2014 the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, serves to reiterate the
support of the international community for the steadfast
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. It also
expresses support for a peaceful, lasting and just
settlement of the Palestinian question based on United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle ofland for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map. In that regard, Kuwait supports
the efforts of Palestine to accede to all the specialized
agencies of the United Nations and all international
treaties and protocols. We also support the resolutions
adopted by the League of Arab States at its summit in
Kuwait in March.

We call upon the international community to
pressure Israel to end its illegal blockade of Gaza,
to open all border crossings as per its international
commitments, to end all illegal settlement activities
and to commit to all Security Council resolutions,
including those with respect to withdrawal from all
lands occupied in 1967. Kuwait demands that Israel
implement resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw from the
Syrian Golan to the border of4 June 1967. In addition,
Kuwait is committed to supporting Lebanon and calls
upon Israel to end its continued violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and to withdraw from all Lebanese
territory, in implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

To conclude, we welcome Palestinian national
reconciliation in line with the Cairo declaration of 2011
and the Doha declaration of 2012. This is a positive
step and we commend the Palestinian people and their
leadership for their steadfast commitment to regain
their rights. We will continue to support Palestine at
all levels - political, financial and other - until there
is an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and
Palestine is established as an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

With regard to Syria, only a political solution can
be reached. We call for the resumption of negotiations
in implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). We furthermore call on the
Security Council to follow up on implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014) so that humanitarian assistance
can be provided to the Syrian people.

