Mr. J ele (South Africa): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the member States of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC): Angola, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa,
Seychelles, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

 

We in SADC commend the Secretary-General for his
report, whose holistic approach to the sources of conflict in
Africa has been dealt with in a balanced manner. It is
particularly important that the report provides guidelines on
conflict prevention, management and resolution.

It is imperative that the United Nations strengthen its
capacity in the area of peacekeeping in Africa so as to
respond to conflicts in a way that inspires confidence in its
universal obligation as the custodian of international peace
and security. Conflict prevention is vital and should be
accorded the highest priority and, where conflict has
erupted, timeous and effective management is crucial.

SADC welcomes the Secretary-General's objective to
redouble efforts to institutionalize peace where conflict has
ceased or where the prospects for peace are increased. The
political will of Member States is therefore pivotal in this
process and, in that context, it is important to stress the
need for dialogue and national reconciliation.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter makes
provision for regional arrangements to ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security. It further
stipulates that such arrangements should be consistent with
the purposes and principles of the Charter. This provision
of the Charter provides a framework for developing closer
cooperation between Africa and the United Nations in peace
missions. Therefore, there is a need to reinforce and
implement the existing measures in a manner that promotes
meaningful interaction between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU).

We share the Secretary-General's concern about the
proliferation of arms and endorse his proposals for
strengthening the international and domestic instruments for
the harmonization of policies against illicit arms trafficking,
as this would serve to promote stability. There is an urgent
need to divert the expenditure of scarce resources from
military to development projects.

As the integration of credible deterrent capacities, the
provision of sufficient resources and the mustering of
commensurate political will are imperatives for successful
peacekeeping, it is essential that external actors maintain
common and coherent political approaches towards incipient
or ongoing conflicts and desist from engaging in rival or
competing efforts once a framework for mediation has been
established.

With regard to sanctions, we concur that they are
among the most important tools in peacemaking efforts, but
would emphasize that they should be imposed in
accordance with annex II of resolution 51/242, which
underlines the need for sanctions to be resorted to only
with utmost caution in order to minimize their adverse
effects on the civilian population.

The enhancement of Africa's capacity to operate in
peace missions has been a subject of much debate. Sadly,
international resources provided are commensurate neither
with specific needs nor with the proposed support for
capacity-building. The current processes required by
donor countries to access financing for training exercises
are laborious and often not responsive to the urgency with
which Africa is expected to increase its capacity. We
therefore fully support the Secretary-General's call on
Member States to contribute generously to the OAU
Peace Fund. Once the proper criteria have been
established for endorsing peace missions and needs
assessments have been made regarding those aspects of
Africa's capacity which require strengthening, it would be
easier to determine the applicability and depth of regional
and subregional needs.

We are also encouraged by the practical
recommendations regarding refugee assistance, the
enhancement of the professionalism of public officials and
the creation of a positive environment for investment and
economic growth. The proposals to secure a more
dynamic engagement between business leaders, the United
Nations, the Organization of African Unity and
subregional entities are most appropriate. These
interactions should greatly facilitate an understanding of
the debilitating effect of Africa's problems.

There is a need for the international community to
nurture and advance Africa's renaissance by recognizing
the continent as the principal development challenge
through effective and well-targeted strategies for
development. We would like to underline the principle
that respect for human rights should be linked to the
broader context of peace, democracy, good governance
and development. Respect for these fundamentals would
assist in obviating the instability and violence which have,
sadly, beset parts of our continent and led to large-scale
population movements and the associated misery,
transcending borders.

Central to Africa's renaissance is the economic
regeneration of the continent through economic reform, so
Vital in attracting foreign direct investment. However, one
of the major obstacles to African development is the
inability to address the debt problem generally and its

 

servicing in all respects. The problem of the unsustainable
debt burden has vexed African development practitioners
for a very long time. Despite bilateral and multilateral
approaches to resolve it, its cumulative impact persists. We
call on the international community to explore and
implement more vigorous and effective methods for a
lasting solution to this problem. It is also of cardinal
importance to Africa's sustainable development that the
developed countries rethink and reverse the decline in levels
of official development assistance to make it more effective
and capable of delivery.

We in Africa are determined to demonstrate to the
world that we are prepared to tackle our own problems. We
trust, therefore, that this determination will serve as an
encouragement to the international community to invest in
Africa's renaissance. SADC is committed to the eradication
of the causes of conflict in Africa to ensure sustainable
development.

