Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Successive United
Nations Missions, from the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) to the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH), have laid solid foundations for peace and
stability in Haiti. They have achieved important progress,
in particular, in professionalising the Haitian National
Police, which is vital to the rule of law and the successful
transition to a stable democracy.

And yet, in the light of the precarious security
situation and the lack of a functioning judicial system,
compounded by the climate of political instability, more
should be done if the international community's hard-won
achievements are to be made irreversible. The
consolidation of the rule of law is the very basis for
promoting human rights and democracy. This is possible
only when Haiti has an effective, politically neutral and
professional law enforcement mechanism. In this regard,
the professionalization of the Haitian National Police is
the most cost-effective way for the international
community to make a difference in the destiny of Haiti by
helping to consolidate the rule of law in that country.

We wish to emphasize here again that international
assistance cannot be a substitute for fulfilment of the
ultimate responsibility of the Haitian people and their
political leaders to resolve their own problems. In this
connection, it is our strong hope that the political forces
in Haiti will work together to put an end to the ongoing
political paralysis.

In the longer term, peace and stability in Haiti will
be viable only when firmly backed by a functioning
democracy and socio-economic development. For this
reason, we look forward to the successful holding of a
general election in November next year and attach great
importance to the sustained support of international
financial institutions and the specialized agencies of the
United Nations in the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Haiti.

The Republic of Korea reiterates its strong
commitment to peace and stability, based on the rule of
law and vibrant democracy, in Haiti. We have provided
assistance to Haiti in the modest amount of more than
$500,000 since 1995, including a voluntary contribution
of $200,000 to the Trust Fund established under Security
Council resolution 975 (1995) and the provision of police
equipment on a bilateral basis.

Korea takes note of the request of President Preval,
and supports the establishment of a United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti. We therefore will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Finally, we highly commend Mr. ter Horst for his
eminent leadership and the men and women who have

 

served in the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH) for the successful completion of their mission.

