Mr. Owada (Japan): More than four months have
passed since the democratically elected Government of
Sierra Leone was overthrown by the junta led by Major
Johnny Koroma, flagrantly violating the framework
established in the Abidjan Agreement, and putting in
jeopardy the peace process in Sierra Leone, which had
been so assiduously worked out by the international
community. Japan once again condenms this act. Japan
expresses its grave concern about the threat to
international peace and security in the region that this act
of violence against the constitutional order has brought
about, as well as about the violence and human rights
violations committed against the civilian population and
foreigners, the humanitarian consequences of the coup
and the interference in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The junta has been persistently ignoring the
voice of the international community as reflected in the
three statements that the President of the Security Council
has issued since the coup. The junta is strongly urged to
take immediate steps to relinquish power and to restore
constitutional order in Sierra Leone.

I should like to reiterate Japan's support for the
efforts of members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and other States of the region
to resolve the crisis in Sierra Leone. In this context, I

 

wish to express my Government's appreciation for the
steadfast and tireless efforts of ECOWAS to engage the
junta in dialogue and to search for a peaceful end to the
crisis in Sierra Leone. I should also like to convey Japan's
support for the mediation efforts of the United Nations, as
well as for the endeavours of the Secretary-General's newly
appointed Special Envoy, Mr. Francis Okelo. It is most
regrettable that the junta has not responded with all the
earnestness that is required to these calls for dialogue.
Japan calls upon the military leaders to take upon
themselves the responsibility for resolving the crisis and to
participate in good faith in an effort to bring about a just
resolution of the current abnormal situation.

Since the junta has been consistently turning a deaf ear
to the voice of the international community, this Council is
now obliged to address the situation by taking concrete
measures, as provided for in the draft resolution before us.
I wish to recall that the purpose of these measures is not to
punish the junta for the sake of punishment. It is an attempt
on the part of the Security Council to uphold the principles
involved. The measures are intended as a means of
prevailing upon the military regime to listen to the voice of
the international community and to heed the calls of the
Security Council to make way for the democratically
elected Government of Sierra Leone and thereby restore the
constitutional order in that country.

At the same time, Japan is acutely aware of the
possibility that the sanctions restricting the sale and supply
of petroleum and petroleum products may cause further
hardship to the people of Sierra Leone. The draft resolution
addresses this point in two ways: first, by requesting that
appropriate exceptions be made for humanitarian reasons
and, secondly, by calling upon ECOWAS, the various
agencies of the United Nations and other organizations to
endeavour to make appropriate arrangements for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. It is hoped that through
the implementation of these provisions the negative impact
of the sanctions on the civilian population will be kept to
a minimum. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Sierra Leone and will be
interested in its evaluation of the humanitarian conditions
there.

In view of the elements that I have enumerated as
being essential, Japan deems the contents of the draft
resolution before us to be appropriate. Japan will therefore
support this draft resolution. Japan will continue to follow
closely developments in Sierra Leone.

