Mr. Otunnu: The day has been long and full and
I shall not detain the Council for much longer. My
comments will be very telegraphic. The critiques,
insights and observations made by members of the
Council and other delegates have all been noted. I only
wish to clarify a few areas of common concern.

With regard to the role of Governments, let me
state as clearly as I possibly can that the primary
responsibility for protecting children lies with the
national authorities, and that the role of United Nations
agencies and other international actors should
supplement those efforts, not supplant them. In
situations where, because of the protracted experience
of war, national institutions have been weakened, the
rejuvenation of those institutions should be a priority
for all international partners.

Regarding dialogue with parties in conflict,
again, let me clarify that this dialogue is solely for the
purpose of ensuring protection of and access to
vulnerable children. It should be done in complete
transparency, with the knowledge and cooperation of
local authorities, and it should not in any way
compromise the framework of peace processes and
negotiations; it should fall within that framework.

We are interested in the monitoring exercise not
simply in terms of what has gone wrong - the bad
news, the grave violations. As you see in the Secretary-
General's report, we are equally interested in what is
going right. In fact, the ultimate goal is to ensure that
in every situation remedial measures are taken by the
parties in conflict working in collaboration with United
Nations agencies and local civil society to remedy the
situations.

With regard to what kinds of measures should be
taken, again, it is important to emphasize that there is a
wide range of measures to be brought to bear on parties
to conflict so that they modify their conduct relative to
the protection of children. Those measures include
public opinion, both local and international; and
juridical measures and juridical accountability before
national courts and before the International Criminal
Court. They certainly include diplomatic and political
pressure, both local and international. And, as an
extreme measure - because we are now dealing with
extreme situations - there should also be targeted
sanctions. However, sanctions are not to be applied
exclusively, but in addition to other measures.
Together, these form a comprehensive approach that
should lead to the modification of the conduct of
parties on the ground.

Civil society and non-governmental
organizations - both local, based within the countries
and communities concerned, and international - have
crucial roles to play in this exercise. Indeed, that is laid
out in great detail in paragraphs 136 and 137 of the
report.

I should now like to say one word about whether
or not we are talking about situations beyond the
context of conflict: no. Some of the abuses described in
this report may be reproduced; they may be perpetrated
in situations other than conflict situations. But this
mandate, this exercise, is strictly about Violations that
are taking place in the context of conflict.

Finally, a word about the issue of resources. The
mechanism being proposed for monitoring and
reporting - and this is stated explicitly in the report -
does not envisage the creation of a new entity or
structure within the United Nations. Rather, it calls for
the streamlining, the coordination, of the existing
actors and existing structures, both on the ground and
at the Headquarters level. Secondly, in connection with
resources, particularly at the ground level if the
operational actors - such as UNICEF, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and non-governmental organizations - are to perform
well the roles envisaged in this mechanism, they will
need to strengthen their capacities, such as staff; for
example, they will need to provide better and more
targeted training. And that will have implications in
terms of the resources that they will mobilize in the
way in which they usually mobilize resources for
programmes of this nature.

All of the other points are well noted; I shall take
up some of them bilaterally, especially the exceedingly
important critique provided by the delegation of India,
reiterating points that they have previously made. We
are having an ongoing bilateral dialogue on those very
important points.

Finally, we are very grateful to you,
Mr. President, for sending the clearest possible signal
that our children matter and their protection matters
because the future of our societies matters. I also thank
the Ministers from France, Japan and Tanzania, who
came from their capitals to be here today to lend their
support and influence to this project. Finally, I thank
the members of the Council and the other
representatives for their participation.

