Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I have the pleasant duty of
expressing my delegation's satisfaction at seeing the
representative of France presiding over the Security
Council as we begin the year. My country enjoys
excellent relations with France, relations that are based
on mutual trust and respect. Allow me also,
Mr. President, to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Colombia. I commend him for the
skill and ability with which he discharged his difficult
tasks during his presidency last month.

I would like to congratulate Angola, Chile,
Germany, Pakistan and Spain on becoming members of
the Council. I would also like to pay well-deserved
tribute to the outgoing members. We are very grateful
to them for their efforts, in particular with regard to the
search for peace in my country.

Lastly, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting of the Security
Council. I also express my gratitude for the Secretary-
General's important report on children and armed
conflict (S/2002/1299), which Special Representative
Olara Otunnu presented this morning with his usual
eloquence. I also thank Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), for her important statement.

With regard to the item under consideration, I
would like to remind the Council that problems
pertaining to the protection of children are central to
my Government's primary concerns. That concern is
reflected, for example, in the existence of an
institutional and legal framework to guarantee the
rights of children. Despite the continuing financial
difficulties and war, my Government has reacted
positively to all the recommendations relating to the
protection of children that are contained in the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 1325 (2000) on the subject of women and
peace and security. Furthermore, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is party to the major
international instruments on the protection of the rights
of the child, including the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocols on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography, the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention No. 138 - concerning
the minimum age for employment - and No. 182 -
on the elimination of the worst forms of child labour,
and, of course, the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The implementation of the
Rome Statute is of great importance to my
Government, which expended great effort to facilitate
its entry into force, which took place on 1 July 2002.
This treaty includes an important provision to protect
the rights of children, making it a war crime to
conscript children under the age of 15 years into
national armed forces.
The Council should also recall that my
Government has been greatly involved in the process of
protecting children, including through the
promulgation of its Decree-Law No. 66, of 9 June
2000, which dealt with the demobilization and
reintegration of vulnerable groups in armed forces.
That political will has been reflected in the
establishment of an appropriate structure, the National
Bureau for Demobilization and Reintegration
(BUNADER), which is charged with following up and
implementing the decree-law in partnership with
UNICEF, whose valuable work is greatly appreciated.

Since 1997, my Government has been aware of
the urgency of the need to end the presence of child
soldiers known as kadogo in the Congolese armed
forces. Since that time, my Government has developed
several programmes to demobilize child soldiers. Most
of those programmes required multilateral support, in
particular through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the Human Rights Field
Office in Kinshasa. Other programmes required
bilateral assistance.

While today we welcome the sincere cooperation
and partnership that has developed between my
Government and the United Nations system as a whole,
as well as the efforts under way to end this deplorable
situation and fully implement norms and principles on
the rights of the child and on their protection, we must
nevertheless recognize that, at the time, the response of
the United Nations, the international community and
donor countries did not meet our expectations. Reasons
having to do with security, inaccessibility and, frankly,
a lack of confidence in the capacity and the will of my
Government to implement its policies to protect the
rights of the child resulted in the United Nations being
very late in providing support to my Government with
regard to formulating appropriate policies to protect
children in armed conflict and implementing
initiatives, particularly outreach initiatives and those
aimed at raising awareness.

Nevertheless - pursuant to the relevant
provisions of resolution 1261 (1999) of 25 August
1999, in which the Security Council called upon States
and the relevant parts of the United Nations system to
intensify their efforts to end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict - I would like to reaffirm to
the Council that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has ended the enlistment of children in the Congolese
armed forces. That is in contrast to the behaviour of the
armed groups that hold sway in occupied provinces,
which continue to employ child soldiers in the theatre
of military operations. A process of demobilization for
child soldiers is now taking place under the supervision
of BUNADER and UNICEF. However, the future of
those soldiers continues to be of major concern and to
pose an immense problem.

When one takes into account the fact that serious
acts of banditry, particularly in Kinshasa, are being
carried out by armed young people, one has to wonder
about the wisdom of launching these young people into
the world without any financial incentives or viable
possibilities to reintegrate into society, especially as we
are dealing with young people in their prime who know
how to handle weapons. This phenomenon represents a
time bomb for the entire Congolese society, as well as a
real problem that the United Nations is tackling very
timidly and one that the Government alone cannot
address due to a lack of funds. It is important that steps
be taken not only immediately but also through the
implementation of chapter VI of the comprehensive,
inclusive agreement on the transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, relating to the training of our
national army.

We must all take concrete action very quickly.
Paragraph 55 of the report of the Secretary-General
under consideration (S/2002/ 1299) mentions a
commitment by the World Bank and donor countries to
support a regional multi-country demobilization and
reintegration programme for the entire Great Lakes
region. To us, such a commitment still seems to be a
long way off.

Last Thursday, France made 1 million euros
available to the United Nations Development
Programme. Of that amount, 200,000 euros are
immediately available for a programme to return to
civilian life foreign ex-combatants located in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. France's
contribution, following a contribution of 2 million
euros to the funds of the World Bank, gives France the
leading rank in support for the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration programme of United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). That will greatly assist the
return of foreign ex-combatants - including the child
soldiers among them - to their countries of origin and
their families and homes.

Furthermore, implementing the relevant
provisions of resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001),
MONUC has established child protection units. But
given the proliferation of armed groups and their
dispersion, and given the size of our national territory,
one might question their effectiveness and advocate a
substantial increase in the number of their personnel
within MONUC so that they can be more effective.

The international community is also called on to
help the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
implementation by the Government and the future
transition authorities of the relevant recommendations
made by the delegates to the inter-Congolese dialogue.

The war of aggression that has raged in my
country for four years now, in violation of the United
Nations Charter, has not only given rise to the
phenomenon of child soldiers, whose forced
recruitment continues in the occupied provinces. For
children, this war has brought a succession of miseries,
of which they are the first victims. Thousands of them
survive, marginalized throughout the country, cut off
from society and their own families, living in the
streets alone or in groups, sexually exploited and
abused, breaking the law, without protection or future.

This war of aggression has also led to the forced,
brutal and tragic displacement of populations within
the borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and has forced many Congolese into exile in
neighbouring countries. It has also encouraged all
kinds of violations of fundamental human rights,
particularly those related to the physical integrity of
women and children.

My delegation wishes to express my
Government's concern at the events currently taking
place in the east, in Uvira, and further north, in Beni,
Mambasa, Bunia, Kilo, Mongwalu and Mahagi. A
major humanitarian crisis has been created, especially
due to the forced displacement of thousands of people,
which has been confirmed by MONUC. Purely
commercial reasons are at the base of this upsurge in
tension, in which, through opposing Congolese
factions, Ugandan generals and Rwandan businessmen
equally attempt to gain control of the goldmines of
Kilo-Moto and of the Mongwalu area.

My Government denounces the delaying tactics
employed by Rwanda and Uganda, as well as their
manoeuvring to prolong the war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those two countries, after
signing agreements with my country, were quick to
incite new rebellions and create new warlords. Uganda
created the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC) -
headed by Mr. Thomas Lubanga, a notorious hostage-
taker and known criminal - which is not a signatory
of the Pretoria Agreement. For its part, Rwanda has
given the present Governor of Nord-Kivu, Mr. Serufuli,
responsibility for leading a militia of almost 20,000
men, essentially Hutus released from the prisons of
Rwanda by the Kigali Government, with the mission of
sowing terror, looting and committing massacres
among the civilian population.

My Government expresses its dismay at
information reporting widespread cases of looting and
mass rape of women and girls and summary and
extrajudicial executions perpetrated by the Mouvement
pour le liberation du Congo (MLC) and its ally, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie-National
(RCD-N), as well as by the UPC.

My Government is scandalized by the discovery
of mass graves in Mambasa, where violent clashes
continue between, on the one side, the troops of the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie -
Mouvement de liberation (RCD-ML) and on the other,
the troops of the RCD-N, in coalition with the MLC.

My Government is shocked at the allegations
made by representatives of the Catholic Church and
non-governmental organizations for the defence of
human rights alleging acts of cannibalism by soldiers
of the MLC and the RCD-N, principally and
specifically targeting pygmy populations and the
Nande people. My Government awaits the conclusions
of the investigation carried out by the United Nations
and hopes that those conclusions will be made public
so that light will be shed on that indescribable act of
terror and those dreadful events. If that unimaginable
barbaric savagery turns out to be true, my Government
would ask the Security Council to take against the
alleged perpetrators, authors and those responsible all
measures authorized under the Charter of the United
Nations in order to stop those atrocities and crimes,
which now fall within the purview of the International
Criminal Court.

In conclusion, my Government appeals to all our
international, regional and subregional partners to help
us carry out our programme to promote and to protect
the rights of children. There is an urgent need to renew
international commitments to make children a priority
so that we do not waste the most precious human
resource in the world and to build a stable and
productive society. The future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo lies in the well-being of its
children. Investing in children today will ensure peace,
stability, security, democracy and sustainable
development for present and future generations.

