Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Pecsteen de Buytswerve and Ambassador Skoog for
their briefings and commend the parties concerned for
their efforts.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
endorsed by the Security Council, is a significant
achievement of multilateral diplomacy and an essential
component of international order based on international
law. It is of crucial importance for safeguarding the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and

maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.

The Iranian nuclear issue is reaching a critical
turning point, and the implementation of the JCPOA is
being put to a severe test. Dialogue and negotiation point
to a realistic avenue to settle the Iranian nuclear issue.
The full and effective implementation of the JCPOA is
the only correct and effective way to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue and ease the current situation. All the
parties concerned should work together to restore the
balance of rights and obligations under the plan.

China is concerned about the United States
unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA and its increase
of unilateral sanctions against Iran. In the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/934), he also states his
belief that such steps on the part of the United States
continue to run contrary to the goals set out in the
JCPOA and the resolution and may also impede Iran's
ability to implement certain provisions of the plan or
the resolution. The Secretary-General's observation
warrants serious attention on the part of the Council
and all the parties.

China has noted that Iran has remained largely
restrained in reducing its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA, and that it has stressed that all the
steps that it has taken in that regard are reversible
and subject to the monitoring and verification of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). All the
parties to the agreement should exercise restraint and
stay within the framework of the Joint Commission to
strengthen consultations, resolve their differences and
refrain from taking steps that might further complicate
the situation.

China commends all the parties to the agreement
for their courage and efforts. We appreciate Russia's
continued efforts to take forward the modification of
the Fordow nuclear facility. We welcome the European
Union's positive progress in setting up the Instrument
in Support of Trade Exchanges, and we support France
in its continued diplomatic good offices. We further
support the IAEA in its continued objective and
impartial position in monitoring and verifying Iran's
nuclear activities.

China has always been committed to settling the
Iranian nuclear issue through political and diplomatic
channels and remains committed to consolidating the
international nuclear non-proliferation system and
safeguarding international regional peace and stability.
China is a negotiator of and participant in the JCPOA,
as well as its staunch defender and enforcer. China
will continue to work with all the parties to make new
progress in the modernization of the Arak heavy-water
reactor. We will continue to be objective, impartial
and responsible in our tireless efforts to uphold and
implement the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).

China commends the Secretary-General's report
for its call to uphold the agreement, protect the
freedom to pursue legitimate business with Iran,
support the procurement channel and maintain
regional stability. In the meantime, the report should
reflect the implementation of the resolution in an
objective, balanced and comprehensive manner so as
to ensure the accuracy of the information and fully
address Iran's legitimate concerns and lawful rights
and interests.

The 2231 format of the Council is not a sanctions
mechanism. The Facilitator of the format and the
Secretariat should act strictly in accordance with their
mandate and function. In the current circumstances, all
the parties need to exercise caution in addressing Iran's
missile launches and accurately interpret the relevant
Council resolution in order to avoid any negative
impact on the overall picture of the implementation of
the JCPOA. China notes Iran's repeated statements on
the conventional and self-defensive nature of its missile
programme and hopes that the parties will take the
Iranian position seriously.

The proper handling of the Iranian nuclear issue is
closely linked to the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Middle East. Recently, the Middle East has seen
continued tensions and rapidly evolving hotspot issues.
China calls on all the parties concerned to remain calm,
exercise restraint, resolve disputes through dialogue
and consultation, refrain from taking actions that might
escalate regional tensions, respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries and refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of others. China
supports the Gulf countries in conducting dialogue on
regional security issues and supports the countries of
the region in their efforts to resolve conflicts.

