We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. At this particular juncture, the Council needs to be more proactive than ever in order to revitalize a broad political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is, by all accounts, forcing Governments, communities and people around the world to think beyond the current situation and build a new future for themselves, with a renewed sense of common humanity. Humankind has never been so vulnerable to the impacts of a crisis for which no one seems to be prepared and from which no country is protected. The Syrians deserve the same. The Syrians deserve the right to plan for the future - a future of freedom, justice and respect for their rights. Are we doing what we need to do to support them? The Syrians need assurances - assurances that a nationwide ceasefire will be sustainable and long-lasting; that if they get infected with coronavirus, it is not a death sentence; that there will be accountability for the atrocities that have been committed against their civilians; and that, above all, they will be able to return to their homes, villages and cities, and that their basic needs will be met in the framework of an inclusive and just rule of law. But to achieve all that, a political process needs to be in place that responds to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Why are we not there yet? Let us ask ourselves that question. And let us avoid, once and for all, pointing fingers at one another and move forward. The situation in Syria remains complex and fragile. The humanitarian situation is dire for millions, including those who are on the brink of starvation. The reports of human rights violations in the south and continued tensions along cross-lines across the north are deeply concerning for the Dominican Republic. We cannot afford to come together again, month after month, to repeat the same recipe for action. We call on the Syrian Government, the opposition and civil society to unite, if not with each other, then with the Syrian people. We call on it to unite with the women and make their aspirations its aspirations, and to unite with the young people and make their aspirations its aspirations. But we also call on those with influence on the parties in conflict to seize every opportunity they have to promote dialogue and concertation, to ensure that the ceasefire in the north holds and to extend it to the whole nation, and to help the parties commit to the Constitutional Committee while also advancing in terms of the release of detainees, increased confidence-building measures and the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons, providing them with all the assurances necessary for a dignified life. We remain confident that all this is possible. Determination and political will be required to boost the broader political process, as envisioned in resolution 2254 (2015). The time is now. The responsibility is ours. How much longer must they wait?
