Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his briefing. Many thanks also go to Special Envoy
Madeira for his information on the African Union-led
regional initiative against the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA).
The humanitarian impact of the scourge of the LRA
is unspeakable. It depends not on the size of the LRA,
but on its massive use of Violence, including sexual
violence against women and children, abductions
and horrifying attacks. It has uprooted hundreds of
thousands of civilians across the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan. The ability of the LRA to operate
across national borders and to exploit weak State
authority in the region highlights the urgent need for
a comprehensive, coherent and coordinated approach.

The threat posed by the LRA to regional stability
needs to end. The human consequences of the LRA's
atrocities need to be addressed. The protection of
children deserves our special attention, as the LRA
is synonymous with the brutal abduction and use of
children as child soldiers, porters, spies and sex slaves.
As Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, we will ensure a close
follow-up of the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the situation of children and armed conflict affected
by the LRA (S/2012/365) and strive for comprehensive
recommendations. We reiterate that a durable solution
to the LRA threat requires both military efforts, carried
out in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, and non-military efforts, including
enhanced humanitarian aid and development measures.

It is against this backdrop that I would like to
highlight three points.

First, the Governments of Uganda, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan are ultimately responsible for ending
the LRA threat and for protecting their civilians. They
need to be in the lead. Their political commitment and
cooperation at the State, military and community levels
are indispensable. We therefore want to encourage them
to make the response to the LRA a national priority,
to further strengthen their collaboration, and to invest
all necessary resources in the implementation of the
African Union (AU) initiative against the LRA. We
commend the support that is provided in this regard by
the United States to the affected countries.

The successful rehabilitation and reintegration of
ex-LRA combatants could promote further defections.
We therefore want to also encourage the countries of
the region to put in place policies supporting defections,
including through comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR) programmes, and to ensure a
common approach with respect to a legal framework
on the treatment of ex-LRA and abductees who have
escaped from the LRA.

Secondly, we welcome the close collaboration
between Special Representative Abou Moussa
and Special Envoy Madeira in support of the AU
initiative against the LRA. We consider the African
Union involvement to be essential to strengthening
coordination, information-sharing and trust among the
four militaries of the LRA-affected countries. We also
encourage the African Union to prioritize the protection
of civilians and to implement a strategy in this regard.
All military efforts against the LRA need to put the
protection of civilians, notably also of children, front
and centre.

Thirdly, we strongly welcome and support the United
Nations regional strategy to address the LRA threat.
It provides a good basis for improving cross-border
mechanisms and regional inter-mission cooperation
in all relevant fields. We commend the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for its
leading role in coordinating the strategy and all United
Nations actors for their contributions.

The cooperation between the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to extend
MONUSCO's regional LRA communication strategy is
a good example of enhanced inter-mission cooperation
that is already in place. Further efforts are needed. We
therefore encourage the swift implementation of the
strategy. This will require the full commitment of all
United Nations actors and external partners.

The successful implementation will also depend
on the further support of the international community.
Germany is committed to contributing to that end. Apart
from humanitarian assistance provided to LRA-affected
communities, we will support the expansion of
MONUSCO's standard operating procedures for
DDRRR across the region. The project will also provide
support for sensitizing LRA combatants with the aim of
encouraging defections. All activities will also include
capacity-building for national actors, including civil
society.

UNOCA's follow-up of the regional strategy will
be important and needs to remain a priority. The
Security Council should be kept informed accordingly
by a report of the Secretary-General, as suggested in
the draft presidential statement prepared by the United
Kingdom delegation, which we fully support.

Turning finally to UNOCA's wider role, we
commend Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
for their contribution to peace and stability in the Central
African region. We support the work priorities set out
in the report of the Secretary-General, in particular
support for the capacity-building of the Economic
Community of Central African States in the field of
early warning and conflict prevention, enhancing
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, and for the
AU-led efforts to address the LRA threats. These areas
should remain at the core of UNOCA's activities. We
welcome the established working relations between
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the envisaged joint initiatives on terrorism and
illicit flow of weapons across the two subregions, Given
UNOCA's limited resources, it will remain crucial to
prioritize its work programme and to focus on specific
activities.

In closing, I want to express our support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNOCA, including for UNOCA's mandate renewal in
August.

