Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank
today's briefers.

The challenges facing the Sahel region are complex
and becoming increasingly so. The United Kingdom is
concerned about the increasing incidence of terrorism,
criminality and intercommunity violence in central
Mali. We share the Secretary-General's concerns about
the spread of insecurity and terrorism to other parts
of the region, including eastern Burkina Faso. Many
speakers today have talked about the importance not
only of security - although that is key - but also about
development, and the wider economic development and
provision of services that are required. We can see our
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in action in
this region. There is not one single element that can
ensure success alone. All of them are needed. There
are economic and social issues that go back decades
and that underpin the instability in the Sahel. Our
development work must address those long-standing
causes of the instability we see while also emphasizing
individual rights.

The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-S Sahel) needs to tackle terrorism and create the
space for Governments and international organizations
to safely deliver services. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), of course, is a crucial component
of assisting Governments in that space. In Mali in
particular, we need to focus on the peace process and
recommit to it. All those components are therefore not
only individually but collectively vital, and it is the
core task of all in leadership roles, whether in New
York, Nouakchott or on the ground, to ensure that those
efforts are connected, sequenced and effective. And it
would help the Council if we could hear more about
those joint activities in practice as well as in theory.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1006)
sets out, there is clear progress to applaud. We recognize
the leaders and the personnel of the G-5 Sahel States
for continuing their efforts to unite and work together
despite difficult and adverse circumstances. The
United Kingdom is particularly encouraged by the
successful deployments of troops and the conduct of
six Joint Force operations on the boundary zones; the
full operationalization of the three sector headquarters
and the launch of the Sahel security and defence
colleges. We recognize the bravery and dedication of
the G-5 Joint Force in what Mr. Lacroix described as an
alarming security situation.

We were also pleased to see the update on the human
rights and international humanitarian law compliance
framework. The United Kingdom emphasizes the
importance of ensuring that the operations of the Joint
Force are conducted in full compliance with international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We welcome the steps
already taken to advance the compliance framework
and encourage continued efforts to embed and make
it operational throughout the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
The protection of civilians and the operationalization
of the framework are vital to maintaining the support
and consent of the populations that the Joint Force was
created to protect.

Moving forward, we want to encourage the G-5
Sahel secretariat to finalize the Joint Force's strategic
concept of operations, which will both demonstrate
unity of purpose within the Joint Force and boost
donor confidence. We call on the G-5 Sahel countries
to expedite their efforts to deploy all their outstanding
troops and fully establish the police component in
order to address the growing transborder threat that
the region is facing. I welcomed Mr.Sidikou's bluntness
this morning. We also strongly urge all partners to
make good on the financial commitments they have
made to the Joint Force as soon as possible in order
to ensure that it becomes even more of a reality as
quickly as it can. The United Kingdom reiterates its
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. To that end we
have contributed 15.5 per cent of the package of support
of the European Union (EU) to the Joint Force as well
as pledging £2 million in bilateral support, and we
have deployed three Chinook helicopters to the Sahel
to support Operation Barkhane. That is on top of the
approximately $200 million that we have provided to
the Sahel in development and humanitarian assistance
between 2018 and 2019.

The United Kingdom recognizes the contribution
of the regional actors working for stability in the Sahel,
including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
EU missions, and we support the technical assistance
and training they are providing. Enhance coordination
is key to ensuring that the various stabilization efforts
have maximum impact and avoid duplication. We
commend the EU's role in managing the coordination
hub so far, and recognize its intention to transfer the
hub to the G-5 Sahel once it has the capacity to receive
and host it. To that end, we strongly urge the G-5 Sahel
to accelerate the establishment of the support group that
will serve as a platform for exchanges and coordination
with national, regional and international partners.

I made it clear earlier that military action alone is
not the solution to this issue, and I outlined some of
what the United Kingdom has done to that end. With
that in mind, we welcome the recalibration of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the launch
of the United Nations Support Plan, which provides
an important framework for addressing the structural
impediments to development, peace and security in the
region in a more integrated manner, and the issues in
the Sahel more generally, which, as I said before, go
back decades. We also welcome the continuing role
taken by the Peacebuilding Commission in mobilizing
commitments and partnerships between the United
Nations system, the countries of the Sahel and other
international and regional partners with a view to
advancing implementation of the Integrated Strategy.

