Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia for their briefings and actions. I would like to reiterate Belgium's full support. Before saying a few words on the political situation and on human rights and security issues, I would like to offer, through Ambassador Osman, my condolences to the families of the victims of the attack on a hotel in the capital on Sunday. Such terrorist acts are unacceptable and demonstrate once again that the Somali Government and the Somali armed forces must prioritize the country's security. With regard to the political situation, I wish to welcome the resumption, in July, of a high-level political dialogue between the Federal Government and the federal member states. That is an encouraging and entirely necessary development to address the urgent issues facing Somalia. We must ensure that the dialogue continues and that a consensus is reached between the Federal Government and all the federal member states. We hope that the removal of Prime Minister Khayre, in problematic circumstances, does not signal a change of direction. Time is running out to take important decisions on the organization of the elections, but such decisions must absolutely be the result of a compromise, not a unilateral decision taken by a Somali political institution or actor. We also encourage the authorities to broaden the democratic space in order to allow for the participation of a large part of the population, including women, young people and internally displaced persons, in those processes, which are crucial for the future of the country. In that context, Belgium also echoes the representative of the United Kingdom in expressing our concern about the attacks on journalists who are doing their work and exercising their freedom of expression. With regard to human rights, we remain concerned about the grave violations against children. As Chair of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, I am pleased to confirm that the Group very recently adopted conclusions on Somalia, with the ongoingsupport of Assistant Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter. The group welcomes those conclusions, in particular the efforts made by the Federal Government. Belgium encourages the Government to continue its efforts aimed at implementing the necessary legislation to combat several types of violations, including the draft law on sexual violence. On this point, we are concerned about the introduction in Parliament of a new text that appears to be incompatible with Somalia's international obligations. Finally, Sunday's attack reminds us that Al-Shabaab remains the primary threat to the security and stability of the country. The development and deployment of the Somali army is essential to containing this threat and protecting the population. We await the review of the transition plan, which will be the key document to guiding Somalia, with the help of its partners, towards regaining control of its security and reconfiguring the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I wish to recall the support that the European Union is providing to Somalia through the financing of AMISOM, the European Union Training Mission and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia and the anti-maritime-piracy Operation Atalanta. The support of the international community is not limited to the security sector. There is of course also humanitarian aid, which is badly needed by the population, as the number of food-insecure people is in the millions. There is also support for institutional capacity-building, as the restoration of State authority is not simply a military operation; it is a matter of the Somali authorities providing the population with the basic services and freedoms to which they aspire.
