The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
formal meeting of the Council for the month of May, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Liu Jieyi, Permanent Representative of China, for his
service as President of the Council for the month of
April. I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Liu and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Health care in armed conflict

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Micronesia,
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
the United Arab Emirates and Vanuatu to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Peter Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and Ms. Joanne Liu, International President of
Medecins Sans Frontieres.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/380, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxemborg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Micronesia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, .

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhana's.

Infavour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)


The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2286 (2016).

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him
the floor.


