Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me begin
by commending the delegation of Sweden on its
assumption of membership in the Security Council and
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January, as well as for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation would also like
to take a moment to welcome the other new members
of the Council, namely, Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan. We wish them a very productive term. I
also thank Special Envoy Mladenov for his briefing.

This open debate is taking place only two days
after the adoption of the joint statement at the Middle
East Peace Conference in Paris, which reaffirmed
that the two-State solution is the only way to achieve
a just, lasting and comprehensive resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The joint statement also
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
which, among other things, condemns the settlement
activity. Indonesia wishes to express its full support
for those positive outcomes - the resolution and the
joint statement - produced within less than a month
of each other, and to congratulate the Council and the
Government of France for the progress achieved.

In resolution 2334 (2016) the Council stresses that
the cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory is essential if we wish
to salvage the two-State solution. It also calls for
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse the
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the
two-State solution.

In a bold move, the Council reaffirmed that Israel's
establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity, constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and is a major obstacle to
the achievement of the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. The Council further
reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
that Israel fully respect all of its legal obligations in
that regard.

Resolution 2234 (2016) was long in coming. Since
2009 the Council has not adopted a single resolution
concerning Palestine, nor have any of its resolutions
spoken of the illegality of the settlements for over 30
years. On that account, my delegation commends the
members of the Security Council that supported the
resolution, particularly its co-sponsors.

While the resolution is a landmark achievement,
some specific provisions are particularly significant,
including the declaration that no recognition of any
change to the line of4 June 1967, including with regard
to Jerusalem, will take place, other than those agreed
by the parties through negotiations. Another extremely
significant achievement of the resolution is the call
upon all States, bearing in mind the declared illegality
of the settlements, to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967. We are also pleased
that the resolution mandates the Secretary-General to
report to the Council every three months concerning
the implementation of its provisions.

While the letter ofthat resolution is mighty, its spirit
is mightier. What the resolution actually implies is the
change of heart in the Council that many delegations
in the Organization, including mine, have called for
for many years. That change of heart affirms clearly
and firmly the recognition that change will not come in
the Middle East as long as Israel's construction of the
settlements and its arrogant ignoring of international
law continue. It is that change of heart that clarifies that
any settlements built illegally since 1967 remain illegal
and will not be recognized.

What next? The 2017 billion-dollar question
is expressed in one word: implementation,
implementation and implementation. A resolution,
whether an institutional one or one made personally in
the new year, is meaningless if it is not implemented.
That is why, while we praise the courage behind the
adoption of the resolution, the challenge is in the
tangible and effective implementation that it demands.
If settlement construction by Israel was illegal before,
if it constituted a flagrant Violation of international law
and a major obstacle to peace and the viability of the
two-State solution based on 1967 borders, it is even
more profoundly so since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) last month.

We have therefore arrived at the point where the
Council must demonstrate the mettle of which it is
made, on the side of right over wrong, justice over
injustice. The Council has the moral obligation to
be on the right side of history. The evidence so far is
unflattering, as previous resolutions - like reports by
United Nations-appointed representatives, rapporteurs
and commissions - have often been trampled upon
by Israel, and then eventually ignored by the United
Nations itself. In our View, the failure to implement
that resolution would finally frustrate the hopes of
all Palestinians, and even of the majority of Israelis,
who simply want to live side by side in peace with
their neighbours.

Finally, my delegation would like to stress that even
the cessation of settlements can only be the beginning
of a long process. The parties must start the negotiation
process without delay and commit to addressing the
root causes of the problem. In that regard, it our hope
that the newly elected members of the Council will also
lend their support to, and support the implementation
of, that historic resolution in this the fiftieth year of
Israel's occupation of Palestine.

