Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): It is very
unfortunate and deplorable that, two months after the
declaration of unilateral ceasefires, the situation in the

Gaza Strip is still fragile and a proper ceasefire regime
is yet to be established. Moreover, as we have heard
today, all too many Gazans, most of whom have
nothing to do with the cause of the conflict, are still
suffering from the lack of basic goods and supplies
such as food, nutrition, shelter and proper medical
supplies due to the aftermath of the January conflict.
This unjustifiable misery and the humanitarian
suffering of the population of Gaza must be stopped
immediately.

In this vein, my delegation joins many others that
have spoken before us in urging all parties directly
concerned to work to establish a durable and fully
respected ceasefire agreement at the earliest juncture,
secure unimpeded passage for humanitarian aid to the
suffering people in Gaza, and take all necessary
measures to fully implement resolution 1860 (2009).
The effective provision of international aid and the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip depend on the creation
of a stable environment. In order to enable long-term
development and help people to engage in their
everyday lives, Israel and Palestine must work
diligently for an enduring peace settlement.

Three weeks ago, representatives of 72 countries
and 12 international organizations gathered together at
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, to discuss ways to assist in the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip following its
destruction during the January military conflict. At the
meeting, nearly $5 billion were pledged to aid the early
recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza Strip. The fact
that so many countries congregated and offered to
mobilize so much capital in such a short time clearly
represents our shared desire and hope for enduring
peace and security in the Gaza Strip and the Middle
East.

However, it should be remembered that,
regardless of how many resources are mobilized or
donors committed to pledged contributions, the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and, more broadly,
long-term economic development in the area cannot be
pursued unless all parties directly concerned
demonstrate strong political will for peace and exercise
restraint. All the assistance of the international
community will be in vain unless substantial progress
is made in the peace process. Those directly concerned
should shoulder the primary responsibility for peace
and reconstruction in the Middle East. With the United
Nations and the international community, Korea stands
ready to provide our support to the peace process
between Israel and Palestine and to the reconstruction
and long-term development of the Palestinian
territories.

Since we have a vivid memory of the misery of
war ourselves, Korea promptly provided relief aid to
the Palestine refugees in Gaza through the International
Committee of the Red Cross shortly after the conflict
arose in the Gaza Strip last January. Korea also has the
experience of a nation and community rebuilding from
the destruction of war. We are ready to share this
experience to assist in reconstructing the Gaza Strip
and pursue longer-term economic development in the
Palestinian territories. The Korean Government has
already pledged $15 million in assistance to the
Palestinians in 2009 and 2010, including an additional
$2 million-worth of assistance.

My delegation assures you, Sir, and the Security
Council that Korea will continue to contribute to the
reconstruction and humanitarian relief efforts for the
Gaza Strip and the Palestinian territories.

