Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I join others in welcoming you, Mr. President, to today's briefing. I would also like to welcome the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany to today's briefing. We would like to express our thanks to Assistant Secretary-General Mueller and UNICEF Executive Director Fore for their briefings. We remain deeply concerned about the increasing level of human suffering in the north-west of Syria since the beginning of December 2019 due to tensions and hostilities, as highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/141). The surge of displaced persons - 300,000, 500,000, 700,000 and now nearly 1 million persons, 80 per cent of them women and children - only increases the risk of civilians falling victim to attacks, cold, hunger, disease and so on. We are particularly concerned about the number of civilians killed by weapons, of whom more than 31 per cent are children. That is simply unacceptable. We are also concerned that the humanitarian situation remains dire in other parts of the country, especially in the north-east. Health-care and education services have either been heavily affected or have collapsed, leaving the majority of the Syrian populationin the most vulnerable conditions. We therefore urge all concerned parties to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and ensure that the protection of civilians and the delivery of humanitarian assistance are a top priority. On this occasion, we would like to commend the tireless efforts of United Nations agencies, working with their partners, to bring much needed humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people, providing them with shelter, food and medical and health services. Their important work should not be interrupted or impeded, so that the humanitarian crisis can be contained and alleviated. Secondly, we thank the Secretary-General for his recent report on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah. It will serve as an important tool for the Security Council to evaluate the situation and work to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches the right destination at the right time. We are particularly concerned about the information indicating severe disruptions to medical and nutritional supplies for civilians in north-eastern Syria. Moving forward, we strongly urge the countries concerned and the United Nations to work closely together to find the most effective and feasible ways and means to deliver assistance to people in need, when they need it most. All suggestions on cross-border and cross-line options are on the table. We welcome all efforts aimed at facilitating the more expeditious delivery of humanitarian assistance. The only way to end the humanitarian crisis and bring stability to Syria is by achieving sustainable peace. We join the other members of the Council in reiterating our support for the Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire and urge parties to engage in dialogue and negotiations to find a lasting solution, in accordance with the principles of international law and international humanitarian law, as well as relevant Security Council resolutions.
