Mr. Florent (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Adeniji, for his
substantial briefing on the situation in Sierra Leone.
My delegation also fully associates itself with the very
detailed account that Mr. Dahlgren will soon make of
the recent mission he led to West Africa. I shall
therefore confine my statement to a few points of
importance to my delegation.

France is gratified by the constructive
developments noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest report. We support the resolute approach of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
in conformity with its mandate, to enable the
democratically elected Government to regain control of
the entire territory of Sierra Leone. This process should
be gradual, particularly as we approach the diamond-
producing regions in the East, in order to prevent the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) from rearming
itself. This positive development will require the
Security Council to maintain its support for the search,
through dialogue among the contending parties and
with the support of the members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for a
political settlement of the conflict. The dialogue must
lead, beyond the end of hostilities and the gradual
disarmament of the ex-combatants, to the resumption
of the peace process, inter alia, through the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the transformation of the RUF into a
political party.

The elections planned for the coming dry season
are very welcome. We must also support the efforts of
ECOWAS to promote a political dialogue among the
three States of the subregion and to encourage the
reintegration process in Sierra Leone as the
Government regains control of the territory, while
providing security for refugees and internally displaced
persons and allowing refugees to choose, in full
knowledge of the facts, between remaining in Guinea
or returning to their country. The authority of the
Government and civil society in Sierra Leone must also
be restored. As the Secretary-General has pointed out,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme will be of crucial importance.

In conclusion, France remains concerned by the
fate of Sierra Leonean refugees in Guinea, a great
number of whom have returned spontaneously, often to
areas held by RUF. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees must, as planned, proceed
as soon as the rains end to return more refugees on a
more organized basis.

