Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela commends the State of Kuwait
for presiding over the Security Council in the month of
February and thanks Kuwait for convening this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.

We welcome the efforts that have been made so far
for more than two decades to make improvements to the
working methods of the Council, including presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/19, which establishes the
practice of holding an annual exchange of views on
working methods.

Our country believes that there has been progress in
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
such as the participation of elected members in Council
activities three months prior to the assumption of their
responsibilities so that they can witness, at first hand,
the daily activity of this organ with a View to assuming
their responsibilities in the exercise of their mandates.

The inclusive appointment of the Chairs of the
Council's subsidiary organs is a positive aspect in the
evolution of the working methods. The process was
finalized in 2017, when it was agreed that the process
of appointing the representatives in charge of such
bodies would be facilitated by two member countries
of the Council, with the full cooperation of the rest of
the membership. Undoubtedly, that rule has meant an
improvement over the scheme that prevailed until 2016.

Although the working methods of the Security
Council have improved, it is worth noting that there are
still practices that affect its efficiency and effectiveness
in addressing matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Venezuela is baffled
at objections to the holding of public discussions on
issues that are under the Council's agenda or objections
to the participation of key regional organizations in the
resolution ofprotracted conflicts. Such a state of affairs
in no way contributes to the needed confidence-building
among parties if they are to reach a peaceful resolution
to their conflict. We call for public meetings to be the
rule and not the exception.

Although closed consultations are a useful space
for frank discussion, they must not be used to minimize
the importance of public meetings. Based on our
experience as a member of the Council, we sometimes
observed that some discussions in closed consultations
on certain issues could have just as well have taken
place in public meetings with the presence of the
membership, given that the information imparted did
not affect the negotiations in progress.

We regret that in some cases, for reasons unknown,
the Secretariat does not submit the written reports
that have been requested in accordance with Council
resolutions. To date, the written report requested of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), concerning Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, has not been submitted.
The membership has been limited to listening to oral
presentations by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. We believe that the strengthening of
the working methods of the Security Council is linked
to the effective implementation of its resolutions.

Venezuela expresses its concern regarding some
permanent members' use of the Council's working
methods to promote their particular agendas, thereby
violating the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we reject any
attempt to bring to this organ issues that are not
threats to international peace and security. In that
connection, we are concerned about the abuses
committed when convening Arria Formula meetings
to deal with situations of countries that are not on the
Council's agenda and that do not represent a threat to
international peace and security. Venezuela believes
that that type of informal meeting format should be
governed by a regulatory body so as to avoid excesses
being committed to the detriment of the purposes and
principles of the Charter. There have been proposals and
calls to that effect voiced in the recent past within the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, but they have been blocked by
some permanent members.

In conclusion, we express our hope that
improvements to the working methods will be carried
out in a sustained manner with a view to increasing
transparency, inclusiveness and accountability, and in
strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

