Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
would like at the outset to thank you for convening this
meeting on the situation in Timor-Leste.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2003/449), as well as the briefing presented to us
this afternoon by our good friend Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma. I should like to reiterate our full
confidence in the outstanding work he is doing; I am
sure that this is what Timor-Leste and its people
deserve.

We welcome the significant progress achieved in
several areas as regards the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1473 (2003). I wish to join previous
speakers in expressing appreciation for the positive
changes that have taken place, particularly in the field
of security.

We are particularly pleased at the progress made
in the field of public administration, in the functioning
of Timor-Leste's justice system, in the conduct of
investigations of serious crimes and in the role of the
National Police. We wish to express our appreciation
for the crucial role played by the advisers in the
UNMISET Civilian Support Group in transferring
knowledge and skills to Timor-Leste counterparts,
which are important in providing support for the
process of achieving stability in Timor-Leste.

We would like to underline the continuing efforts
of the Timorese Government to improve the situation
with regard to peace and stability in the country by
engaging in a broad political debate throughout all
sectors of Timorese society. The communities
themselves have a critical responsibility in this regard.

Resolution 1473 (2003), adopted by the Security
Council on 4 April 2003, requests the Secretary-
General to provide a detailed military strategy for the
revised schedule for the downsizing of the military
component of UNMISET. My delegation takes note of
the specific measures for the adjustment strategy
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report. We
believe that such a strategy provides an appropriate
baseline for the full and effective implementation of
Security Council resolution 1473 (2003).

We support the continuing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, namely in the
following areas: the provision of additional training
capacities in key areas such as public administration
and justice; the strengthening of human rights and the
rule of law; and a monitoring and advisory presence in
districts where policing authority has been handed over
to the Timor-Leste Police Force.

It is important that UNMISET, in order to deal
with the limitations of Timor-Leste's police
capabilities, address the recent security incidents,
which made clear the fact that law enforcement will
continue to be a real challenge for the country which
will require vigorous and sustained efforts.

My delegation supports the extension of
UNMISET's mandate for a further year, until 20 May
2004, and, in this context, we deem extremely
important the additional commitment that the
international community needs to make towards Timor-
Leste. This is vital if we want to safeguard the great
political and human investment made so far in this
country in the context of this peace process, which we
can consider a joint success story for the people of
Timor-Leste and the international community.

We join the appeal by the Secretary-General for
bilateral support to supplement the efforts of
UNMISETin order to guarantee a sustainable and
efficient administration and a Viable economy. The
relevant agencies of the United Nations must therefore

closely coordinate their efforts with those of the
international community of donors in order to
consolidate peace in Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, we welcome the increasing
cooperation between the authorities of Timor-Leste and
of Indonesia. This spirit of cooperation between both
countries was demonstrated by the discussions on
border demarcation and in investigations of serious
crimes. We encourage Timor-Leste and Indonesia to
develop friendly and neighbourly relations, in order to
strengthen security in the region.

Finally, we reiterate our confidence and
friendship to the Government and to the fraternal
people of Timor-Leste.

