Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I wish to thank
the Senegalese delegation for organizing this highly
pertinent open debate. As others have said, United
Nations peacekeepers today operate in a much
more challenging environment than at any time in
peacekeeping history and increasingly in areas where
there is no peace to keep. The latest attacks and loss of
life in Mali are yet another reminder of the threats that
peacekeepers face.

In 2015, the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) report (see S/2015/446)
and the report of the Expert Panel on Technology and
Innovation in United Nations Peacekeeping spoke
clearly of the need for change at all stages of mission
life. Their recommendations, if realized, would help to
improve missions' ability to deliver on their mandates
and protect peacekeepers, who continue to lose their
lives in the line of duty.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to make the following statement in my national capacity.

If situational awareness is missing or flawed,
mandate implementation, including the core protection
of civilians function, will suffer. Force commanders
will be handicapped in their decisions and in their
ability to keep their troops out of harm's way. As the
Expert Panel points out, aerial data, geospatial and
geographic information and other remotely acquired
data are of critical importance to any peacekeeping
mission and should be available as a matter of course.

The use of technologies in peacekeeping would
improve early warning, enhance the ability to detect,
mitigate, deter and respond to threats of violence
against civilians, and protect the lives of peacekeepers
themselves. That is especially pertinent where
peacekeepers face asymmetric threats, which are a
lot harder to predict and pin down without such data.
We regret that the use of such date continues to elicit
strong resistance from some Member States. Global
Positioning System technology in mission vehicles,
night-vision goggles, infrared capabilities and reliable
cellular or satellite communications are needed to better
tackle such threats. Furthermore, medical evacuation
services must be readily available, especially when
peacekeepers are operating in high-risk areas.

Improved technology use should go hand in hand
with enhanced inter-agency information-sharing and
better use of available data-sharing tools. Joint Mission
Analysis Cell, Joint Operations Centre and geographic
information systems stakeholderould be expeditiously
and fully staffed and equipped to do their job. One
should not have to wait for months to fill such positions,
especially where asymmetrical threats are a daily
reality to grapple with.

There is a clear urgency to address the threat of
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) , starting from
pre-deployment training all the way through, to
counter-IED capabilities on the ground, including
ground sensors, jammers, radars, convoy protection
and the use of tactical drones in hazard areas. Troop-
and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
should prepare and equip their contingents to operate
in asymmetrical threat environments and adapt their
standard operation procedures accordingly. The
inclusion of counter-IED expert capacity in peace
operations to train and advise TCCs/PCCs, as well as
host nation security forces, is a necessity.

My delegation commends the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in mitigating
IED risks in Mali, Somalia and elsewhere by providing
expert support, training, mentorship and equipment to
the peacekeepers deployed. Exploring and developing
partnerships with other bodies and organizations that
can offer relevant expertise and capacities to tackle
the threat is important. A good example of cooperation
is the route clearance e-learning course developed by
the North American Treaty Organization (NATO) at
the request of UNMAS. We note NATO's readiness to
identify and develop further training opportunities, as
per UNMAS needs and requests.

We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capabilities Readiness System,
which enables a more dynamic process of interaction
between United Nations Headquarters and Member
States for ensuring the readiness and timely deployment
of quality peacekeeping capabilities.

The safety of peacekeepers should be on the
priorities list of the Security Council as it designs or
adjusts peacekeeping mandates. Peacekeepers should
not be left to fend for themselves against asymmetric
threats. Numerous substantive recommendations to
that effect already exist, including those contained
in last year's HIPPO report and the report on the
use of technologies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. At a time of increasingly scarce resources
and the growing human cost of today's asymmetrical
threats to peacekeeping, we simply cannot afford to
keep commissioning new reports while ignoring their
recommendations. The time is now to move from the
should-do narrative to what has been done, what more
needs to be done and how best to do it. Civilian victims
and peacekeepers under attack need actions, not words.

