Mr. Garcia (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like first of all to express our pleasure
at seeing you, Sir, presiding over this meeting of the
Council. We commend you on your conduct of the
presidency for July.

My delegation wishes to participate in this debate to
help avoid any recurrence of incidents like the one that
was the subject of the resolution adopted by the Council
of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
and of the events that surrounded it.

We believe that these incidents and events require
the international community to reflect on the causes that
led to them or, more to the point, on those that might
precipitate further incidents, if we are to avoid merely
recriminatory attitudes that are not in keeping with the
responsibility of all States to avoid such incidents.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation to
the Council of the International Civil Aviation
Organization for its efforts to agree on a moderate - or
better, measured - resolution with the constructive
objective of impressing upon all States the need to respect
international principles of civil aviation.

In this connection, because of their relevance, we
wish to stress operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of the ICAO
Council resolution of 27 June 1996, which make the point
that these are concomitant principles that are ineluctably
linked. The principle that States must refrain from the use
of weapons against civil aircraft in flight is as relevant as
that which establishes that each State shall take
appropriate measures to prohibit the deliberate use of any
civil aircraft registered in that State for any purpose
inconsistent with the aims of the Convention on
International Civil Aviation. None the less, concerned as
the international community is to avoid further tragic
incidents, from a preventive and practical standpoint it is
of the utmost urgency that the second of these principles
be respected so that the sovereignty of States is not
affected by acts that contravene the Convention and the
principles of the United Nations Charter.

 

My delegation feels that the Security Council could
take advantage of its consideration of the item before us to
reiterate emphatically the commitment of the United
Nations to the inviolability of the sovereignty of States and
the individual's right to life.

As to the draft resolution under consideration, we
regret that it does not contain some of the amendments
proposed by the caucus of members of the Non-Aligned
Movement that are members of the Security Council.
Similarly, we find no justification for the Security Council's
remaining indefinitely seized of the matter before it. If that
is the decision, we believe that it should be made taking
into consideration the many elements that led to the
incidents without discriminatory neglect of events that may
have preceded or followed them.

Lastly, my delegation wishes to reiterate the need for
all States to respect and comply with the principles and
norms of the Chicago Convention.

