I would like to thank High Commissioner Grandi for his briefing. It is important that the Security Council be briefed on a regular basis on the activities of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and their relevance for our work. We appreciate this follow up to UNHCR's April 2019 briefing (see S/PV.8504) during our presidency. The UNHCR report Global Trends - Forced Displacement in 2019, published today, brings the sad news of a record 79.5 million refugees worldwide - 68 per cent of whom originate from just five countries, and 6.6 million from Syria alone. Germany appreciates the indispensable role of UNHCR in protecting and assisting millions of refugees and internally displaced persons worldwide. This is all the more important these days because, while the pandemic is affecting everyone across the globe, its impact will be most devastating for people in the most vulnerable situations, including refugees and displaced persons. We commend the work of UNHCR's staff, who continue to provide protection and assistance to the most vulnerable despite lockdown measures and often at the risk of their own health and safety. Prevention measures introduced in displacement sites have helped to avoid a major outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Germany has also supported UNHCR financially in its endeavour to keep those under its mandate safe from COVID-19. To answer the call of the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan and UNHCR's COVID-19 appeal, Germany provided €300 million in additional funding - €35 million specifically for UNHCR. We did so in a way that gives organizations, including UNHCR, the leeway they require to adapt their humanitarian operations flexibly to the continuously changing situation and needs. In the face of this crisis, we strongly believe that determined action, global solidarity and multilateralism are more needed than ever. We strongly echo the High Commissioner's statement that an effective response to the pandemic and respecting international refugee law and standards are not mutually exclusive. We call on all Member States to ensure and protect the rights of refugees through preventive measures, to safeguard the humanitarian space and to grant exemptions for humanitarian workers and goods. More equitable burden-sharing is indispensable if we are to provide sustainable solutions for refugees and those who host them. It is therefore very encouraging - six months after the very successful first-ever Global Refugee Forum - to see progress in the implementation of the many Forum pledges and other instruments. The impressive variety of pledges, good practices and new initiatives is indeed encouraging, and they require meaningful and dedicated implementation and follow up. As aco-convener of the Forum, Germany is fully committed to further supporting the implementation process. We therefore call upon all Member States to contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Global Compact on Refugees. Today's meeting can also help encourage the broader membership to engage in the follow-up process, mobilize serious commitments and make substantial contributions. The Council should stand firmly by UNHCR's side in that endeavour. With regard to Libya, we are deeply concerned about consistent reports on the humanitarian and human rights situation of refugees and migrants, in particular in detention centres. Regarding overarching principles for the repatriation of refugees, we strongly appreciate UNHCR staying firm on the necessity of having key protection mechanisms in place as a precondition of any assisted voluntary repatriation. We recall once more that, in the case of refugees and internally displaced persons, all repatriations must be voluntary, safe, dignified and well-informed. We must redouble efforts to deliver a better future for Rohingya refugees with freedom of movement, a decent livelihood and, in the long run, the possibility of gaining citizenship in order to address the risks posed by measles, mumps and rubella. We appreciate the willingness of the Government of Bangladesh to continue hosting the Rohingya refugees. In that context, I also want to speak about Syria. It is not the lack of infrastructure that prevents internally displaced persons and refugees from returning home. The main barrier is the climate of fear and injustice and the weak rule of law in Syria. Damascus must provide credible and verifiable security guarantees that would allow for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of Syrians to their country. Meanwhile, cross-border humanitarian assistance remains fundamental to reaching those in need in the north-west and north-east of Syria. As a co-penholder of the Syrian humanitarian file in the Council, Germany is strongly committed to supporting UNHCR and other humanitarian actors in securing as much humanitarian access as possible, now more important than ever because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Ahead of World Refugee Day this Saturday, Mr. Grandi reminded us that the number of displaced people has increased even further from last year's record numbers and that there is a strong need for humanitarian, development and peacebuilding actors to further enhance cooperation in order to effectively address today's manifold and often protracted displacement situations and to promote durable solutions in the interest of the displaced and their hosts. The Council is aware of Germany's ongoing work on the prevention of sexual violence in conflict situations. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence has risen to truly alarming levels. Against that backdrop, we encourage UNHCR to strongly focus on its protection mandate, in particular with regard to women and girls, who are often the most marginalized in a displacement context. Let me assure the Council that Germany will remain a committed and reliable partner and donor of UNHCR across the board of its activities, especially in these unprecedented times of COVID-19.
