Mr. Motomura (Japan): Allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate on the
activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and for
allowing my Government to present its views on this
subject of obvious importance to all of us. May I also
express Japan's appreciation to Ambassador Navarrete
of Mexico for his outstanding work in the Council. We
understand that this formal meeting of the Security
Council is the last one he will attend.

Let me also thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, for his
informative briefing, as well as for the excellent
manner in which he and the other members of the
Bureau have been conducting the work of the
Committee. In addition, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my Government's full support
for the Counter-Terrorism Committee's second 90-day
work programme, which has been distributed as
Security Council document S/2002/67.

Japan agrees with many of the points raised by
the previous speakers. Also, as a member of the G-8,
the Government of Japan associates itself with the
statement made by Ambassador Heinbecker of Canada,
which currently holds the chairmanship of the G-8,
describing the Group's counter-terrorism activities.
However, I would also like to briefly touch upon some
aspects of the activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to which Japan attaches particular
importance.

I will not repeat Japan's basic position or describe
the specific measures it has taken in the fight against
terrorism, as these have been presented on various
occasions, including Council meetings. I would ask
those delegations interested in more detailed
information to refer to our report to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which is to be published as a
Security Council document in due course.

The fight against terrorism will not be successful
unless the overall capability of the international
community to respond to and suppress terrorism is
upgraded. Thus, of utmost importance is international
cooperation to help countries that are willing but
unable to improve their counter-terrorism capabilities.
From the numerous briefings conducted by Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, including his briefing today, we
understand that the Counter-Terrorism Committee is of
the same view.

Japan hopes to play an active role in such
cooperative efforts. As detailed in its report to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001), it maintains solid
programmes of bilateral assistance, including training
programmes in counter-terrorism. Japan is committed
to doubling the number of participants in such
programmes this year. If the need arises for various
forms of assistance during the course of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States, my Government is prepared to consider
providing further assistance.

The activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee experts are critically important in ensuring
the smooth implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
The Government of Japan looks forward to working
with the six experts who have already been appointed,
and is confident that if its own candidate,
Mr. Toshihiko Tanaka, is appointed as a Counter-
Terrorism Committee expert, he will make valuable
contributions to the Committee's work.

Before I conclude, allow me to touch upon the
situation in Afghanistan. Although the fight against
terrorism can by no means be reduced to the single
issue of Afghanistan, an important component of that
fight is ensuring that Afghanistan is never again used
as a safe haven for international terrorists. It is our
strong hope that the International Conference on
Reconstruction Assistance to Afghanistan, which Japan
is hosting in Tokyo next week with the active
participation of the countries and international
organizations concerned, will be an important step
towards achieving that end by ensuring a stable and
prosperous future for Afghanistan.

