First, I, too, want to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. The most positive takeaway is certainly the ceasefire in Idlib, which holds despite the challenges. The same cannot be said about the political process; once again, there are no new developments. The Syrian regime has clearly distanced itself from the whole process, with plans to organize parliamentary elections this year. This clearly violates the road map set out in resolution 2254 (2015). The situation of political prisoners also remains a pressing issue. Unfortunately, the announcement of a general amnesty did not lead to the unilateral release of thousands of arbitrarily detained people. The European Union has been clear in saying that none of the sanctions will be lifted or aid for reconstruction provided without a credible political process. That position has not changed; we demand that Syria act in line with resolution 2254 (2015). According to the Syrian Government, sanctions are affecting the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. In a letter dated 6 May addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/368), the Syrian Mission stated that the measures imposed indirectly hinder the import of medical supplies and equipment into Syria. That claim, which was also made just now by the representative of the Russian Federation, is not true. If there are any difficulties with procurement, that means that companies do not want to do business with the Syrian Government because they lack confidence in it. It is not only the international community or United Nations agencies that see little change in the regime's behaviour but also multinational corporations. To affiliate themselves with a Government that is known for arbitrary detention and chemical attacks is simply considered bad marketing. Sanctions have nothing to do with this negative perception. In order to regain the trust of the international community and businesses, the Syrian Government needs to fulfil its international commitments under resolution 2254 (2015). Only then will it be possible to support Syria's reconstruction; that is the message of Estonia and the European Union.
