Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock once again
for his briefing. As always, he informs us and puts the
gravity of Syria's humanitarian situation in perspective.

First, given all of the interesting accusations we
heard earlier, I want to make a few points crystal clear.
The 75 members of the Global Coalition to Defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) joined forces
to liberate people from ISIS control in Iraq, and the
Coalition continues our campaign to eradicate ISIS in
Syria. Despite the difficulty of the task, our operations
have succeeded in rolling back the so-called ISIS
caliphate and addressing a dire threat to our collective
peace and security.

The Coalition made those gains while the Al-Assad
regime and its backers focused their guns mostly on the
Syrian opposition groups that were not ISIS terrorists.
While we went after ISIS and actually achieved lasting
gains for the Syrian people, the Al-Assad regime was
busy bombarding civilians in places like Aleppo, Idlib
and eastern Ghouta. The Coalition's operations were
carried out in scrupulous regard for the laws of war
and to minimize civilian casualties. In Raqqa, our
partners conducted a neighbourhood-by-neighbourhood
evacuation of civilians ISIS had trapped in the city.

The United States will once again put on the
record that United Nations humanitarian convoys are
welcome at any time in Raqqa or Rukban. We welcome
that assistance and are ready to do everything that we
can to assist it. As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
noted, a United Nations inter-agency team successfully
carried out an assessment in Raqqa just two weeks ago.
In Rukban, Coalition forces are also acting to support
humanitarian efforts and have worked with the United
Nations and other partners to provide requested details
on operational security and medical evacuations.
The bottom line is that the United States is ready to
support humanitarian deliveries. The delay, as always,
continues to be whether the Al-Assad regime will grant
permission for United Nations convoys to move.

We keep hearing in this Chamber about mine
clearance in Raqqa. Removing unexploded ordnance is
one of our top priorities when it comes to stabilizing
the area: so far we have cleared almost 3,000 explosive
remnants of war; we have cleared almost 300 critical
infrastructure sites; provided mine risk education for
40,000 people and trained over 120 Syrians to conduct
demining operations. This task is not easy, thanks
to the quantity of munitions ISIS left behind, but we
recognize this work is vital to ensure Syrians can return
home safely.

On top of mine clearance in Raqqa, we have
provided more than $50 million in food and non-food
items to the most vulnerable. For example, we have
given close to 300,000 pounds of food and 151 million
litres of water to more than 195,000 people. I could go
on and talk about the schools and medical clinics we
have supported or our efforts to restore electricity. We
would be happy to brief our fellow Council members at
any time on those details.

The issue is that we are not here to educate ourselves
about the work of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS
in Raqqa and our continued efforts to facilitate cross-
line delivery into Rukban. Russia has called us here as
part ofa messaging campaign to try to distract from the
atrocities committed by the Al-Assad regime. In order
to do that, Russia has asked the Security Council to
focus its attention on the one part of Syria where the
Al-Assad regime is not pummelling civilians to death
with barrel bombs or banned chemical weapons.

Consider what has taken place since the Security
Council demanded a ceasefire in resolution 2401
(2018). On 24 February, the Council demanded a halt
to the fighting in Syria. Instead, the same day the
resolution was adopted, the Al-Assad regime flagrantly
disregarded it. The Al-Assad regime and its backers
ignored the Council and launched an all-out campaign to
seize eastern Ghouta. The campaign culminated in the
use of chemical weapons against innocent men, women
and children. Over 151,000 civilians were displaced.

Now fighting is escalating in north-western
Syria. Between 2 and 17 April, Syrian and Russian
air strikes damaged four medical facilities in that
part of the country - a disturbing repeat of previous
circumstances. Between mid-March and early April,
air strikes reportedly killed another 188 civilians
and injured 120 others. In addition to a ceasefire, the
Council has also called again and again for unhindered
humanitarian access in Syria. However, since the
beginning of 2018, the Syrian authorities have only
allowed six cross-line interagency convoys to deliver
humanitarian aid - six. That is just five per cent of the
cross-line assistance requested by the United Nations.

More than ever, we need to focus on ensuring that
the Council's demand for a ceasefire and for unhindered
humanitarian access actually gets implemented on the
ground, but that would require the Al-Assad regime to
stop its brutal campaign against the Syrian people, and
the countries with influence over Al-Assad to join us in
demanding that the Al-Assad regime stop is senseless
slaughter of the Syrian people.

The United States will not stop focusing on the
ways to achieve that goal, no matter how many times
our Russian colleagues convene these cynical, thinly
disguised diversions.

