Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Special Representative Zarif for his presentation this
morning and for the participation in today's debate by
Prime Ministers Daeic' and Thaci and for their remarks.
We warmly welcome them both.

Given that this is the first time that Australia has
spoken in a debate on Kosovo in the Council, I would
like to state Australia's support for an independent and
sovereign Kosovo. While we recognize that there is
not a unanimity of views within the Council on this
question, Australia wishes to note that it was one of the
first few countries to recognize Kosovo's independence,
in February 2008.

We commend the leadership displayed by both Prime
Ministers in elevating the European Union-mediated
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to the highest
political level. That has been essential. Of course, it
is not an easy process, but we are very encouraged by
their personal and constructive contribution to seven
rounds of trilateral negotiations, including in Brussels
this week.

The discussions between the Prime Ministers
builds on other recent positive developments, including
the meeting between Presidents Nikolie and Jahjaga in
early February, which was a powerful symbol of the
commitment of both parties to continuing their dialogue
so as to find a long-term solution. Trust-building
and reconciliation among communities in Kosovo is,
obviously, a vital complement to the political process.

The role of the European Union (EU) and High
Representative Ashton has been decisive in advancing
the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. We commend
those ongoing endeavours, which have achieved
genuine results, including the commencement of the
integrated agreement on the management of crossing
points and customs, and the exchange ofliaison officers
based in the EU delegations in Belgrade and Pristina.
Both countries have a European future.

We welcome the strong endorsement of the process
provided by both the National Assembly of Serbia and
the authorities of the Republic of Kosovo, which has
sent powerful messages to their own communities on
the fundamental importance to the futures of both
countries ofa successful outcome to the negotiations.

The security situation in northern Kosovo,
particularly around northern Mitrovica, remains
fragile. Both sides need to do more and to work harder
to improve the situation in the north. We condemn acts
of vandalism against significant cultural and religious
heritage sites. The prompt reaction by local authorities,
the condemnation of violence by all political parties
and the swift action of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) have
helped to prevent further incidents, and we commend
those actions. We encourage all sides to take steps to
protect Kosovo's rich and diverse heritage, including
that of the Serbian Orthodox and Muslim communities,
on the basis of ethnic and religious tolerance. We also
encourage the unimpeded resettlement of minority
returnees and internally displaced persons in Kosovo.
That is vital.

Australia would also like to express its appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Farid Zarif and the United Nations Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to ensure
a consistent approach by the international presence
in Kosovo. We have to be frank about this. UNMIK's
job, as mandated by the Council, is a difficult one, but
its work has complemented strongly the efforts by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), KFOR
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and helped to provide the stability to support
direct political dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We support the ongoing investigation by EULEX into
the allegations of organ trafficking, and we support the
calls for any persons implicated in war crimes to be
held accountable.

To conclude, a broad and substantial political
settlement to the question ofKosovo is now within reach,
and Australia joins the Secretary-General and other
Council members in encouraging both Prime Ministers
to continue their dialogue with a determination to bring
about lasting stability, not only in Kosovo and between
Serbia and Kosovo, but in the broader Balkan region.

We look forward to progress on remaining sensitive
issues, such as the governing institutions in northern
Kosovo, at the next round of EU-mediated dialogue
in April. Following that, it will be important that
both parties leverage the confidence and trust that
they have so painstakingly created to achieve actual
implementation of the agreements reached at a political
level. For our part, we believe that the Security Council
and the international community generally stand ready
to assist the parties on their path to reconciliation,
security and stability.

