Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the organization of this debate,
and we welcome the presence today of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala. We also thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his briefing, and would
like to particularly acknowledge Ambassador Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui for his recent stint at the helm
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

Chile associates itself with the statement just
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

In 2012 we witnessed significant milestones in the
ongoing process in Haiti: Parliament's ratification of
the new Government, the appointment of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary, and the publication of the
amendments to the Haitian Constitution all deserve the
recognition of the international community. Similarly,
initiatives such as the implementation of Haiti's strategic
development plan, the new cooperation mechanism and
the strategic development plan of the Haitian National
Police for 2012-2016 are also pertinent examples of this
ongoing process.

Such progress notwithstanding, there are areas
in which improvements must be made, and urgently,
in strengthening institutions, consolidating the rule
of law and improving the people's socioeconomic
situation - all elements that are essential to ensuring
the security, stability, governability and economic
and social progress of the Haitian people. There is no
question that a political dialogue between the various
State authorities is essential; it is the only way to
achieve a lasting consensus that will enable an inclusive
society to be built in Haiti that fully respects human
rights and can address ongoing challenges. While
reiterating Chile's commitment to working with Haiti
multilaterally and bilaterally, we call on the Haitian
authorities to take steps immediately to encourage
this political dialogue and the quest for consensus. In
that regard, and with the support of MINUSTAH, the
holding of free, fair and credible national, municipal
and local elections is an essential part of this process
and requires the speedy creation and functioning of a
permanent electoral council.

My delegation recognizes MINUSTAH'S central
role in maintaining a stable and secure environment
in Haiti and the progress the Haitian National Police
has made in that area. Despite the increase in civil
disturbances and crime, the stabilization of the security
situation has enabled it to work on the reconfiguration
and agreement established in the last renewal of its
mandate. In that context, my delegation welcomes
MINUSTAH's consolidation plan 2013-2016, and
commends its establishment of concrete goals and
targets in the areas of political development, increasing
electoral capacity, the rule of law and human rights,
and governance, agreed on with the Haitian authorities.
Similarly, we commend the plan's initiation of a strategic
review process. These goals will enable the Mission to
use its resources and evaluate its achievements more
efficiently so as to enable a gradual and sustained
transfer of responsibilities to the Haitian authorities.

In that regard, we stress that any budget reductions
for the Mission should be justified by the situation
as observed on the ground, and also take into
consideration the connection between security tasks
and development, for which rapid-impact projects,
programmes for reducing community violence and
other initiatives supporting local populations are key
factors. In that context, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's initiative for the elimination of
cholera in Haiti and the work that MINUSTAH has
done in this area, and calls on donors to fulfil their
financial pledges.

Regarding priorities for the police, we hope
especially that the Haitian National Police can gradually
assume greater responsibility in the area of public
security, in line with its development plan for 2012-
2016. To that end, it is fundamental that the annual
process of police recruiting and training be carried
out, which requires not only efforts by the Haitian
authorities, but also by the international community.
The Chilean Government will continue to participate
in police training through its bilateral cooperation
programmes.

In looking at Haiti from the perspective of its
development since the devastating earthquake in 2010
until now, the progress reflected in a decrease of 75 per
cent in the internally displaced people in the camps of
refugees demonstrate the outstanding work done by
the Haitian authorities in that area, with the support of
the United Nations. That is a clear demonstration that
coordinated will on the part of the various actors can
lead to positive results.

For my delegation, it is essential to reiterate the
importance of interaction among Haitian authorities
in maintaining political stability and achieving
development. Without such positive interaction, it
will be impossible to appropriately meet the pending
challenges in strengthening the rule of law and
consolidating democratic institutions, especially in
the areas of administration of justice, human rights,
penitentiary administration, gender-based violence and
the protection of minors. It is also fundamental to lay
the foundation for development by attracting investment
and generating employment, which will make it possible
to grapple with the difficult socioeconomic situation
and the decrease in food security in Haiti.

As we reaffirm the commitment and solidarity
of the Government of Chile with the people and
authorities of Haiti, we also believe it necessary to
continue cooperating to promote the development of
institutional capacity in Haiti under the principle of
national ownership. The future of Haiti demands it.

