Mr. Levy (spoke in Hebrew; interpretation provided by the delegation): Today, the day when the Jewish
people in Israel and around the world sit in the

 

Tabernacle and offer the prayer to the Almighty that he
"place the tabernacle of peace over us", is also a day when
bereaved families are mourning their loved ones, cut down
in their twenties in the recent events, and offering prayers
in their memory. Many others stand concerned and pained
at the hospital bedsides of the many injured, with a silent
prayer for the recovery of their loved ones in their hearts.

On this day I stand here in the face of the orchestrated
attempt to place blame on Israel and to portray it as the
sole responsible party for the bitter harvest of blood in
which so many have lost their lives, Palestinians and
Israelis alike. I come to refute in their entirety the
distortions of fact which are being spread here regarding
the dramatic events of the last days, which have cast such
a dark cloud over the entire peace process

No matter what claims may be held against Israel,
they in no way justify the incitement to violence and the
use of live weapons, especially by those who have been
empowered by the agreements to ensure law and order and
to prevent incitement. The essence of the peace to which
we all aspire is the transformation of patterns of behaviour,
replacing threats with dialogue, and violence with
conciliation and direct talks between the sides. The
atmosphere of escalation, threats and calls for armed
struggle will not move us from the fundamental principles
which guide our policy: the pursuit of peace while ensuring
national and personal security for our citizens.

Israel's desire for peace is enshrined in the declared
policy guidelines of the Government. The commitment of
the present Government to the agreements signed by its
predecessor gives expression to the supreme democratic
values which light our path, and is deserving of due
recognition from all interested parties.

From the inception of this new Government, Israel has
been subjected to calls for the normalization process to be
halted and threats of a return to the intifada if Israel does
not commit itself in advance to the outcome of the
negotiations between us and the Palestinians. Israel has
been threatened that if the demands of the other side are
not met in their entirety, then it will face an armed struggle
against it.

On other fronts, steps have been taken and troops
redeployed as a means of sending a message warning Israel
that if it does not adopt one specific path and commit itself
in advance to the one single outcome demanded by the
other side, then the situation in the region will deteriorate
and the blame will be placed squarely at Israel's feet. A
constant propaganda war is being waged against Israel
and its Government, filled with hatred and venom, and
carried out without interference and often even with the
encouragement of statesmen. Shocking and unprecedented
personal insults against Israeli leaders are voiced daily.
There is not one country in the world that can accept this,
even in the name of peace itself.

Let us remove all doubt. While the official reason
for convening this meeting of the Security Council is the
opening of the Western Wall tunnel, this is merely a
pretence. What we have before us is yet another attempt
to dictate to and pressurize Israel as a means of achieving
political goals, and to predetermine the outcome of the
negotiations. Given, however, the declared purpose of this
meeting, it is important, in the light of the distorted
perspectives that are being heard from all directions, that
we set the record straight regarding the Western Wall
tunnel.

This is a 2,500-year-old tunnel which, in ancient
times, was used as a water system providing life itself to
Jerusalem and its inhabitants. Today, water is of course
supplied differently, yet the tunnel remains a symbol of
the unique and eternal character of Jerusalem. Today the
tunnel forms part of the larger tourist fabric of the city.
The tunnel holds no political or religious significance
whatsoever. The attribution of a religious nature to this
issue is manipulative and baseless, and designed purely to
arouse emotions. Our sole intention in opening the exit of
the tunnel was to provide greater comfort and safety to
the many local visitors - Jews, Christians and
Muslims - and the many tourists and pilgrims who come
to the Holy City to marvel at its wonders.

The supreme Muslim religious authority in
Jerusalem, the Waqf, was informed in advance of our
intention to open the tunnel to tourists and Visitors. I wish
to remind the Council that all measures taken by the
Israeli authorities in Jerusalem take into account the needs
of the entire population, including the Muslim population,
in order to preserve the principle of freedom of worship
and free access to the holy sites for all religions.

At no time in Jerusalem's long history has freedom
of worship and free access to the holy sites been so
painstakingly safeguarded as it has under Israel's
authority, to the benefit of all religions. Great pains have
been taken to ensure that the opening of the tunnel neither
damaged any archaeological or religious sites nor
endangered the security or the integrity of any structures
in the Old City, be they Islamic or otherwise.

 

I wish to emphasize that the Western Wall tunnel does
not run beneath the Temple Mount, nor does it in any way
affect the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as has been claimed, or its
foundations. What we are facing here is an attempt to
exploit an isolated event for the purpose of conducting a
general and orchestrated offensive against Israel.

At this juncture, as we debate the current sensitive and
dangerous situation, I strongly urge the participants here to
call upon the various regional actors to display caution,
reserve and responsibility in both their words and their
deeds.

Israel will not allow itself to be placed on trial. Over
the last months we have cautioned more than once that
words of violence can turn into actions, and that threats of
violence are carried out in the end. To our great regret, our
fears have now been realized
The President of the Palestinian Authority must exert
the authority vested in him to exercise his restraining
influence and issue clear and unequivocal instructions to his
forces, which are subject to his authority, and to the
residents of the autonomous areas to refrain from violence
lest there be any further deterioration. This is his
responsibility. At this difficult time, I must make it as
completely clear as possible that Israel has always been and
remains committed to pursuing peace through honouring
agreements.

Peace is meant to prevent the spilling of blood, that of
our sons and our neighbours alike. Violence and the
terrorist actions to which we were subjected only a few
short months ago endanger the peace process and threaten
all possibilities of bringing about a new reality.

We believe that honouring agreements is an integral
element of peace and of the efforts required to achieve it.
In the few weeks since assuming the heavy burden of
responsibility of government and the mission of running the
weighty matters of State, we have had ongoing contacts
with the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser
Arafat, and his colleagues. The Prime Minister, the Defence
Minister and myself have held talks with him, and we have
agreed together with the Palestinian side upon a clear
structure for resuming the negotiations for discussing and
resolving the issues in dispute. We have taken steps to ease
the closure, while taking upon ourselves security risks, in
the light of the horrendous terrorist attacks in Tel Aviv,
Jerusalem and elsewhere, which remain fresh in our minds.
We have taken decisions also to assist and ease the
economic hardship in the autonomous areas.

The place for resolving differences is the negotiating
table, and for this, order, stability and security must be
restored.

The recent events are serious and grave.
Nevertheless, we must not lose hope. Now we must make
every effort to prevent further deterioration, to restore
quiet and to renew negotiations and dialogue. We must
remember that continued escalation, violence and
expressions of hatred may prevent any possibility of
advancing towards peace.

Once more, I call upon the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, to act in accordance
with the responsibilities vested in him.

I hope that this Security Council debate will not be
allowed to become yet one more phase in the attempt to
isolate and impose unacceptable positions on the
Government of Israel. The Council must not lend its hand
to the atmosphere of escalation. This will serve no
purpose.

I come from Jerusalem and I shall return there.
Jerusalem is a mosaic of many colours towards which
countless eyes and prayers are turned from all corners of
the earth. Jerusalem has always been and remains the
heart and soul of the Jewish people, the eternal and
historic capital of Israel. The annals of the Jewish people
are embedded in her very essence, her stones, her
pathways and hilltops. Jerusalem, as its Hebrew name
testifies, is the city of peace. Let us all, Jew and Arab
alike, raise a prayer and heed the lessons of recent days,
and embark on a new path of dialogue.

We are pained by the bloodshed. The years of
struggle, violence, bloodshed and pain have led us
nowhere. We must build a new future. Let us not miss the
opportunity.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September and on the very able manner
in which you are conducting the affairs of the Council.

