Mr. Wang Yingfan (China)(spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes your presence in New York,
Sir, to preside over this meeting of the Security Council.
We wish to express our appreciation for the efforts made
by the Bangladesh delegation, and especially by
Ambassador Chowdhury, in arranging this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.

 

There are still conflicts in many regions of the world
today, undermining political stability, economic
development and people's livelihood in those regions to
varying degrees, and often causing serious humanitarian
problems. Innumerable innocent civilians have been
affected by these conflicts; tens of thousands, sometimes
even millions, are forced to leave their native lands; and
vulnerable groups in particular, such as women and
children, find themselves in extremely miserable situations.
We are deeply concerned about this, and at the same time
we wish to express our appreciation for the many efforts
made by the relevant United Nations institutions and by
international, regional and other humanitarian organizations
in alleviating the difficulties facing civilians caught in
conflicts. We urge the parties concerned to strictly abide by
international humanitarian law, to provide necessary safety
guarantees and to ensure unhindered access so that the
humanitarian organizations can carry out their relief
activities. At the same time, we are in favour of
incorporating, as appropriate, humanitarian aspects into
those peacekeeping activities authorized by the Security
Council.

Like many other delegations, we are of the view that
the Security Council, in fulfilling its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, and in
reviewing situations of armed conflict, should also pay
attention to humanitarian issues caused by conflicts and,
especially, take into consideration factors such as
humanitarian assistance. It must be pointed out that the
recipients of humanitarian assistance are often countries
troubled by economic difficulty, political instability and
even armed conflict. These countries are vulnerable both
politically and economically. As the purpose of
humanitarian assistance from the international community,
including the United Nations, is to help eliminate or
alleviate humanitarian crises in those countries, the unique
conditions and difficulties of the country concerned should
be given full consideration in carrying out humanitarian
assistance activities in order to avoid further complicating
the conflict or situation that led to the humanitarian
problems there and to avoid aggravating an already difficult
or even tragic humanitarian situation. To do so, relevant
humanitarian organizations, whether governmental,
international or non-governmental, must fully respect the
views of the recipient countries, adopt a just, equitable and
unbiased position towards all recipient countries or parties
and see to it that humanitarian work is not politicized. All
parties concerned should be aware that they are carrying
out humanitarian activities in a sovereign State; therefore,
they should fully respect the laws and customs of the
country concerned. Simply providing humanitarian
assistance does not give them the right to dictate to the
country receiving assistance; nor should they interfere in
the internal affairs of a sovereign State in the name of
humanitarian assistance. More important, humanitarian
responses should not be employed as a pretext under
which to use force against a sovereign State.
We cannot but notice with concern that, in recent
years, the lack of financial resources has placed a great
strain on humanitarian activities. We call on the
international community to do more in this regard and to
give equal attention to humanitarian difficulties and crises
wherever they may occur.

We have always maintained that humanitarian issues
should be addressed by treating both the symptoms and
root causes. In providing humanitarian assistance and
performing humanitarian activities, the international
community should identify the deeper causes of
humanitarian crises and seek their solutions. As is known
to all, poverty and economic backwardness, territorial and
border disputes inherited from the past and differences
among ethnic and religious groups, among other factors,
are at the root of unending warfare and worsening
humanitarian crises in many regions. Therefore, it is very
important to the fundamental alleviation and solution of
humanitarian problems that the international community
effectively help the relevant countries to eradicate
poverty, develop their economies and create a favourable
external environment for the relaxation rather than the
intensification of disputes and conflicts. This is of
practical importance.

In recent years, the Security Council, within the
terms of its responsibilities, has considered and adopted
resolutions or presidential statements on issues such as
protection for humanitarian assistance, protection of
civilians in armed conflict and humanitarian assistance to
African refugees. These efforts demonstrate the aspiration
and determination of the international community to
resolve humanitarian issues.

It is our hope that today's open debate will serve to
enhance the positive efforts of relevant United Nations
institutions aimed at alleviating and eventually resolving
humanitarian problems.

