Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to Malaysia for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for explaining the
situation of and the impact of conflicts on children,
as well as the implementation of several action plans
to eliminate violence against children, particularly in
armed conflict.

Indonesia has paid particular attention to the issue
of children in armed conflict, which has a grave impact
both on the involved parties and the victims, especially
on the growth, well-being and future of children.
We condemn any act of violence against children,
as defined by the United Nations in six categories of
violations against children that include the killing and
maiming of children, the recruitment or use of children
as soldiers, sexual violence against children, attacks on
schools or hospitals, the denial of humanitarian access
for children, and the abduction of children. We believe
that no child imagines itself being forced to become a
soldier; no child wants to be in conflict and no child
wants a war. But the reality is disastrously different
from our expectations.

It is already very disturbing that children are
forced into armed conflict as combatants. What is
equally disturbing is that they may be forced into
some type of strategic position, such as spies, couriers,
communications officers, logistics and other forms
of involvement that can harm children. In post-war
situations, the psychological condition of children
involved in armed conflict has become a central concern
of stakeholders that, if not carefully handled, could
raise the potential for spawning radical and extremist
movements in the future.

As the Graca Machel report (see A/51/306) reminds
us, children who cannot escape conflict do not have the
same chances for advancement enjoyed by children
growing up in peace. There are short- and long-term
implications that surely remain with children that have
experienced first-hand the horrors of conflict and
violence. In this regard, we highly value efforts that
have been undertaken by the Council in establishing
and implementing measures and resolutions, including
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict. We also appreciate the importance of various
engagements and initiatives of the Secretary-General,
Member States and other stakeholders, which can
provide useful guidance on the practical steps taken
to ensure that children are able to grow up in a safe
environment and free from any form of violence.

With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), we have a common platform to advance peace
globally by arming all countries and people with
economic and social equality, which will enable all of
us to also exercise our abilities to protect the planet.
Through this framework, leaving no one behind and
achieving sustained peace for generations to come feels
more tangible.

When the international community addresses
conflict and violence, the greater hope is that there will
be stronger strategic emphasis on prevention. First and
foremost, one important measure that should be taken is
to protect the minds and spirits of children from being
contaminated by the violence of conflict. Moreover, one
part of preventive measures is understanding the root
causes and catalysts of conflicts, which are often linked
to poverty, marginalization and lack of opportunities
for the young population to advance themselves.

Violence against children cannot therefore be
ended with silo or sporadic approaches. Purely military
and security approaches have not proved effective. It is
imperative for us to adopt a comprehensive approach to
identifying real actions to address the impact of armed
conflict on children, including through social, economic
and political approaches, as well as the formulation
of a long-term strategic plan for reintegration and
rehabilitation. Such strategies should be based on
credible and impartial information, taking into account
the efforts made by Member States and in line with the
responsibility and authority of States.

It is also important to create an enabling environment
and implement many of the international commitments
that would ensure the protection of children. Indonesia
once again encourages Member States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict, as well as other relevant
conventions. Indonesia also encourages Member
States to support efforts towards the fulfilment of the
fundamental rights of children through child protection
legislation, education, training and resources to ensure
that the best interests of children are taken care of.

Let us once again redouble our efforts. What is at
stake is the future of the world and many generations
to come. Children deserve peace. Children have
the right to develop healthily and enjoy a happy and
harmonious life.

