Mr. Kolby (Norway): The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has come a long way since the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Major developments
have taken place both in Kosovo itself and in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Guehenno, for a comprehensive briefing.
It provided exactly the kind of high-quality information
that was called for in our debate on cooperation with
troop-contributing countries last Tuesday.

Like other major troop contributors and aid
donors to the international community's efforts in
Kosovo and the Balkans, Norway welcomes this open
debate as an opportunity for us - Council members
and affected non-members alike - to take stock of the
situation at the start of what may be regarded as a new
phase in UNMIK's operations.

While thanking the entire UNMIK staff, in
particular Bernard Kouchner for his dedication and
tireless work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Norway warmly welcomes the
appointment of Hans Haekkerup of Denmark as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
He can count on Norway's full support in his
endeavours to implement the tasks entrusted to him by
the Security Council in resolution 1244 (1999).

Many serious challenges remain with important
implications for international peace and security. First
of all, the security situation and the level of violence in
Kosovo continue to be of deep concern to us.
Combating violence and providing protection for all
minorities in Kosovo must remain a top priority for
UNMIK and KFOR. It is unjustifiable that people
continue to be killed and attacked because of their
ethnic background. Norway condemns all acts of
violence that undermine possibilities for multi-ethnic
coexistence. We welcome the attention given by the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
law enforcement and fighting crime.

The prime operational responsibility rests with
KFOR and the UNMIK police, but Kosovo's political
leaders have a major responsibility for the development
of a society based on tolerance and non-violence.
Newly elected local leaders must be reminded of this.
Efforts to improve the overall situation for minorities,
including with regard to health and other social
services, must be reinforced. An improved situation for
minorities is crucial for refugees to be able to return in
safety and dignity.

Inter-Albanian violence, often with political
connotations, is also a serious threat working against
attempts to build a democratic society in Kosovo. The
local population must be encouraged to step forward
and assist in the identification of suspects.

A second challenge concerns elections. Norway
welcomes the priority given by UNMIK to the
implementation of the results of the local elections held
last autumn. This must include the adjustment of the
joint administrative structures to broaden their political
and ethnic bases. Such adjustments will make the
central institutions stronger, not weaker. These
endeavours must be complemented with training and
adequate funding for the newly elected bodies.
Norwegian assistance to Kosovo, which amounted to
$15 million last year and will remain at a high level of
$12 million in 2001, will be directed towards
institution-building and transfer of know-how in order
to support good governance and generate sustainable
employment.

Norway believes that even with comprehensive
international assistance, it will be some time before we
will be able to see the proper functioning of the newly
elected municipal structures. We should allow some
time for the local institutions to gain experience before
moving to elections at the next level in Kosovo. The
mandate and the composition of a Kosovo-wide
assembly must be determined and a legal framework
created before a decision on the date of the election is
taken.

These issues must also be viewed within the
context of the new political situation in Belgrade and
the implications that this has for Kosovo and the region
as a whole. As we have heard today, the preparation of
a framework for political and administrative structures
at the provincial level has started. This is a natural
follow-up to the successfully held elections at the
municipal level. Yugoslav authorities should be
included in an appropriate manner when consultations
outside the UNMIK structures are being carried out.
Properly handled, the closer involvement of Belgrade
in discussions regarding Kosovo can serve as a useful
confidence-building measure both between the
international community and Belgrade and between
Belgrade and the Kosovo leaders.

We note with concern that the situation for the
Kosovo Albanian political prisoners held in Serbia is
still unclear. We call upon the Yugoslav authorities to
find the appropriate legal channels for the speedy
release of the Kosovo Albanian prisoners being held on
political grounds. At the same time, further efforts
must be made to establish the fate of Serbs missing in
Kosovo.

Norway is pleased by the contacts established
between UNMIK and the authorities in Belgrade
following the democratic changes in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We encourage and expect
Kosovo Albanian leaders to explore the new
possibilities for a constructive dialogue with the
Yugoslav authorities.

Norway strongly condemns the recent attacks by
ethnic Albanian armed groups in the Presevo Valley in
southern Serbia. It is unacceptable that such groups
violate the ground safety zone in order to launch
attacks on targets in the Presevo Valley. The United
Nations and KFOR must make every possible effort to
prevent activities that can destabilize the situation in
the region and adversely affect developments inside
Kosovo. We welcome the measures taken by KFOR to
improve the control of the boundary. Additional
measures might be called for both by KFOR as regards
the security zone, and the UNMIK police as regards
preventive measures and investigations inside Kosovo.
We also expect the Kosovo Albanian leaders to make
greater efforts in order to impede these extremist
elements. We commend the responsible and restrained
approach by Belgrade in dealing with the situation in
the Presevo Valley.

Norway, which, together with Denmark, is taking
over as the KFOR lead nation from April this year, will
also continue to actively support UNMIK, including
through efforts to strengthen internal security and
institution-building. It is crucial that the civilian and
military sides of a peace operation be closely
integrated.

