Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation associates itself with preceding
speakers in expressing its grave concern at the stagnation
of the peace process in Angola. The Government of that
country and the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) are mainly responsible for
bringing this process to a successful conclusion. In
addition, both parties are obliged to refrain from any
measure that could jeopardize the success of the process.
Otherwise, there will be no possibility of a just and
lasting peace in Angola.

Unfortunately, at present one of the parties -
UNITA - is not contributing as it should to the peace
process. Its unjustifiable delays in fulfilling its
obligations, undertaken two years ago under the Lusaka
Protocol, are the main cause of the present difficulties. As
the Secretary-General pointed out in his report of 13
August 1997, UNITA must demobilize and demilitarize
its armed forces. To that end, and in accordance with the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, it must provide the
United Nations with complete and reliable information on
all the military or armed personnel under its control.

In this context, we condemn any attempt by that
group to rearrn or reorganize its armed forces, or to mine
certain parts of the territory under its control - a concern
expressed in the report of the Secretary-General. UN ITA
must also turn radio VORGAN into a non-partisan station
and must guarantee that it cease immediately any hostile
propaganda against both the United Nations and
international humanitarian organizations. The parties must
make every effort to build a culture of peace in Angola
and must not incite hatred or reopen the old wounds of
war.

At this stage in the peace process, the Security
Council has every right to demand that UNITA grant
unconditional access to United Nations bodies and non-
governmental organizations in the territory under its
control so as to enable them to provide humanitarian
assistance to refugees and displaced persons. In this
context, it is essential that both parties ensure the safety
and freedom of movement of all international personnel

 

in Angola, in particular the personnel of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA).

The fact that UNITA has not fulfilled all of its
obligations in this respect now makes it necessary for the
Security Council to consider the establishment of sanctions
against UNITA and against its leaders. Once again, my
delegation considers it necessary to state, as it has done on
other occasions, the fact that any sanctions regime must be
solely a temporary means of exercising pressure on those
Governments or entities that threaten international peace
and security. In this respect, sanctions are a means of
legitimate, collective defence for international society in the
framework of the legal system established under the Charter
of the United Nations. For this reason, sanctions should not
become a more or less covert method of conducting war or
intervening in matters that are essentially under the
domestic jurisdiction of States. Sanctions should be
carefully designed so that they can achieve the objective of
altering the illegal policies of the Government or entity in
question. For this reason, sanctions must not become a
method of punishment for an innocent population, and they
must always be interpreted restrictively.

In this context, it is important to point out the positive
aspects of the draft resolution that we are considering. First,
the sanctions will enter into force only after a reasonable
time, which will make it possible for UNIT A to stop in its
tracks and reverse its illegal policies before implementation.
The sanctions are also designed to operate against the
leadership of UNITA and its functioning as a political
entity, so as to avoid suffering in the civilian population
that would result from economic sanctions. The draft also
makes due reference to the need for making exceptions on
the basis of humanitarian considerations and establishes the
principle that requests of that nature must be given
favourable consideration. Likewise, the draft under
consideration shows a high degree of adaptability and
flexibility with regard to the best way of applying these
enforcement measures.
During informal consultations, my delegation, like
others, expressed serious reservations about the references
made to the immediate families of UNITA officials, as such
references would, in a way, imply the imposition of
responsibility simply by virtue of being a family member.
This goes against the juridical tradition that forms the basis
of the democratic legal order. The resolution that we are
about to adopt, once the appropriate adjustments have been
made, appropriately takes into account this reservation of
principle and establishes mechanisms to ensure that the
rights of innocent people in Angola will not be violated.

In adopting this draft resolution, the Security Council
will send a clear and decisive message to Dr. Savimbi
and the leaders of UNITA. We hope that that message
will be properly understood and that these sanctions will
truly become a positive factor for international pressure in
favour of peace in Angola.

