The President (spoke in French): I should now
like to make a statement in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria.

I wish to thank Mr. Tiirk for his briefing on the
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
and on the latest developments. Bulgaria warmly
welcomes the resolve of the Papua New Guinea
authorities, as well as the invaluable contribution made
by the countries of the region, in particular by the
States members of the Bougainville transitional
team - Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu - to
the implementation of the ceasefire and to ensuring the
political stability of the country.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude
for the important role of, and the efforts made by, the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and its Director, Ambassador Noel Sinclair,
in ensuring progress in the implementation of the peace
process.

Bulgaria welcomes the agreements reached at the
recent meeting in Adelaide, Australia, between the
foreign ministers of Australia and of Papua New
Guinea. My country welcomes the efforts of the States
involved in the peace process as well as the completion
of stage III of the weapons-disposal plan of action. We
believe that the decision on the fate of the weapons that
have been collected must be acceptable to all parties to
the peace process and should adequately respond to
security-related problems and challenges.

My delegation believes also that peace-building
efforts must continue without any hindrance from any
party. There is also a need, in order to ensure a
comprehensive reconciliation, to preserve the
possibility of involving Francis Ona and his group in
the peace process.

My delegation welcomes the concrete steps taken
by the Government of Papua New Guinea in
implementing the peace process, including the
amendments to the country's Constitution and the
efforts to consolidate peace in Bougainville. The
changes that have been made will not only contribute
to improving the economic and social situation of the
inhabitants of Bougainville; they also mark a new stage
in the relationship between the national Government
and Bougainville.

We believe that, given the importance of the stage
at which the Bougainville peace process is now,
UNPOB's mandate should be extended by six months.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Papua New Guinea, to whom I give
the floor.

