Mr. Mohd Radzi (Malaysia): Mr. President, let
me begin by joining others in thanking you for
convening this meeting. Malaysia is pleased and
greatly honoured to address the Council today under
the presidency of Pakistan and especially to see the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan presiding over this
meeting this morning.

At the outset, Malaysia would like to reiterate
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security resides with the United
Nations, as envisaged in the Charter. We therefore
consider United Nations peacekeeping operations to be
a vital and indispensable element of the Organization.

At the same time, we wish to emphasize that
United Nations peacekeeping operations, no matter
how successful they are, cannot be a substitute for a
permanent solution. Nor are they to be used as an
excuse to gloss over the need to address the underlying
root causes of conflict.

Within the limited time allocated in this debate I
would like to raise a few of the points of concern and
interest to Malaysia in relation to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

First, the Security Council must strive to avoid
selectivity and double standards in establishing United
Nations peacekeeping operations in order to enhance
its credibility in the eyes of the international
community. That particular point was also stressed by
leaders of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) when
they met at the 13th NAM. Summit in Kuala Lumpur
last year.

The Council will recall that in the past it has
received proposals to intervene in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict by deploying an appropriate United
Nations presence in the occupied Palestinian territory
including East Jerusalem. On all those occasions, when
an urgent United Nations intervention was most
needed, regrettably, the Council was prevented from
approving those proposals, hence indirectly allowing
the continuation of flagrant and gross violations of
international law and the brutal and wanton oppression
of the Palestinians by the occupying Power. Malaysia
once again urges the Council not to turn a blind eye to
the current grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to fulfil its long overdue responsibility
under the Charter by seriously considering the
deployment of a United Nations presence in the
appropriate form and modality in the territory. We
believe a United Nations presence in the occupied
Palestinian territory would contribute immensely to the
current efforts for peaceful settlement and the
establishment of the State of Palestine, coexisting side
by side and in peace with Israel, as envisaged by the
road map.

Secondly, high priority must be accorded to
strengthen the safety and security of peacekeepers and
associated personnel in field missions and respective
headquarters. In that context, every effort must be
made to further improve the safety and security system,
especially in the field missions, in the face of the
increasing threat to United Nations personnel. We
welcome the Secretary General's recommendation for
the creation of a full-time safety and security focal
point and a mission security management unit within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

The capacity of the United Nations to collect,
collate, analyse and disseminate intelligence reports in
a timely manner must be enhanced. We welcome the
formation of the Joint Mission Analysis Cell (JMAC)
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in four
missions for the purpose of enhancing the capacity to
gather information in the field and use it appropriately
to assess the environments in which they are operating.
The JMAC should be expanded to other peacekeeping
missions as well, and this capacity should be optimized
to the fullest.

Thirdly, we note that cooperation and
consultations between the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) have significantly
improved at the formal and informal levels. The
consultations have enabled the TCCs to share in
advance vital information enabling them to adequately
prepare their troops for their specific missions. We
would like to encourage more frequent consultations
and to widen the scope, where possible, of such
cooperation and consultations.

In that connection, we welcome the consultations
between the Security Council and TCCs under the
provisions of resolution 1353 (2001). We have noted,
however, that the views expressed by TCCs during the
consultations - sometimes on several occasions -
were not taken into consideration when the Security
Council made important decisions pertaining to the
expansion of a mandate or the appropriate size of a
peacekeeping force in a mission. We wish to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that the TCCs' expertise
and experience, acquired through decades of
participation in peacekeeping operations, can serve as
an invaluable input to the Security Council in all stages
of planning and implementing peacekeeping missions.
We urge that this matter be given its due attention.

My fourth and last point concerns the resources
and the budget of peacekeeping operations. It has
become clear that the current allocation of $2.82
billion for the peacekeeping budget is insufficient.
With new theatres of peacekeeping operations in the
pipeline, an estimated additional $1.5 billion may be
required. The Member States and the United Nations
will certainly have to find ways and means to raise the
required resources. It is our hope that in meeting this
challenging task of mobilizing additional resources, the
existing periodic payment of reimbursement and claims
to troop-contributing countries will not be affected.

We also draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that there are still troop-contributing countries that
have not yet received reimbursement for their
participation in various missions that have ended, some
more than a decade ago, such as UNOSOM. in Somalia
and UNCTAC in Cambodia. We urge the United
Nations to continue the efforts to settle the long-
outstanding account while deliberating on innovative
and practical modalities to raise the required resources
for expanding peacekeeping operations.

