Mr. Lowcock: The Stockholm Agreement and
resolution 2451 (2018) are already having an impact.
Reports from humanitarian agencies in Al-Hudaydah
indicate that civilians are a little more confident and a
little less afraid that they will be victims of air strikes
or caught in crossfire as they go about their lives. But,
as Mr. Griffiths just said, it is very early days, and we
must do everything we can to support the Stockholm
Agreement. We must keep reminding the parties that
international humanitarian law must be respected in all
locations and at all times.

I cannot yet report to the Council that the wider
humanitarian situation in Yemen is any better. It
remains catastrophic. More than 24 million people
now need humanitarian assistance - 80 per cent of
the population. They include nearly 10 million people
just a step away from famine. More than 3.3 million
people have been displaced, over 600,000 of them in
the past 12 months. Only half of health facilities are
fully functioning. Hundreds of thousands of people
got sick last year because of poor sanitation and
water-borne diseases, including cholera. Needs have
intensified across all sectors. Millions of Yemenis are
hungrier, sicker and more vulnerable now than they
were a year ago.

Humanitarian agencies, though, are scaling up
to meet these needs. In December, the World Food
Programme (WFP) reached 9.5 million people with
emergency food assistance; that is a record number. In
the next few months, the WFP will expand operations
to reach 12 million people a month, including the
10 million most at risk of famine and 2 million acutely
vulnerable internally displaced persons. Humanitarian
agencies continue to roll back cholera, to improve
living conditions for displaced families in collective
centres and informal camps, and to do everything
possible to mitigate hunger and malnutrition for the
240,000 people facing catastrophic levels of food
insecurity i at the phase 5 level of the Integrated
Phase Classification. Agencies are also preparing
for large-scale returns to Al-Hudaydah as and when
conditions allow. Altogether, operations in Yemen
this year will, if funding is available, reach 15 million
people - about half the population.

None of this is problem-free. On 31 December, the
WFP issued a statement seeking action from the de
facto authorities over diversion of food aid from seven
distribution sites in Sana'a. We know that aid diversion
and attempted diversion are risks in all conflict
settings. We take this extremely seriously; parties to
conflict must not misappropriate relief items destined
for civilians in need.

Because we are committed to an effective response,
we had already contracted independent third-party
monitors last autumn. In their first report, they found
that 95 per cent of intended food-aid beneficiaries
contacted across the country confirmed that they were
indeed receiving food aid. In some cases, rations were
not always complete. These gaps could potentially
be due to funding or access constraints, or other
problems. More detailed independent monitoring of
this sort is currently under way. It would not surprise
me if problems were to emerge in other parts of the
country. But we will always act to find solutions when
that happens.

It is also important to note that the Sana'a problem
itself was identified through existing monitoring
mechanisms and that the WFP, with support from
the Humanitarian Coordinator, has acted decisively.
They and the de facto authorities are having intensive,
constructive discussions on the way forward, and we
are optimistic that the right measures will be in place
before the next round of distributions is slated to begin.
Steps to improve targeting and delivery mechanisms
are being taken as we speak.

Resolution 2451 (2018) sets out three main points
related to humanitarian issues. I would like to update
the Council on where we stand on those today.

The first point is access. The humanitarian scale-up
that Yemenis need will not be possible if aid workers
and supplies cannot travel safely and freely to where
they are needed. Following the Stockholm agreement,
an immediate objective was to regain access to the
Red Sea Mills and several humanitarian warehouses
in Al-Hudaydah. This has not yet happened, but needs
to happen quickly. Enough grain for 3.5 million people
has now been sitting unused, possibly spoiling, for
nearly four months in the Red Sea Mills.

Unfortunately, over the last six weeks, the de
facto authorities have blocked humanitarian supplies
travelling from areas under their control to Government-
held areas. They have also recently informed
humanitarian agencies that 72 hours' notice is required
ahead of any movements, instead of the usual 48 hours.
We are also concerned by administrative restrictions
being imposed on international non-governmental
organizations as they renew their operating agreements,
as well as ongoing challenges with monitoring.

Restrictions are also being tightened on specific
types of programming, including protection and
support for victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
Protection work is urgently needed in Yemen, where, to
cite one example, verified reports of grave violations
of children's rights, including killings, maiming and
recruitment to military service, increased by nearly
25 per cent in the last year.

Continuing delays and unacceptable preconditions
for the planned medical air bridge from Sana'a airport
also mean that thousands of people with medical
conditions for which treatment is unavailable in
northern Yemen are condemned to suffer.

Taken together, these developments are delaying
and interrupting critical humanitarian programmes.
But solutions can be agreed. Just today we received
confirmation that 56 new visas would be granted to
United Nations staff; that is an important step in the
right direction.

The resolution also calls for impediments to
commercial imports to be lifted. In December,
commercial fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef were higher than at any time since August 2017,
although they remain below estimated requirements.
This is a significant improvement, and we hope that fuel
imports will continue to increase in the coming months.
The number of clearance requests to enter Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef ports also more than doubled in December
compared with the previous month. We hope that this
is a sign of rising commercial confidence following
the Stockholm agreement, but, of course, it makes a
difference only if those requests are then agreed.

While the situation on fuel imports improved and
more ships sought to reach the ports, commercial food
imports in December plummeted to just 163,000 metric
tons, which in fact is the lowest figure recorded since the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen began monitoring, in July 2016. This is
deeply concerning in an environment where a serious
threat of famine persists. Overall, average monthly
commercial food imports are now 25 per cent lower
than they were a year ago. Ongoing import restrictions
also mean that no commercial containerized cargo has
entered Al-Hudaydah port for more than a year.

Severe congestion at Aden port also remains a
problem. Despite some recent progress, the WFP still has
nearly 500 containers stuck in Aden port. In some cases,
they have had to reroute cargo via Salalah, in Oman,
and then overland into Yemen, at considerably greater
cost and risk. I hope that the Government of Yemen,
the de facto authorities and other stakeholders will take
all steps necessary to ensure the smooth, unimpeded
flow of commercial and humanitarian imports through
all Yemeni ports, as required by resolution 2451 (2018).
This should include the reopening of Ras Isa port,
which has been closed since June 2017.

As I told the Council last month (see S/PV.8424),
I raised all these access issues with those I met in
Sana'a and in Aden in November. I also sent a follow-
up letter to the president of the Ansar Allah Supreme
Political Council last month. A constructive dialogue
is continuing through the Humanitarian Coordinator,
and I remain hopeful that the de facto authorities and
the Government of Yemen will act quickly to fulfil
the strong commitments to humanitarian action that
I received.

The second humanitarian point in resolution 2451
(2018) relates to the economy. The resolution calls on
the parties to strengthen the economy and the Central
Bank, and to pay pensions and civil-servant salaries.
The Yemeni rial is again losing value, with the exchange
rate now hovering around 520 rial to the dollar. That
is, of course, better than the 800-plus rial rate we
saw several months ago, but significantly worse than
last month's 450-rial rate. It is also more than twice
pre-conflict levels.

Without intervention, the International Monetary
Fund estimates that the exchange rate is likely to slide
to more than 700 rial to the dollar this year. As the
Council is aware, because Yemen imports nearly all its
food, fuel and medicines, this would be devastating for
millions of people.

Foreign currency injections from the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have
been extremely helpful in strengthening the rial since
October. But as I discussed with the Prime Minister in
Aden, we need regular, predictable injections such as
this that will sustainably keep the exchange rate at an
affordable level.

The resolution also points out that paying pensions
and civil-servant salaries across the country is
another key element of strengthening the economy. In
November, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates announced $70 million in funding to
UNICEF to cover teachers' allowances. Arrangements
have now been agreed to deliver these payments, and
they are expected to begin shortly. That should benefit
millions of Yemeni children. Martin's team, with
the support of the Resident Coordinator, expects to
convene discussions on the economy and strengthening
the Central Bank soon. I hope that will quickly lead to
practical and sustained improvements.

The third humanitarian point is your call,
Mr. President, on the international community to
consider additional funding for the 2019 United
Nations-coordinated humanitarian response plan. We
raised $2.4 billion last year, or 83 per cent of what we
required. As humanitarian operations expand this year
in response to the deterioration in the situation we have
seen, especially over the past six months, humanitarian
agencies will obviously need even more money. The
2019 humanitarian response plan will be finalized
in the next few weeks, and I expect it will require
approximately $4 billion - half of which will be just
for emergency food assistance.

On 26 February, the Secretary-General will convene
a high-level pledging conference in Geneva, co-hosted
by the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland. In late
November, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates announced that they would contribute
an additional $500 million to combat hunger in Yemen
in 2019. Given that we expect that the funds generously
provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates in 2018 to be fully spent by the
end of March, that new pledge is extremely important.
We are counting on all our donors to announce more
generous funding at the February event.

The important progress we have seen on the political
track, which Martin has just briefed the Council on,
deserves our full and continuing support, but it does
not of itself feed a single starving child. Millions of
Yemenis are looking to us for assistance and protection,
and we need to see more and faster progress on all the
humanitarian elements of the Council's resolution to
make any practical difference to their lives.

