I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings on both the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. It is certainly regrettable that the Syrian Constitutional Committee was unable to meet this month in Geneva, especially given that this week marks the one-year anniversary of the launch of the Committee. Unfortunately, however, there have been little to no results from the whole process. The Committee's meetings in Geneva have not become regular, and the Syrian regime's representatives are resorting to delaying tactics. We conclude that there is no real will in Damascus to move forward with the new constitution or to engage genuinely in the political process. Plans for holding presidential elections next spring without a new constitution only confirm that assessment. It would be a clear violation of resolution 2254 (2015) and its road map to achieving peace. Estonia reiterates that meaningful progress on the issue of detainees and missing persons is another crucial element of resolution 2254 (2015), which could also serve as a confidence-building measure between the Syrian regime and its legitimate opposition. The release of arbitrarily detained people, respect for human rights and the holding of free and fair elections are the cornerstone of national reconciliation. Looking at the situation on the ground, we remain cautiously optimistic about the Russia-Turkey ceasefire agreement of March, which largely seems to be holding. That truce continues to provide the local population in Idlib a much-deserved break from violence. However, we deplore yesterday's Russian air strikes in the northern part of Idlib, which violate the ceasefire and underline its fragility. We call on the parties to de-escalate the situation. While the military situation is hopeful, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to affect Syrians across the country, with at least 12,000 cases and 500 people dead. Health facilities and human resources have been nearly depleted due to conflict, and the capacity to cope with the pandemic remains extremely limited. Like other Council members, Estonia deeply appreciates the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in providing aid to millions of Syrians every month. We call on all parties immediately to provide unimpeded, safe and sustained humanitarian access to all parts of Syria. Since August, reportedly more than 100 schools have closed in north-east Syria. Estonia deems it imperative that children regain access to quality education and continue the learning process in order to prevent a "lost generation". We welcome the overwhelming support of the largest international donors to Syrians. The European Union and its member States' contributions have enabled a scaling-up of critical programmes to support host communities and refugees in dealing with the impact of COVID-19 as well as to alleviate the suffering of Syrians inside the country. The fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region", hosted by the European Union and co-chaired by the United Nations earlier this summer, generated pledges totalling more than €12 billion, of which €4.5 billion has already been contributed for 2020.
