Mr. Zacklin: I shall be brief. The report of the
assessment mission, which was led by Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh of the Department of
Political Affairs in May of 2004, is before the Council
and is self-explanatory. I will focus my remarks on the
judicial and non-judicial mechanisms that have been
recommended and place them in their national and
international contexts.

The request in July 2002 by the then-President of
Burundi, Pierre Buyoya, for the establishment of an
international judicial commission of inquiry, which
was foreseen in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, must be considered in the light of
Burundi's history of ethnic conflict, the events that
have taken place since the conclusion of the Arusha
Agreement in 2000 and the experience gained by the
United Nations in promoting justice and the rule of law
over the past 12 years. It should also be examined
against the background of four international
commissions of inquiry established between 1993 and
1995, three of which were at the request of the
Council.

For all of their differences, the four commissions
shared similar features. Their subject matter and their
temporal jurisdiction were limited to the events of
1993, namely, the coup d'etat, the assassination of the
President of Burundi and the massacres that followed.
As the earlier 1972 massacre of Hutus was outside
their mandate, a legal determination that the crime of
genocide had been committed in Burundi was made
only in respect of the 1993 massacres of Tutsis. While
all four commissions recommended that if impunity is
to be eradicated those responsible should be brought to
account, no action has been taken on those
recommendations by any United Nations organ.

In such a deeply divided society, where inter-
ethnic killings in 1965, 1972, 1988, 1991 and 1993
have formed part of a dreadful and deeply disturbing
repetitive cycle, limiting the mandate of any inquiry to
a single cycle of massacres and characterizing it - and
it alone - as genocide was considered by many of the
mission's interlocutors in Burundi as a partial and
biased account of the events. The demands for the
establishment of a commission of inquiry whose
temporal jurisdiction extends over four decades of
Burundi's recent history are thus an appeal for fairness
in establishing and recounting the historical truth and
putting the 1993 massacres in a broad historical
perspective.
Against that background, the Secretariat
assessment mission was mandated by the Council to
determine the advisability and feasibility of
establishing yet another commission of inquiry and to
consider the relationship between the international
judicial commission of inquiry and the national truth
and reconciliation commission envisaged under the
Arusha Agreement. Based on extensive consultations
with representatives of the Government, political
parties and civil society at large, and convinced of the
acute need to support the peace process and, in the
words of the Council, foster "truth and reconciliation
while achieving justice" (S/2004/72, annex, para. 2),
the mission considered modalities for establishing a
twin accountability mechanism to clarify the historical
truth, investigate the crimes and bring to justice those
responsible.

The mission has accordingly recommended the
establishment of a non-judicial accountability
mechanism in the form of a truth commission, and the
establishment of a judicial accountability mechanism
in the form of a special chamber within the court
system of Burundi. The mission recognizes that this
proposal is a departure from the letter - although not
the spirit - of the Arusha Agreement. It was
nevertheless convinced that the establishment of the
two commissions envisaged under the Arusha
Agreement, having virtually identical temporal and
subject-matter jurisdiction, including powers of
investigation, would create the inevitable and
undesirable risk of overlapping jurisdictions and the
possibility of contradictory findings, and would
represent a misuse of scarce resources. Given the state
of the local administration of justice in Burundi, it also
concluded that the likelihood of a local trial process
meeting international standards of justice was
questionable.

The proposed truth commission would be
established under the existing Burundian law, revised
as appropriate. It would be composed of five members:
three international and two national commissioners.
The mandate of the commission would be to establish
the historical facts and determine the causes and nature
of the conflict in Burundi, classify the crimes
committed since independence in 1962 and identify
those responsible.

The experience gained in establishing parallel
judicial and non-judicial accountability mechanisms in
Sierra Leone and East Timor will be helpful in
determining the relationship between the truth
commission and the proposed judicial accountability
mechanism. The expeditious establishment of the truth
commission for Burundi will ensure that, by the time a
special chamber is established, the results of the
investigations carried out by the commission could be
shared with the prosecutor of the special chamber.

As a matter of sequencing, it is possible that the
two mechanisms will operate simultaneously for a
certain period of time. Should there be concurrent
operation, the modalities for cooperation could include
a referral of cases from the commission to the chamber,
the sharing of information and evidentiary material
and, where appropriate, the sharing of services,
knowledge and expertise.

In deciding to recommend a special chamber
within the court system of Burundi, the mission has
opted for a judicial accountability mechanism located
in the country and forming part of the Burundian court
system. It is envisaged that the special chamber would
have the competence to prosecute those bearing the
greatest responsibility for the crime of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes committed in
Burundi. Its temporal jurisdiction would be limited to
specific phases of the conflict, and would include, as a
minimum, the events between 1972 and 1993,
inclusive.

The legal basis for the establishment of the
special chamber and the applicable law governing its
operation will be the Burundian law, with the necessary
modifications introduced to ensure procedural
guarantees of fair trial and due process of law. In this
connection, I should point out that, based on existing
United Nations practice, in order for the United
Nations to cooperate in the establishment of the special
chamber, its founding instrument will have to exclude
the death penalty from the sentencing framework and
declare any amnesty given to genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes invalid before the chamber.

As in the case of the truth commission, the
composition of the special chamber would be mixed,
with a majority of international judges and an
international prosecutor and a registrar. It is envisaged
that the prosecutor's office and court management
would include a substantial international component
working alongside Burundi nationals.

In proposing both a judicial and a non-judicial
accountability mechanism, the mission has taken into
account the Arusha Agreement, the needs and
expectations of the Burundians so clearly expressed to
the mission, the capacity of the Burundian
administration of justice, established United Nations
principles and practices and the practicality and
feasibility of any proposed mechanism.

In so doing, it has attempted to apply the lessons
learned from the United Nations experience in
establishing international tribunals and transitional
justice mechanisms since 1993. In an integrated
approach to justice and the rule of law in post-conflict
societies, the establishment of a judicial accountability
mechanism clearly cannot be viewed in isolation, but
must be seen as part of a whole, placed in the general
context of overall judicial reform and capacity-building
and pursued in tandem with other transitional justice
and rule of law initiatives.

As part of this comprehensive approach to justice
and the rule of law, properly organized and
implemented, the establishment of a truth-telling
mechanism and a special chamber in the court system
of Burundi would have the added value of enhancing
the capacity of the Burundian administration of justice,
strengthening the judicial sector and leaving behind a
legacy of international standards of justice and a core
group of experienced judges, prosecutors, defence
counsel and court managers.

The establishment of such mechanisms for
Burundi with mixed composition will serve to promote
objectivity, impartiality and credibility. At the same
time, it will promote a sense of national ownership
through participation of Burundian nationals in both
processes. This sense of ownership is of critical
importance, and it cannot be emphasized too strongly
that the success or failure of such mechanisms will
depend on the degree to which Burundi as a whole
embraces the proposals. Given the deep ethnic
divisions within Burundian society and the mutual
distrust between the two ethnic groups, the mission
strongly urges that the judges, prosecutor and defence
counsel selected be known for their integrity,
objectivity and impartiality and recognized in Burundi
as transcending the ethnic divide.

I would be remiss if I did not say a few words
about funding. As national entities, neither
accountability mechanism for Burundi would be
entitled to financing through assessed contributions. It
is obvious, however, that the establishment of any
accountability mechanism for Burundi will have to
rely, virtually in its entirety, on international funding.
There are a number of recent examples of both judicial
and non-judicial accountability mechanisms being
funded by voluntary contributions from Governments
or by a mixture of such contributions and institutional
support from the international and regional
intergovernmental machinery. While that may not be
ideal, if there is a true commitment on the part of
Governments and the existing institutional framework
in the rule-of-law sector, it can be done. What is
important is that whatever mode of financing is
utilized, there should be viable, sustained funding that
will permit the mechanisms to take root, fulfil their
mandates and create the desired legacy of truth,
reconciliation and justice.

The report of the assessment mission has
presented a comprehensive approach to the pursuit of
truth and justice in Burundi. If that approach is
acceptable to the Council, it should mandate the
Secretary-General to engage in negotiations with the
Government of Burundi on the practical
implementation of the proposal to establish the truth
commission and the special chamber with a view to
concluding an agreement with the Government of
Burundi on the terms and conditions for United
Nations cooperation in the establishment and operation
of the truth commission and the special chamber. It
goes without saying that such a process should be
based on a broad-based, genuine and transparent
consultation with a range of national actors and civil
society to ensure that the general legal framework for
the establishment of judicial and non-judicial
accountability mechanisms reflects the views and
wishes of the people of Burundi and that the sense of
national ownership is deep and genuine.

