Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening us today
to discuss the contribution of regional organizations to
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing at the
beginning of this meeting.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).

As our Jordanian colleague noted a few minutes
ago, regional and subregional organizations have the
advantage of geographical proximity and can thus
respond more quickly to the evolving situation on the
ground. They share better knowledge of and insights
into the causes, factors and actors of a crisis, and, as
neighbours, they have a direct interest in preventing
a crisis from spilling over. The United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations would benefit
greatly from developing greater complementarity and
using their comparative advantages and capabilities
as they seek to defuse crises, negotiate peaceful
settlements and tackle cross-border threats.

Let me refer today to three regional organizations
of which my country is a member - the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Council of Europe - and to
their cooperation with the United Nations.

In the aftermath of the horrors of the Second
World War, European Governments, determined to
prevent another such terrible war, were determined to
proceed so as to make a war between the historic rivals
not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible.
Successive transformations made the European Union
an anchor ofpeace and security on the continent, whose
underlying principle of solidarity works inside as well
as well outside its boundaries, including through a
comprehensive strategic partnership with the United
Nations, which was recognized in last year's presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/4 on the subject, adopted under
the Lithuanian presidency of the Council.

On the political level, the EU commitment to
prevention and mediation finds expression in its
continued support for United Nations stand-by teams
of mediation experts and its direct involvement in
mediation, such as that which produced an historic
agreement between Pristina and Belgrade in 2013 and,
more recently, the successful conclusion of negotiations
between the E3+3 Governments and Iran.

As the largest humanitarian and development donor
worldwide, the European Union cooperates with the
United Nations in all major conflict and post-conflict
areas, whether Syria, Libya, South Sudan, Ukraine,
the Central African Republic, Yemen or Afghanistan.
The EU has been at the forefront of United Nations-
led international efforts in the Ebola response, which
the Council discussed just last week. The EU and its
member States dedicated €l.2 billion for humanitarian
aid, recovery and research projects in the affected
countries, including for support to the African Union's
medical mission in West Africa. EU institutions and
member States have allocated some €3.7 billion to
tackle the unprecedented humanitarian crisis in Syria
alone.

The comprehensive and synergistic nature of
partnerships among the United Nations, the EU and
African Union can well be seen in Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere, ranging
from border management and security sector reform
to capacity-building, post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation.

In Mali, an EU training mission (EUTM) and
the civilian mission EUCAP Sahel Mali are actively
contributing to the country's security sector reform.
Lithuania is a long-term contributor to EUTM. Mali
and is committed to maintaining its involvement. Close
cooperation between the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union is also strong in Somalia,
involving Mission Atalanta, among others, in which
Lithuania has participated since 2011. The EU's African
Peace Facility, inter alia, supports the fight of the
African Union Mission in Somalia against Al-Shabaab
terrorists and will provide funding for the multinational
joint task force against Boko Haram. EUCAP Sahel
Niger, established in 2012, is assisting the country and
the region to tackle transborder security threats such as
terrorism and organized crime.

With regard to combatting terrorism and countering
violent extremism, United Nations-EU high-level
counter-terrorism political dialogue and cooperation
offer much-needed and useful exchanges, as well as
capacity-building initiatives for affected regions and
States and should be further developed.

The OSCE, an organization with 57 participating
States on three continents, engages in a wide range
of issues, including conflict prevention, mediation,
confidence- and security-building measures, the fight
against illicit trade in small arms, non- proliferation
issues, and the promotion of the rule of law, good
governance, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
All those areas coincide with the activities of the
United Nations. Thus the two organizations certainly
have a great potential for closer cooperation that has
yet to be fully utilized. The OSCE has developed
considerable mediation and conflict-prevention
capacities complementary to those of the United
Nations, and it continues to play a role in tackling the
protracted conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria
and Georgia, as well as to contribute to security and
stability in Central Asia.

This year, the OSCE marks the fortieth anniversary
of the Helsinki Final Act - a set of fundamental
commitments based on the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity, the inviolability of borders and
the non-use of force, which are also at the core of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is an important
but also a poignant anniversary, in the context of the
unprecedented breach of those very principles by
Russia, whose proxy war against Ukraine and illegal
annexation of Crimea continue to cause death and
destruction.

The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
has an important role to play, as it represents the only
international body providing continuous reporting
from the ground and registering ongoing violations
of the Minsk ceasefire. The Mission's vehicles have
been burned and its unmanned aerial vehicles have
been repeatedlyjammed, while its observers have been
denied access and threatened by illegal militants who
continue to enjoy the military and material support
of their patrons. The Mission definitely needs greater
support and cooperation from both the European Union
and the United Nations as it continues to carry out its
work. Despite existing difficulties, a greater role for
the United Nations in the pursuit of a durable, viable
resolution of that conflict should be further explored.

Let me now turn to the Council of Europe, which
has developed an impressive inventory of international
treaties aimed at addressing some of the most pressing
contemporary challenges that are at the core of issues
related to peace and security. The conventions on
mutual assistance in criminal matters, on corruption,
on cybercrime, on the prevention of terrorism and on
action against trafficking in human beings are just a
few highly relevant examples for the work we do here
at the United Nations, including in this Council. Those
treaties are open to accession by States not members of
the Council of Europe and can provide useful standards
and tools for countries anywhere around the globe for
strengthening governance, the rule of law and respect
for human rights.

In June, for the first time, the Secretary-General of
the Council of Europe addressed the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism on the initiatives
aimed at supporting efforts by States to implement
resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters.
The recent adoption by the Council of Europe of
the protocol on foreign terrorist fighters merits our
attention as we continue to elaborate joint responses to
that unprecedented threat. It also serves as an excellent
example of close cooperation between regional
organizations and United Nations entities, since the
adoption of the protocol was originally suggested by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
which also participated actively in the drafting process.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe can also be strengthened in the
field of the rule of law, the absence of which, along
with the ensuing lawlessness and abuse, are often at
the very core of conflict. The Venice Commission of
the Council of Europe assists countries in democratic
transitions and constitutional processes. The work of
the Commission is well recognized not only within the
Council of Europe but also among its Mediterranean
and Central Asian partners. The Venice Commission
is already working closely with the United Nations
Development Programme on justice reforms. Its
expertise could be further used in assisting countries
in the constitutional and legislative fields, especially
in post-conflict situations, where building a judicial
system and ensuring the independence of the judiciary
are often key priorities.

Contemporary security challenges are too
complex and too multidimensional to be addressed by
any one single player. It is essential to take forward
the partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations, with a view to strengthening
complementarities and creating new synergies on the
basis of their comparative advantages. I hope that
today's debate will contribute to that process.

