Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation thanks the delegations
of Kuwait and the United States for having organized
the Security Council's regional visit to Kuwait City and
Baghdad. We underscore the importance and timely
nature of this kind of visit, as well as the efforts made
by the leadership of Kuwait and Iraq to cooperate with
the Security Council. We note in particular the efforts
of the Special Representative for Iraq, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, and her team to ensure the superb
organization of the visit and for the assistance they
provided to the Iraqi authorities in the process of
achieving national reconciliation and the recovery of
the country's economy.

Contacts with regional players once again confirm
that the Security Council mission remains an important
part of the Council's activities and plays a key role in
enabling it to take balanced decisions. That is what
we have all heard in the region. We welcome the fact
that during our visit to Baghdad and Kuwait City
we heard that there was an intention to engage in
good-neighbourly cooperation and to help to resolve
crisis situations in the region through political and
diplomatic means.

We note the activities carried out by Iraqis and
Kuwaitis in re-establishing historical fairness in what
we call the Iraq-Kuwaiti humanitarian dossier, which
is a legacy of the first Gulf War. We would highlight in
particular the fact that in 2018 the Kuwaiti leadership
held a conference on the reconstruction of Iraq, which
once again demonstrates their readiness to move
forward in making progress in Iraq and in establishing
sound bilateral relations.

During the course of the visit, it was stated time
and again that there was a need to de-escalate tensions
in the Persian Gulf region. Every State in the region
has an interest in this, as do international partners
without exception. We reiterate the timeliness of the
Russian concept on guaranteeing collective security
in the Persian Gulf, and we advocate heightening
the profile of the United Nations in implementing
mediation-based diplomacy.

Also important is the fact that the visit also
confirmed that the fight against terrorism is far
from over; we were told this by all regional partners.
The Security Council adopted the corresponding
resolution - resolution 2462 (2019) - on cutting off
financing to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
other terrorist organizations and preventing fighters
from returning to their homelands from areas of armed
conflict. The Russian initiative to create a broad
international front to fight terrorism remains relevant.

Russia advocates a comprehensive approach to
fighting international terrorism. We believe that in
resolving this issue, it is important to have cooperation
at all levels, international and regional. Time and again
we have stressed that countries such as Iraq, Syria and
Iran, as well as other countries of the region, can make
a contribution here. The fight should be waged on the
firm basis of international law under the auspices ofthe
United Nations. A coalition made up of a narrow range
of States can only lead to a new wave of violence.

