Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this public meeting
on general questions relating to sanctions. We would
like also to welcome the presence here of Mr. Hans
Dahlgren, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, and to thank him for his important statement.
We would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Danilo Tiirk for his extremely useful
statement.

Over the past decade, the Security Council, in
accordance with its mandate, has been obliged to make
use of sanctions as a means of maintaining and
restoring peace and security in many regions of the
world. While sanctions have played a crucial role in the
promotion of international peace and security, we are
obliged, however, to note that they have not had all the
success we had hoped for.

In some situations, they have not been effective
and have had a clear impact on civilian populations and
neighbouring States during the course of their use. This
state of affairs has on occasion raised questions
regarding the usefulness of sanctions and even
tarnished the image of the United Nations.

That is why over time the international
community has felt that there is a need to improve not
only the definition but also the targets and the
effectiveness of sanctions. To that end, our Council
decided, in April 2000, to create an informal working
group for the consideration of general issues related to
sanctions. Along the same lines, the Interlaken process,
begun in Sweden in 1998 and 1999, brought together
experts, non-governmental organizations and United
Nations representatives to consider the issue of
financial sanctions.

The Bonn-Berlin process which followed, in 1999
and 2000, in turn dealt with arms embargoes and travel
bans. These two processes led to the adoption of smart,
targeted sanctions, which have made it possible to
minimize the impact of sanctions on civilian
populations and on third countries. Those instruments
were supplemented by the Stockholm protocol, which
led to the drawing up of effective measures for the
implementation and monitoring of targeted sanctions.

My delegation welcomes these commendable
initiatives which are mutually complementary and
attest to our shared will to make sanctions more
effective and more efficient.

The increasingly important role played by the
sanctions committees created by the Security Council
clearly demonstrates this. Thus it should also be noted
that in targeting leaders, administrations or specific
groups, sanctions have made it possible to maintain the
required pressure on them and, in some cases, to
change their stance in order to restore peace.

However, as effective as they may be, it must be
recognized that smart sanctions continue to be the
subject of frequent violations, be they arms embargoes,
freezing of financial assets, or travel bans.

In order to right the situation, it would be
desirable for the Council to become further involved in
the ongoing improvement of regimes in force, while
avoiding selectivity. This means that, in addition to the
traditional role allocated to the panels of experts and
follow-up groups, we should create a series of reliable
and effective uniform monitoring mechanisms. The
example of Angola is enlightening in that respect.

Moreover, my delegation believes that, if the
mechanism is to function effectively, the sanctions
committees must be provided with adequate financial
resources so as to be able to assist those States that do
not have the means necessary to create the required
legal and normative arsenal.

Despite the highly commendable efforts that have
been made, the Council's informal working group has
yet to agree on a common position that could improve
the sanctions regimes. In our View, the remaining
differences on certain points may be sensitive but are
not insurmountable. With a little more will and the
desire to agree, we could overcome those differences
and produce a consensus document on the
administration, conception and implementation of
sanctions. That is why we urge all the members of the
group to work to achieve that objective.

Furthermore, we remain convinced that sanctions
can be fully effective only if consultation and
cooperation are maintained on a regular basis between
the Secretariat and the sanctions committees, on the
one hand, and interested international, regional and
subregional organizations, on the other. We warmly
encourage such activities, which contribute to
strengthening the dissemination of information on the
application of sanctions and their economic and
humanitarian consequences. In the same vein, the
sanctions committees must strengthen their cooperation
because certain of their activities are being duplicated.

In conclusion, I should like to express my
delegation's conviction that, far from being repressive
measures, targeted sanctions are in fact an excellent
means of prompting offending States, organizations
and groups to abide by the United Nations Charter.
They are therefore an effective tool for stimulating the
required political will necessary to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

