Mr. De La Sabliere (spoke in French): The
members of the Security Council mission to Central
Africa have asked me to report to the Council on the
mission. As the President has just said, we have
prepared a report, which is currently being finalized
and which is now before the Council. The report
includes our analysis of the situation and the mission's
recommendations. I would like to make a brief oral
report about our mission today. Of course, I suggest
that each member refer to the written report we have
prepared.

The Security Council mission that visited Central
Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003 set for itself the main
objective of supporting the peace processes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

A second transitional President has just taken
office in Bujumbura. It is to be hoped that an all-
inclusive agreement should soon take the form of a
Government of national reconciliation in Kinshasa.
Nevertheless, we must note the fact that active
hostilities continue in both countries. Both countries
are at a critical juncture in their history.

Along with the Heads of State of the countries
most directly involved in the peace processes -
namely, South Africa, Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania
and Uganda - the Council's mission contacted the
heads of rebel movements and conveyed very strong
messages to them.

The mission visited Bunia a scant two weeks after
the humanitarian crisis there led the Security Council
to adopt resolution 1484 (2003).

Given their countries' contributions to the peace
process, the members of the Council mission took
pains to listen to the views of Heads of State in
Pretoria, Luanda and Dar es Salaam with regard to the
two situations at the heart of the mission.

In Kinshasa the mission asked President Kabila
and other Congolese officials to speed up the
establishment of a transitional Government. In that
regard, we took note of the commitment expressed to
us by the parties to resolve by the end of the month the
issue of appointing political and military transitional
staff. We reminded everyone in the strongest possible
terms, and in particular the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie-Goma (RCD-Goma), that the
Council demanded the immediate cessation of
hostilities.

A cycle of violence has ravaged Ituri for several
months. Attacks in the Kivus have recently become
more intense. The main Victims are not combatants,
who are often well armed, but rather the civilian
population. We do not want the next victim to be the
peace process itself if the political programme of the
transition does not materialize.

That is why all the parties must ensure that the
armed groups receive no further foreign assistance,
which enables them to perpetuate the conflict. We
spoke to the Presidents of Rwanda and Uganda - who
assured us of their support for the Multinational Force
deployed in Bunia - of the great importance of what
they can contribute to the stabilization of the Great
Lakes region by exerting a positive influence on the
armed groups.

The Security Council mission also provided an
opportunity to remind all the actors that there can be no
impunity for the human rights Violations that,
unfortunately, almost always accompanied the fighting.
The pillaging of natural resources, analysed by the
Panel of Experts headed by Ambassador Kassem, has
become one of the causes of the continuing hostilities
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and can no longer be tolerated.

In Bunia, the Council members were able to
witness the remarkable cooperation between the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force. Here, I must
commend the dedication and courage of the Uruguayan
contingent. The deployment of the Multinational Force,
which is being carried out - despite particularly
difficult logistical conditions - somewhat more
rapidly than anticipated, has already begun to create
favourable conditions for a return of security. Thus, the
conditions will be right, when the Multinational Force
departs on 1 September, for a more effective United
Nations presence in Ituri.

It is very likely that the camps in Bunia housing
people who were internally displaced by the recent
violence will grow as the situation normalizes. The
humanitarian needs that the international community
will have to address will be considerable.

Bunia has been deeply traumatized by the
massacres of which its inhabitants were victims. A
great many of the militia members we saw along the
side of the road were young children; the problem of
child soldiers is well known to the Security Council.
However, the dignity and determination of the
representatives of the interim institutions of Ituri and
the women's associations that we met in Bunia attest to
the fact that peace and reconciliation are deeply desired
by the population - an essential condition in the
search for a political solution.

In Ituri, as in the rest of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we told everyone that a settlement of the
conflict must be political. MONUC, together with the
authorities of the transition in Kinshasa, must work to
that end. It is from that perspective that Council
members should examine the recommendations
submitted by the Secretary-General in his recent
special report on MONUC (S/2003/566). It will be a
matter of defining how MONUC's role in the peace
process of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be most effective, perhaps considering the possibility
of giving it a more robust mandate, taking into account
the departure of the Multinational Force from Bunia on
1 September.

In Bujumbura. the presidential transition that
occurred on 30 April, in conformity with the provisions
of the Arusha Agreement, has made the process
irreversible. In the absence of a complete ceasefire,
however, peace in the country remains fragile.

The Security Council mission encouraged the
Burundians to take the final steps that, however
difficult they may be after 10 years of civil war, will
enable them to seal their reconciliation. We invited
those engaged in the transition to continue to
demonstrate their determination by accelerating
reforms, particularly those in the security forces and in
the justice system. We urged the belligerents to put an
end to the hostilities. In particular, we let it be known
in the clearest way possible to the rebel movements
that did not sign the Arusha Agreement that the
ceasefire commitments must be respected. We told
them that, as Burundians, they must prove their sense
of responsibility by joining the peace process, and we
encouraged the Government, from that perspective, to
provide room for them within the army and in the
transitional institutions. We also emphasized to
everyone that the grave human rights Violations that the
Burundians had endured could not remain unpunished.

The Council members were able to witness the
work of the mission that the African Union deployed to
Burundi. That peace operation - the first sent by the
African Union - deserves the international
community's support. In addition, the Council mission
noted the need to provide adequate economic and
budgetary assistance to the transitional Government.

This Security Council mission, which took place
at a particularly delicate time in the two peace
processes that are under way in Central Africa, enabled
us to renew a direct dialogue with the actors. Mindful
that our visit in the region would not fail to create
strong expectations, we took care to remind our various
interlocutors that it was, above all, on them that peace
and reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi depended. The States of the
region also have an important part to play in promoting
a return to peace and security. In that regard, everyone
recognized the need to restore confidence on both sides
of the borders. It seems to me that, while remaining
mindful of the possibility of holding an international
conference on peace in the Great Lakes region, we
could also consider the idea of a declaration of good-
neighbourliness, which was met with interest on the
part of the heads of State to whom we presented it.

In conclusion, on behalf of all the members of the
mission, I should like to thank everyone who
participated in its organization. That involved
considerable work and enabled the mission to work
under excellent conditions. Since I had the honour to
lead the mission, I should like to say, on a more
personal level, how pleased I was with the work that
we did together.

