Mr. Haque (Pakistan): The debate to review progress
in the international community's efforts in advancing peace
and sustainable development in Africa is timely. It can be
argued that the Security Council is ranging far afield of its
mandate in discussing the issue of sustainable development
in Africa, which was squarely in the ambit of the work of
the General Assembly. However, since this is one of the
most important subjects facing the international community
today, Pakistan has decided to participate in the debate.

Mr. Kofi Annan deserves our thanks and
commendation for his pivotal role in highlighting the causes
of conflict in Africa through a number of reports, as well
as for his initiatives to address the dilemma of the
"perpetual crisis" on the African continent.

The gravity of the situation is reflected in the fact that
over 65 per cent of the issues currently under consideration
by the Security Council relate to Africa. The causes of
conflict in Africa are multifarious. Historical experiences,
geographic conditions, stages of economic development,
sets of public policies, patterns of internal and external
interaction and ethnic tensions have influenced the
dynamics of different conflicts in Africa.

However, the overriding factor responsible for the
problems has been, and continues to be, the pervasive
poverty on the continent. Agonizing, gnawing, ever
expanding poverty which engulfs Africa does not lend itself
to wide media coverage and therefore does not engage the
attention of the international community. Extremes of
poverty, deprivation and desperation breed frustration and
Violence. An abiding sense of injustice, exploited by those
who are either motivated by idealism and outrage or seek
wealth or power for themselves, engenders civil strife and
political upheavals.

We agree with the Secretary-General that conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building cannot lead to
durable peace unless a society can simultaneously move
on the path of economic and social development.

The international community must therefore
concentrate its efforts on poverty eradication in Africa,
which remains amongst the poorest regions in the world.
Without the serious pursuit of the objective of sustainable
development, the possibilities of achieving durable
solutions to conflicts in Africa will remain elusive.
Financial and technological support is urgently required
to strengthen human resource development and to build
and enlarge essential infrastructure for the socio-economic
development of Africa. Unfortunately, the international
response has, so far, fallen short of expectations. The
world must do much more, and must do it now. We share
the view expressed by the Secretary-General that the so-
called "Africa fatigue" is an affront to the idea of a caring
international community.
Africa's poverty is exacerbated by constantly
deteriorating terms of trade, falling commodity prices,
increasing protectionism in developed countries, negative
effects of structural adjustment arrangements, declining
official development assistance and the pressures of debt
servicing.

Let us look at some facts. Foreign debt and debt-
servicing in Africa have risen to alarming levels. Debt
service eats up most of the revenues of indebted countries
and forces them to resort to short-term borrowing at high
rates of interest merely to service their old debts. At
present the total debt of Africa stands at around $350
billion. The African countries cannot pay back this debt
through indigenous resources. The commitment of the
West to official development assistance is also eroding
and aid flows are drying up, thus compounding the
problems.

The process of globalization has bypassed most
countries of Africa and many other developing countries,
which find themselves in a worse economic situation than
ever before. For most developing countries the mantras of
the market economy - liberalization, deregulation and
privatization - have worked to their detriment. They
have not led to increased production or exports. Nor have
they brought in foreign investment, which was expected
to offset the decrease in official development assistance.
Foreign investment is flowing to a limited number of
countries only, and its benefits have been uneven and at
times of dubious value.

 

In some cases large sums of money belonging to the
African countries have been siphoned off to the Western
banks by the rapacious elite of these countries. In other
cases multinational corporations destroy the nascent local
industries, proceed to establish monopolies and take out
much more money than they bring in.

There is thus a major outflow of resources from the
developing to the developed world. According to one
account, for every dollar that comes into the developing
countries, nine dollars are taken out of their economies.
Thus, in some ways the developed economies are
prospering at the expense of African and other developing
countries.

Finally, the resources of the United Nations
development programmes are constantly decreasing, and
available resources are not, at times, being put to optimum
use.

Africa is thus confronted with a hostile international
economic climate in which exploitation of the weaker
economies continues apace, notwithstanding protestations to
the contrary, and in which conflicts are allowed to fester,
since the international community averts its gaze and does
not wish to accept responsibility.

Pakistan expresses its full solidarity with and support
for the efforts of the African countries to find peaceful
solutions to the conflicts in Africa, and also for their efforts
for the economic and social development of their peoples.
Pakistan looks upon Africa as a continent of the future. We
are confident about the eventual rise of Africa. Relations
with African countries are a priority area of our foreign
policy.

Despite our financial difficulties, Pakistan maintains
diplomatic missions in a large number of African countries
and has been running a multifaceted technical-assistance
programme for Africa since the early 1980s. Under this
programme, we are extending training facilities to young
professionals from African countries in diverse fields. We
will continue to enhance the scope of this programme in the
years ahead, within the limits of our resources.

On the issue of peacemaking in Africa, we note that
important breakthroughs have been achieved this year in the
search for negotiated solutions to the protracted internal
conflicts in Sierra Leone and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as to the bilateral conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. We hope that the streamlining and
strengthening of mediatory mechanisms, as well as the
effective monitoring of illicit arms flows, will have
positive effects on the efforts to promote stability and
peace in Africa.

In Africa and elsewhere, random or planned violence
against weak and vulnerable sections of society goes
unreported, unnoticed and unchecked unless it is on a
such a large scale that it can no longer be ignored.
Developing respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights is therefore essential for peace in the region.
We note that there is a growing awareness of the need to
uphold the universally recognized principles concerning
respect for human life and dignity. More, however, needs
to done to ensure strict adherence to international
humanitarian norms by combatants in crisis situations,
particularly for the protection of children, women,
civilians and humanitarian workers.

The international community must address the
underlying the causes of conflict in Africa and elsewhere.
Addressing only the symptoms and trying to put out fires
after they have been lit is an unproductive and wasteful
exercise. Alleviating poverty, generating employment,
providing essential services such as education, housing,
medical care and clean drinking water, and, most
importantly, promoting a shared stake in the progress and
welfare of the country among the people - these are the
most essential elements for peace and progress in Africa.
A culture of peace cannot develop or prosper in a
situation of despair and alienation. It requires a climate of
hope and prospects for progress.

The people of Africa deserve and await a brighter
future as the world approaches the new millennium. The
international community must not fail them.

