Ms. Panjikidze (Georgia): We are meeting today
at a pivotal time for the security and stability of the
Euro- Atlantic area and beyond. The latest developments
have clearly demonstrated that we cannot take our
security for granted and that in today's uncertain world,
all like-minded democracies must stand united to
protect and promote freedom, democracy and a rules-
based world order.

European security is being significantly challenged
by Russia's military aggression against Ukraine.
Georgia has also suffered from Russia's military
aggression in 2008 and the ongoing occupation of its
two regions. This worrisome pattern aimed at forcefully
altering European borders poses significant threats to
the strategic vision of a Europe that is whole, free and
at peace.

With regard to the Middle East, we are deeply
shocked and distressed by the violent developments
and rapid deterioration of the security situation in
Iraq. I would like to express strong support to the new
Government of Iraq, headed by Prime Minister Haider
Al-Abadi, and its efforts to ensure an inclusive political
process and to improve security and stability in Iraq,
despite the challenges presented by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). At the same time, I would
like to reiterate Georgia's unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Iraq and express the hope that during this difficult
time, the Iraqi people will be united in confronting this
common challenge.
Georgia condemns in the strongest terms all
despicable acts ofterrorism and violence against people
based on their religious and ethnic affiliation. Terrorist
groups such as ISIL pose a threat not only to the nations
in the Middle East but also to those in Europe, North
America and beyond.

It is only through our joint efforts and commitment
that we can stop, reverse and prevent such violent
actions.

Georgia, as a reliable ally and capable partner,
has been consistent in its efforts to ensure security
and stability around the globe. We have contributed to
peace and development in Iraq, and we are currently
continuing to do so in Afghanistan and the Central
African Republic. Our commitment to global peace and
stability is firm. Georgia fully supports the efforts ofthe
coalition to defeat ISIL and bring peace to the region.
We stand ready to provide humanitarian assistance to
those who have been affected by the brutal actions of
the terrorist groups.

Furthermore, Georgia's valuable experience in
combat missions as well as its successful defence
transformation can be effectively used to enhance the
capabilities of the Iraqi and other security forces as
they fight the ISIL terrorists.

We look forward to working with the United States
and other coalition partners in the coming days and
weeks to identify areas where Georgia's contribution
can provide added value.

