Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I will
speak on behalf of Ambassador Araud, who could not
be with us this afternoon.

As in past years, the Security Council in May
conducted a weeklong mission to Africa. From 19 to
26 May, the Security Council visited Addis Ababa;
Khartoum and Juba, in the Sudan; and, finally, Nairobi,
where it considered the issue of Somalia, since it was
not able to go to Mogadishu. The Security Council was
able to meet with the political authorities of the
countries visited and with representatives of the United
Nations on the ground, in particular those responsible
for Council-mandated peacekeeping operations. The
mission also made it possible for the Security Council
to meet representatives of civil society.

France coordinated the first segment of this
mission, the visit to Addis Ababa. I will therefore
2
speak about that segment, and then my United States,
Russian, British and South African colleagues, who led
the other segments, will take the floor.

As is well known, the Security Council now
meets with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union every year. Last year the meeting was
held in New York; under the rule of alternation, it was
held this year at the headquarters of the African Union,
in Addis Ababa, on 21 May. The Peace and Security
Council was chaired by the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the African Union, Mr. Pepani. The
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, also took part in the meeting.
During the meeting, which lasted more than four hours,
the Security Council was able to discuss with the
Permanent Representatives members of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union how the two
institutions can work together and to assess their
cooperation in terms of conflict prevention and
settlement and of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The members of the Security Council and of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
reasserted the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the mandate of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union with regard to the
promotion of peace and security in Africa. They also
reasserted the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to regional
arrangements in the settlement of conflicts.

The meeting enabled us to consider in detail four
issues that are currently on the agendas of both
institutions: Libya, Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan and
Somalia. Each was the subject of frank and substantive
discussions, with the objective being to establish a
common vision that would allow the United Nations
and the African Union to implement their actions more
effectively. Following the meeting, an outcome
statement was adopted that welcomes in particular the
enhancement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. It refers also to the concerns of and the
priorities expressed by both Councils with regard to
Libya, Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan and Somalia.

In addition to meeting with the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, the Security
Council met with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Meles Zenawi. The discussions, which lasted for
11-36348
more than an hour, allowed us to consider mainly the
situation in the Sudan and in Somalia, as well as the
issues of Eritrea and Libya.

Before the Permanent Representatives of the
United States and the Russian Federation - who will
deal with the Sudan segment - take the floor, I should
like to close by thanking the team at the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
which was established on 1 July 2010, for the support
and the welcome they provided us during the Security
Council's visit, and in particular the Head of the
Office, Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita.

