Mr. Hatem (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I offer our sincere condolences to the people and the Government of the sisterly Sultanate of Oman on the death of His late Majesty Sultan Qaboos Bin Said. We pray to the Almighty to envelope him with mercy and grant the people and the Government of the Sultanate of Oman patience and solace. We thank you, Mr. President, for holding this meeting against the backdrop of tense and accelerating international circumstances that make it necessary and important to uphold the Charter of the United Nations if international peace and security is to be maintained. We also commend you, Sir, as well as your delegation, on the skilful steering of the work of the Council this month. Further, we wish to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their valuable briefings (see S/PV.8699). This year the world celebrates the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, whose Charter remains the principal reference for States as they strive to resolve international conflicts and maintain international peace and security through negotiations, enquiry, mediation, reconciliation, arbitration and judicial settlement, or through resorting to regional agencies and arrangements, or through other peaceful means. The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in the importance of implementing the provisions of the Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations, which assert the principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, commitment to good-neighbourliness, mutual respect, the peaceful settlement of crises, and cooperation in combating terrorism, extremism and cross-border terrorism. We also need to strengthen our collective efforts in order to guard against some States using conflicts to advance agendas that threaten others' national and international security. In conclusion, we, the international community, should support reconciliation efforts that have a bearing on the promotion of the rule of law. This approach calls all of us to prioritize the supreme interest of committing to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. We reiterate that the Kingdom of Bahrain will continue to engage with international partners and the United Nations to achieve the foregoing noble goals, as well as the goals of peacefully settling disputes and achieving security and stability in all States across the globe.
