Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Permit me at the outset,
Sir, to express my delegation's satisfaction at seeing
see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council this month, and to thank you for having
convened this very important meeting. I would also
like to take this opportunity to warmly congratulate the
new members of the Council and to pledge my
delegation's full support to them. Allow me also to pay
tribute to the outgoing members of the Council for the
excellent manner in which they participated in the
Council's work over the past two years.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning and for his thought-
provoking report, which reviews activities and progress
made in the protection of children affected by
situations of armed conflict. This report goes a step
further than a mere review of the situation; it provides
a list of parties to armed conflict that recruit or use
children in violation of relevant international
obligations, and highlights the plight of children in
conflicts that are not on the agenda of the Security
Council. We see this step as a positive development in
our efforts to protect the most vulnerable in our society.

I wish to commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, as well as Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund, for the information that they provided
today. Their tireless work and actions are clear
testimony of their strong and unwavering commitment
to protect children everywhere.

It is encouraging to note from the report that
impressive gains have been made in codifying
international norms and standards for the protection
and well-being of children. My delegation applauds
this progress, since, as has been stated many times by
the Council, the impact of conflict on children has
severe implications, not only for peace and security,
but also for socio-economic development. These
positive developments should be built upon by the
international community to ensure that children are
forever protected against the consequences of war.

Further efforts should be made to ensure that the
standards according to which children are treated are
implemented on the ground, and that permanent
monitoring and reporting mechanisms are created in
order to identify and adopt measures against violations.
As responsible members of the international
community, we must move with a great sense of
urgency - and move beyond mere words. We must
take concrete actions to practise what we preach. And
we must not forget the children that are today suffering
under foreign occupation and domination.

Here, I speak of the children of Palestine and the
children of Western Sahara. We must summon the
necessary courage and political will to bring the
suffering of those children to an end by ensuring that
their countries attain their inalienable right to self-
determination. The Security Council has a Charter
responsibility in that regard.

For its part, Namibia will continue to contribute
to all efforts aimed at protecting future generations
from the evils of armed conflict. It is for those reasons
that Namibia was at the forefront in getting the
Security Council involved in addressing the plight of
children in armed conflict during our tenure in the
Council in 1999 and 2000. We therefore strongly
supported resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000),
which were adopted during that period. Resolution
1261 (1999), in particular, heightened international
attention with regard to this issue, which resulted in the
progress that we are seeing today.

Furthermore, we believe that the entry into force
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child will have a profound impact that
will contribute to achieving this goal. The provisions of
the Optional Protocol will result in a sharp decrease in
the number of young children recruited for war, and the
Rome Statute will be a strong deterrent to war crimes
such as sexual violence against children. Namibia
strongly supports both instruments and will work
tirelessly to ensure that their provisions are fully
implemented.

Other specific concerns of my delegation are the
disproportionate impact of conflicts on girls and the
devastation caused by HIV/AIDS. In many instances,
the trauma of girls is compounded when they are
infected with deadly diseases through sexual violence
during times of war and peace. My delegation therefore
urges the Security Council to continue to devote
special attention to the needs of girls and to the effects
of HIV/AIDS.

Before I conclude, I wish to make an observation.
The report before us (S/2002/1299), in paragraph 55,
mentions Namibia together with several other countries
where the World Bank and other donors have
committed themselves to give priority to the
unconditional and urgent demobilization of child
soldiers in a Multi-Country Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme for the Greater Great Lakes
Region. The language of the paragraph, as it stands,
could be misinterpreted to mean that Namibia also has
child soldiers to be demobilized, although that is not
directly stated. I should like to make it very clear that
Namibia does not have or recruit child soldiers,
because that is against the supreme law of our land, the
Constitution of the Republic of Namibia.

Finally, my delegation urges the Council to act
expeditiously on the information provided to it in the
report under discussion. The paramount consideration
should be that more needs to be done to protect
children from the scourge of war.

