Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to express our
thanks to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, former President Kafando, for his briefing
on the current political situation in Burundi. We also
thank Ambassador Lauber, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for his briefing. We applaud the excellent work
he has been doing and we endorse the agenda he has
set as he moves forward with a view to discharging
his responsibilities.

We take note of the improvements in the overall
security situation in Burundi, which, as the Special
Envoy says, have been remarkable. However, we
recognize the need to sustain the existing level of
stability and transform it into durable peace. That is
indeed important and a consensus needs to be created
among the Burundians around this noble objective.

The need for broad consensus, as the Special Envoy
says, is very critical. This can be peacefully resolved
only through an inclusive dialogue on the basis of the
Arusha Agreement and the Constitution of Burundi.
It is imperative to ensure that the ongoing efforts at
constitutional reform are conducted through a broad
consensus of all stakeholders so as to preserve the
country's security and stability. We are convinced
that the Special Envoy has the necessary goodwill and
commitment to helping Burundi achieve this. We have
full confidence in him.

We reiterate our support to the eastern African-
led inter-Burundian dialogue and the efforts of the
facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of
Tanzania, under the leadership of the mediator of the
Community of East African States (EAC), President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda.

As witnessed in the inter-Burundian talks held in
Arusha on 27 November to 8 December 2017, the peace
process remains deadlocked in spite of the efforts by
the facilitator. No doubt it would have been good to
hear directly from him on the challenges encountered
and the way forward, but we understand he could
not make it. In any case, the need to reinvigorate the
peace process is clear and we take note of the decision
by the East African Community summit, which was
held this past weekend in Uganda, calling upon all
the Burundian parties to expeditiously conclude the
dialogue under the facilitator and mediator. The annual
summit also expressed its readiness to deploy the high-
level committee of Heads of State on Burundi.

The support of the Council to the EAC-led peace
process remains very important to create the necessary
conditions for peaceful and democratic elections
in 2020. We believe that, as the Special Envoy has
stressed, that coordination and coherence between the
East African Community, the African Union and the
United Nations are also key to making progress in the
peace process.

We appreciate the important discussions held by
the Secretary-General and his Envoy with regional
and subregional partners in this spirit. We note that
Burundi is facing enormous socioeconomic challenges,
and that, coupled with reduced international financial
assistance, has made the situation more difficult.
While the voluntary return of Burundian refugees
from Tanzania is welcome, its impact in further
compounding the socioeconomic challenges of the
country cannot be overlooked. That is why Burundi
needs international support to provide assistance to
the returning Burundian refugees and to implement
its socioeconomic development programmes. In this
context, we commend the Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the PBC for his various engagements
focused on the socioeconomic cooperation between the
international partners in the Government of Burundi.
We believe that these efforts have to be seen as an
integral part of the search for peace in Burundi to
support its strong institutions in creating a conducive
climate in which political differences can be addressed
without backsliding into the violence of the past.

It should be stressed that though it might seem
counterintuitive, Burundi indeed has strong institutions,
which we in the Horn of Africa are very much aware of.
How could Burundi otherwise be able to contribute to
the fight against Al-Shabaab in Somalia? We deeply
appreciate what Burundi is doing in that regard, but we
look forward to those institutions being strengthened
and made operational by promoting further inclusivity,
which is so critical.
