Mr. Lowcock: Yemen remains the world's
worst humanitarian crisis. Three quarters of the
population - more than 22 million people - urgently
require some form of humanitarian help, including
8.4 million people who are struggling to find their
next meal. The crisis is overwhelming families and
institutions and is now affecting nearly every sector
and aspect of Yemeni life. With swift and joint action,
conditions for the Yemeni people can improve. On the
political front, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Martin Griffiths just briefed the Security Council.

Humanitarian agencies have scaled up assistance
and strengthened their capacity in Yemen. The relief
operation is one of the largest and most complex in the
world. One hundred and ninety partners, most of them
Yemeni, get help to millions of people in thousands of
locations every single month. Last year, we increased
the coverage of food assistance from 3 million people
a month in January to more than 7 million a month in
December. For 2018, the World Food Programme has
plans to reach 10 million people a month, and we are
doing the same thing in other sectors, including water,
health, sanitation and other core services.

The humanitarian operation in Yemen is
already one of the largest in the world. We have five
humanitarian hubs in place to coordinate assistance
across the country, and we are exploring opening more,
including in Ma'rib and Mukalla. Every week, dozens
of humanitarian movements, including food convoys,
and hundreds of specific humanitarian locations are
deconflicted by the parties to the conflict. We are able
to reach people in all 333 districts, and in each district
we aim to collect data on how many people receive aid
every month.

Earlier this month, Sweden, Switzerland and the
Secretary-General co-chaired a pledging conference
for Yemen. In the words of the Secretary-General, "It
was a remarkable success of international solidarity".
Forty Member States and regional organizations
pledged more than $2 billion. I thank them for that
generosity. Allow me particularly to recognize the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
for their $930 million contribution to the humanitarian
response plan. That was not just an exceptionally large
contribution; it was also prompt, swift, unearmarked and
unconditional, and it has already been fully disbursed.

All parties to the conflict must take practical steps
to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian access,
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The record on that issue remains
mixed. There have been improvements. United Nations
humanitarian flights and vessels are moving regularly.
That is positive, but we remain very concerned about
commercial imports through all of Yemen's ports,
most particularly Al-Hudaydah and Saleef. Before the
war, Yemen relied on imports to cover 90 per cent of
staple foods and nearly all its medicine and fuel needs.
Commercial shortages and delays at ports have led
to sharp increases in the price of food and household
necessities. Ports are the lifeline of Yemen. We are
doing our part to ensure that they can function properly.
I am pleased to confirm that steps are being taken to
further strengthen the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism, which screens commercial
shipments to Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports.

We are encouraging all those concerned to
accelerate the normalization of commercial shipments
into Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as to Yemen's
other ports. We are worried that shipping companies
are reluctant to enter Yemeni waters. The reasons are
related to problems with foreign exchange and the
banking sector, as well as the ports, but the result is
that insufficient food is being imported. That needs to
be addressed. Price increases, especially of food, are
forcing hundreds of thousands of destitute families to
turn to humanitarian assistance for their very survival.

We are also concerned that Sana'a airport remains
closed to commercial traffic, thereby preventing
thousands of critically ill patients from travelling
abroad to seek treatment unavailable in Yemen. On
several occasions, over the past month, military
activities conducted in the proximity of the airport have
affected humanitarian flights. Last week, there were
serious incidents close to humanitarian locations that
had been deconflicted. We are working closely with all
parties to ensure that they are not repeated.

Within Yemen, bureaucratic impediments imposed
by decision-makers in Sana'a are affecting relief
operations. Humanitarian staff continue to face delays
with regard to visas and project approvals, restrictions
on imports and customs clearance, and long delays
and searches at checkpoints. In recent weeks, some
of the media in Sana'a have depicted humanitarian
operations inaccurately and unjustly, and humanitarian
staff have been detained. We are also concerned about
insecurity in parts of the country, particularly in the
south. While we have partial access to all of Yemen's
333 districts, restrictions and insecurity mean that an
estimated 1.2 million people in need of assistance live
in areas inaccessible to humanitarian organizations. All
impediments that prevent humanitarians from reaching
people must stop.

Looking ahead, we continue to face enormous
challenges. Unless steps are taken now in high-risk
districts, we will risk another major cholera outbreak.
Last year's outbreak of cholera and watery diarrhoea
struck more than a million people. The effects continue
to linger. As we enter the rainy season, the conditions
that created this outbreak are still present. Applying
the lessons from last year, we are doing everything
we can to respond. Agencies are pre-positioning
supplies, chlorinating water sources and launching a
vaccination campaign.

As with other challenges, a successful response
requires safe, unimpeded and unhindered access across
and into Yemen for humanitarian staff and humanitarian
supplies. We need predictable fuel imports to keep
hospitals and water treatment plants running. Yemeni
public servants who are doing so much themselves to
prepare for and respond to the crisis need their salaries
paid. Most health and sanitation workers have still not
been paid for more than a year and a half.

The impact ofair strikes, shelling and fighting on the
civilian population, particularly in Al-Hudaydah, Taiz,
Saada, Hadramut and Hajjah governorates is deeply
worrying. Civilian lives are lost. Public infrastructure
is destroyed. Displacement is increasing. Mines and
the remnants of war affect agricultural production and
the Wider economy, as well as threatening civilian life.
Some 3 million women and girls are at risk of sexual
and gender-based violence.

Like the Special Envoy, Itoo remain very concerned
about missiles being launched into Saudi Arabia from
within Yemen. That adds a further dimension to the
civil war and puts many civilians at great risk. I want
to remind all parties that they have obligations under
international humanitarian law. Restraint is needed to
avoid any escalation that would worsen still further the
suffering of ordinary people.

While the humanitarian response can do, and is
doing, a lot, it cannot resolve this crisis. I therefore
echo the Special Envoy's call for all parties to engage
meaningfully with the United Nations without
preconditions to achieve a lasting negotiated settlement
towards sustainable peace.

