Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I join other delegations
in thanking today's briefers for their useful updates. I
would also like in particular to pay sincere tribute to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Loj
for her dedicated service at the helm of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which
I was privileged to witness while in South Sudan on
the Council's most recent mission. In the light of the
information that we just heard, I would like to highlight
three main points.

First, we are extremely concerned by the rapidly
deteriorating security situation in South Sudan. As we
just heard, Violence is surging in Equatoria, Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, Upper Nile and Unity states, where
armed actors on all sides systematically target civilians
and commit sexual violence and abuses and other
gross Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. As we have just learned, while we
have been speaking here fighting has reportedly erupted
in Unity state between military forces and fighters
loyal to Rick Machar, killing at least 15 people. I am
still worried that we cannot rule out a further escalation
of violence once the rainy season ends this month.

Ukraine also takes reports of growing ethnic
tensions and the spread of hate speech, hostility and
incitement to violence very seriously. In that regard,
we believe that the Visit to South Sudan by Special
Adviser Adama Dieng was an extremely timely move.
We support his proposals and ask him to continue
monitoring the situation on the ground and keep the
Security Council fully updated. The worsening security
climate has resulted in mass displacements, with over
1 million South Sudanese having sought refuge in
more safe regions of the country or in neighbouring
countries. Nearly half of the population requires
constant humanitarian assistance. All of that underlines
the urgent need for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the full implementation of the ceasefire. We could
not agree more with Ms. Ellen Loj that the guns have
to be silenced. I would only add that the guns have also
to be prevented from flowing into South Sudan. In that
light, we are ready to work on the relevant proposal of
the United States delegation.

The continuous fighting suggests that the parties
still hope to achieve their goals by military means, while
it is clear that the political process is the only realistic
way towards peace and stability in South Sudan. That
is why we urge the parties to immediately resume
the implementation of the peace agreement in good
faith and without preconditions. That includes the
resumption of participation of all parties in the work
of the Transitional Government and the promotion of
confidence-building and reconciliation measures.

At such a critical time, it is very important that the
United Nations, and in particular UNMISS, continue
assisting the South Sudanese people. Over the past
month, there has been some improvement in removing
obstructions to the Mission's ability to implement its
mandate, yet many restrictions, in particular those
of freedom of movement and humanitarian access,
still remain. In that regard, we urge the Transitional
Government to respect its commitments under the
status of forces agreement and fully implement relevant
provisions of the joint communique of 4 September,
agreed to by the Council in Juba. Ukraine believes that
the deployment and operatinalization of the Regional
Protection Force, as envisaged in resolution 2304
(2016), would help to stabilize South Sudan.

We welcome the fact that the Transitional
Government and the Secretariat have come to an
agreement on the composition of the troop-contributing
countries. In that respect, my delegation looks forward
to the rapid conclusion of deployment preparations
and the arrival of troops. It is also critical that the
Transitional Government fully cooperate with UNMISS
in the operationalization of the Regional Protection
Force. To sum up, in our view there are the following
prerequisites for the stabilization of the situation in
South Sudan: the cessation of hostilities, resumption of
the implementation of the peace agreement, the removal
of obstructions to UNMISS work and the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force.

