Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I would like at the outset
to thank Ambassador Delattre for his professionalism,
calm and leadership. He has served not only his country,
France, but also the European Union and the whole
United Nations family in an exemplary manner. I also
want to express our deep appreciation for the excellent
cooperation we have had with both Francois and his
team, and I hope that in his new assignment back in
Paris he will further contribute to strengthening the
traditionally strong links between Poland and France.
I wish him every success, and I share the sentiments
expressed in that we hope to see him back very soon in
New York in September.

Let me take this opportunity to thank France for
its efforts in coordinating the negotiations. Poland
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which is an important one. Today the Security
Council has sent a message of unity in support of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
stability in Mali. We voted for the resolution in order to
express our full support for the efforts of MINUSMA,
whose role in promoting stability and reconciliation in
the country remains essential, despite the very complex
security situation on the ground. The presence of the
Mission in northern Mali is essential to preserving
the gains that have been made since the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

At the same time, we believe it is necessary to
strengthen MINUSMA's efforts in central Mali so as
to facilitate the restoration of State institutions. Poland
believes that support for the implementation of the
Agreement remains MINUSMA's core priority. There
can be no doubt that to be successful, its implementation
requires full inclusivity, especially for women, as well
as a strong commitment on the part of all relevant
stakeholders. Those who are trying to obstruct this
process must face the consequences.

In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, as well as to the personnel
of MINUSMA, the United Nations country team and
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their
commitment in extreme and challenging conditions.

