Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): It is no secret that
the file on the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
one of the more difficult files the Security Council has
to deal with. Indeed, if we had received more bad news
than good news today, we would not have been
surprised. However, as Ambassador Morjane said
earlier this morning, the prospects for peace have never
been as good as they are today. Of course, we need to
find out the reasons for this. The reasons are complex,
but one of the reasons is clearly evident before us in
the form of Ambassador Kamel Morjane.

There is of course an age-old debate about
whether history is moved by larger forces or by the
actions of individuals. Certainly, the answer is a
combination of both. But in some cases, the
contributions of individuals do matter, and certainly so
in the case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There is no doubt that Ambassador Kamel Morjane has
made a huge difference personally.

In this regard, I want to mention that in addition
to the legendary diplomatic skills that he has, which
most Tunisian diplomats seem to have - I think it is
part of the genetic code of being a Tunisian - what we
found quite remarkable when we visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was the tremendous
managerial skills that Ambassador Morjane showed in
the management of the huge and complex operation in
the Congo. We could certainly see with our own eyes
that the sheer presence of United Nations personnel
made a huge difference in the chemistry of the region.
All this was carefully and well done by Ambassador
Morjane and his staff. We are glad that we are here to
join in the tribute being paid to him.

But also, as many speakers have noted, the peace
process remains fragile and reversible. In trying to find
an appropriate analogy for where we stand in the peace
process of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
thought perhaps it could be compared to a cracked
boulder being pushed uphill with great effort and which
still remains far from the peak. The real danger exists
of this cracked boulder sliding back downhill.

Given the situation, we see three main challenges.
The first challenge is to prevent any backsliding in the
peace process. A second challenge is to demonstrate
that we have the will and the resources for the long
slog uphill. The third, and the more difficult long-term
challenge, is to see what we do when we discover at
the top a huge plateau where we need to build a durable
peace in the Congo and in the region.

To be completely honest, our answers on how to
deal with these challenges, unfortunately, will not be
new. We will probably repeat points we have made
before, and indeed probably repeat points that have
actually been made earlier in the discussion this
morning. Perhaps some day when the Security Council
goes truly high-tech and we have in front of us a screen
that prints out the text of what every speaker is saying,
we can probably have a button to indicate that we agree
with the points being made, and that might save us a lot
of time in this debate. But in the absence of this high-
tech equipment, we will try to put across our points in
brief, summary form.

As we said, the first challenge is to prevent the
peace process from sliding backwards. How do we do
it? First, clearly the Council must continue to keep the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under close review. In this regard, we want to say that
today's debate is actually a useful contribution. From
time to time we wonder whether these open debates
have any impact on the situation, but for a delicate
problem like the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it
does help to put the spotlight on the issue from time to
time, and so here, Mr. President, we commend you for
organizing this debate at this time.

Secondly, of course, the relations between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours must continue to improve. I think
that we are also pleased to learn that there was a good
meeting between the Presidents of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and we are also
pleased that the Secretary-General, as several other
speakers have commented earlier, made a valuable
contribution in helping arrange good meetings on these
issues.

Thirdly, clearly - and this is a point that several
speakers have highlighted - Kisangani and its
environs must be demilitarized completely and without
further delay. It is unfortunate that the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD) continues to
maintain several thousand troops in the Vicinity. This is
in direct violation of resolution 1304 (2000), adopted
by the Council more than a year ago. Clearly, this is
unacceptable. If you want to judge in terms of whether
we are moving forward or backward, clearly Kisangani
holds important symbolic significance, and we must
show that we are moving forward in that area.

Fourthly, we must also show that all the parties
have a clear understanding of the division of
responsibilities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As several speakers again have noted that
MONUC's mandate does not permit it to assume
responsibility for the safety of civilians, clearly the
Congolese parties must realize that they are responsible
for the maintenance of law and order and for the safety
and security of civilians under their de facto control.

The second challenge, as you said, Mr. President,
is to show that we have a commitment to keep going
uphill. In this regard, it is useful to bear in mind that in
any peace process there are essentially two parts. Part
one is the role and the contribution of the parties on the
ground - the Congolese parties, the neighbours, and
so forth. Part two is the role and the contribution of the
international community at large. Both parts have to
work together to ensure that the process of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo works well.
Frankly, our actions both in the Council and elsewhere,
can send valuable signals. I was going to say, for
example, even though the Secretary-General has now
left, that his personal presence for much of this debate I
think sent a very important signal of the importance of
this issue.

Similarly, we are pleased to learn that during
Belgium's Presidency of the European Union for the
next six months, greater priority will be given to the
issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Of
course, the decision that we take on when we will
move to phase III will itself be a very important signal
of our commitment to the process. Here, of course, we
would like to support the point made by the
Ambassador of Bangladesh. We would say that one
way of expediting the move to phase III is for the
parties concerned to also show a greater commitment to
the process; and certainly, as the Ambassador of
Mauritius highlighted, we have to show greater
commitment to what is called the process of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR). In that sense,
the international community and the parties can work
together.
Finally, the last challenge is to ensure that we
build long-term peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Again, let me confess that we have no new
ideas to suggest for this long-term peace, but we would
like to endorse at least three ideas put across in this
debate so far.

The first is, of course, the importance of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. Everyone has stressed it. We
support it. Certainly, we commend President Masire for
his efforts; but as President Masire told us when he met
the Security Council mission, he hopes that the
international community will show its commitment to
the inter-Congolese dialogue by also showing that it
will come forth with resources to help the operation.

Secondly, clearly we need to continue to pay
attention to the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Panel has done some good work. We hope, when
the final report comes out, that we will pay even
greater attention to the issue.

Thirdly, we think that preparations should also
begin soon for a conference on the Great Lakes to push
the peace process forward and to try to suggest long-
term solutions to all the interrelated crises in the
region. In this regard, we wonder whether the time may
have come to also send to the Great Lakes an inter-
agency mission similar to the one we dispatched to
West Africa under Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall. Here we would, of course, defer to the
judgement of the Secretariat on this. But we do believe
a coordinated approach involving the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region is
important for ensuring the long-term peace of the
region.

