Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): On behalf of
my delegation, I would like to thank Mr. de Mistura,
head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), for his detailed briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Khalilzad of the United States for his
report on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We
welcome the participation of the delegation of Iraq in
this debate and thank Ambassador Al Bayati for his
statement.

We are approaching the end of 2008 amid
intertwining achievements and challenges with regard
to the situation in Iraq. My delegation notes with
encouragement Iraq's continued and measured progress
across a vast spectrum, including a further decrease in
security incidents and violence, the long-awaited
adoption of the provincial council elections law, the
general observance of Moqtada al-Sadr's ceasefire, the
formal transfer of security responsibilities to the Iraqi
army in 13 governorates and the accelerated return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. We are also
heartened to see the incremental macroeconomic
improvements in domestic consumption, public
expenditure, budget execution, private sector reform,
foreign and local investment and external debt
settlement.

The aforementioned progress, however, has not
eclipsed the magnitude of the challenges that remain
pertinent. While the Iraqi economy continues to grow,
thanks in large part to oil revenues, there are still
pressing demands to devote more resources and
capacity to generating employment, ensuring food
security and better access to public services, promoting
social welfare and environmental protection, advancing
the legislative agenda and constitutional review,
curbing the illicit use of weapons and combating
organized crime, promoting disarmament and
demobilizing and reintegrating ex-combatants. The
latest series of incidents involving sectarian violence
and suicide bombings in Baghdad, Kirkuk and a
number of other provinces reminds us that security
gains are still fragile. As reported by the Secretary-
General, the deteriorated living conditions of
vulnerable groups, most of whom are women, Children,
refugees or internally displaced persons, deserve the
continued attention and cooperation of all relevant
stakeholders in order to serve the legitimate interests of
Iraqi civilians in compliance with international human
rights and humanitarian law.

As in any other country emerging from a
devastating war, the quest for durable peace and
sustainable development in Iraq should be a nationally
owned process relying on a harmonious combination of
various political, security and socioeconomic
parameters and requiring the united efforts of all
segments of the population. My delegation calls on all
parties in Iraq to accord the highest priority to national
interests, to renounce all potentially destabilizing acts
and to jointly shoulder the national agenda of
reconciliation and dialogue, political stabilization and
socioeconomic reform, thus creating the most
conducive environment possible for the provincial
elections scheduled for January 2009, as well as for the
country's long-term peace, stability and prosperity.

In order to help Iraq to maximize its internal
strengths and to fully integrate into the world
community, United Nations agencies, neighbouring
countries and the international community can and
should play a more incisive role. In that connection,
while we welcome the signing of the United Nations
Assistance Strategy for Iraq 2008-2010, my delegation
supports every United Nations effort to truly become a
promoter of development, a coordinator of
international contributions and a catalyst for
improvements in the living conditions of the Iraqi
people. We commend the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
since the renewal of its mandate, notably in helping the
people of Iraq to advance political dialogue and
confidence-building, to resolve the status of Kirkuk
and other contested internal boundaries, to extend
electoral assistance, to support the constitutional
review process and to facilitate the regional dialogue
process.

In concluding, my delegation notes with
appreciation the continued engagement of regional
countries and the international community in
leveraging Iraq's reconstruction, development and
reintegration, especially through the normalization of
external bilateral relations and within broader
frameworks such as the International Compact with
Iraq, the expanded ministerial meetings and the
regional working groups on energy, refugees and
security. We hope that all parties concerned will take
further concrete steps to consolidate and contribute to
that mutually beneficial partnership on the basis of
respect for the political independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq.

