Ms. Zhang Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening this meeting and
Mr. Antonio Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing, which
was highly beneficial to the work of the Council.
Over the past year, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has made progress in the three areas of voluntary
returns, local integration and resettlement, and China
expresses its appreciation for that progress. At the
same time, we have noted that the total number of
refugees throughout the world has grown to 11.4
million and that the number of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is also steadily increasing as a result of
armed conflicts and natural disasters.

Armed conflict, political turmoil, economic
stagnation, poverty and underdevelopment remain the
main causes of the intractability and aggravation of the
refugee problem. In addition, factors such as the
security environment, mixed flows and environmental
degradation have made it more difficult to protect
refugees. In the current circumstances, the international
community should continue to follow the principle of
international solidarity and shared responsibility and
should strengthen international cooperation on the
basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit in
order to fulfil our common responsibility for
addressing the refugee issue.

Ending regional conflicts and maintaining an
environment of safety and security remain the
fundamental ways to resolve the refugee problem. The
majority of the national and regional conflicts on the
agenda of the Security Council are accompanied by
serious refugee problems, and the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions are mandated with the
tasks of protecting civilians and safeguarding
humanitarian assistance. The Council must further
enhance its coordination and collaboration between the
areas of conflict mediation and peacekeeping, on the
one hand, and refugee protection and humanitarian
assistance, on the other, to ensure that peacekeeping
operations create an environment conducive to the
repatriation and social reintegration of refugees with a
View to facilitating a lasting solution to the problem of
refugees and IDPs.

