Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to commend your efforts, Mr. President, during
Peru's presidency of the Security Council this month,
and we thank you for holding today's important debate.
We also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for his briefing this morning.

There is agreement in the Council and in the
world that achieving peace in the Middle East will
help to overcome all the challenges facing the region,
in particular the elimination of terrorism. Clearly,
the world will then reap the fruits of peace, security
and stability in the region. To achieve and promote
peace in the Middle East, the current policies and
violations of international law must be abandoned,
since they undermine the efforts aimed at establishing
a comprehensive peace in this vital region of the
world. The implementation of international resolutions
and the initiatives that seek to achieve that objective
therefore provides a strong basis for the success of the
international efforts.

The Israeli military escalation on the occasion of
Earth Day, which led to the death and injury of many
Palestinian civilians, undermined peace efforts and
was a blatant violation of international norms. The
State of Qatar reiterates its condemnation of such
violations and calls on the international community and
the Security Council to shoulder their responsibility to
protect civilians.

Based on our conviction that settling the Palestinian
question and achieving peace will serve both the
Palestinians and the Israelis and will bring about
gains for the region and the world, the State of Qatar
continues to support all efforts to resume meaningful
negotiations between the two parties in order to achieve
peace within clear parameters and timetable. This
would enable the two parties to live side by side in peace
and security based on the two-State solution, establish
a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and respect the legal status
of Jerusalem in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. This
would also facilitate an end to the Israeli occupation
of all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan, and the immediate and complete cessation of
settlement activities, lift the blockade on Gaza Strip,
and allow for the return of refugees and the restoration
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

In response to the United Nations appeals to fill
the gap in funding of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) for its humanitarian projects and based on the
United Nations resolutions that have affirmed that the
international community has an obligation to support
UNRWA, the State of Qatar contributed $50 million at
the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference in support of
UNRWA that was held last March in Rome.

The chemical attack against civilians in Douma, in
eastern Ghouta, at the beginning of this month, revealed
the risks of the ongoing Syrian crisis with respect to
regional and international security, the magnitude of the
suffering endured by the Syrian people and the inability
of the international community to end the suffering,
cease war crimes and crimes against humanity that
are being perpetrated in Syria. The State of Qatar
reiterates its condemnation in the strongest terms of
this disgraceful act. It supports military operations
of the United States, the United Kingdom and France
against military targets used by the regime to launch
attacks against innocent civilians. We reiterate our
call upon the international community to uphold its
responsibilities to end the aggression by the regime,
stop the use of internationally banned weapons and
bring the perpetrators of these crimes to international
justice. We emphasize once again our support for all
the efforts aimed at a political resolution of the conflict
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, in a
manner that fulfils the aspirations of the Syrian people
who yearn for security and stability and the unity of
Syria at the national and regional levels.

We will also continue to work with our partners
to alleviate the impact of the humanitarian crisis. In
this regard, I would mention the State of Qatar's new
pledge of $100 million this year, announced yesterday
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Minister at the Brussels conference on supporting Syria
and the region. This comes in addition to our ample
past contributions in support of the Syrian people.

In the light of the highly tense international
environment and challenges as a result of continued
conflicts, terrorism and the slow pace in resolving
conflicts, and at a time when the challenges in the
Middle East must be faced with cooperation by all, the
continued fabricated crisis against the State of Qatar
is negatively affecting security and stability of the
region. The continued unjust blockade and arbitrary
unilateral measures imposed against my country
without any justification or legal basis, which will soon
enter their second year, reveal the narrow interests they
aim to achieve. They contradict international law, the
multilateral international order, friendly relations and
human rights. They also have grave effects on regional
and international cooperation in terms of maintaining
international peace and security.

The serious implications of this fabricated crisis
against the State of Qatar in the Middle East and its
direct impact on efforts of the Security Council in the
area of maintaining international peace and security
require immediate lifting of the blockade, ending the
arbitrary unilateral actions against the State of Qatar
and initiating dialogue as a means to resolve disputes
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The State of Qatar has called for this since the start of
the crisis, based on its responsibility as a State Member
of the United Nations and as a major partner within the
international community in efforts to address common
challenges. We appreciate the valued mediation of His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
Amir of the State of Kuwait, and we express gratitude to
all States that have supported the mediation to resolve
the crisis.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue its
active and positive contributions to achieve peace in
the Middle East. We will harness all the legal means
to reach solutions for conflicts and crises in the region
and work in a manner to achieve the Security Council's
objectives in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

