Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and Mr. Boyd for
their respective briefings.

Austria reiterates its full support for the Djibouti
peace process and the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG). Further efforts by the TFG to reach out to
opposition groups and to enhance its delivery of
governance are essential for progress in that process.
We urge all parties in Somalia to join the Djibouti
process and its structures. The Djibouti Peace
Agreement constitutes the only viable and legitimate
framework for achieving lasting peace in Somalia.

Austria condemns the attempts of extremists to
overthrow the TFG, as well as the terrorist attacks
against the TFG and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We are deeply worried about the
spoilers of the peace process and about foreign support
to the insurgents. We are ready to support measures
that effectively prevent support to insurgent groups. We
are equally concerned about continued criminal
activities, such as drug trafficking and arms smuggling,
which threaten peace in Somalia and the wider region.

We would like to express our appreciation to
Uganda and Burundi as troop-contributing countries to
AMISOM. The Mission remains a crucial factor for
stability in Somalia. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that it reach its mandated strength and that
it have the capabilities necessary to fulfil its mission.
We very much welcome recent pledges of additional
troops and the delivery of the support package by the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM
(UNSOA). With a view to the efficient implementation
of international support to Somalia and AMISOM, we
would like to stress the importance of close
cooperation and coordination between UNSOA and the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS).

On behalf of my Government, I would like to
covey our condolences to the families, contingents and
Governments of those who have lost their lives in
terrorist attacks. The suicide attack against the
AMISOM. force headquarters on 17 September was
especially heinous and vicious.

The development of Somali security forces is
another important contribution to stabilizing the
country. There needs to be an effective mechanism for
coordination between the TFG and the international
community. The Joint Security Committee and the
High Level Committee should serve as forums for
coordination based on a national strategy for the
reconstruction of Somalia.

We condemn the widespread human rights
violations and abuses by insurgents. Extrajudicial and
arbitrary executions, arrests and torture, as practiced by

Al-Shabaab, must stop immediately, and those
responsible must be held accountable. We also reiterate
our condemnation of the recruitment of children by
armed groups, as well as our request to release them
immediately.

We warmly welcome the TFG's decision to focus
on the protection of human rights as an essential
element for the process. In particular, we welcome the
designation of the Minister for Women's Development
as the TFG's focal point on human rights, as well as
the draft framework for technical cooperation in the
area of human rights with UNPOS and the continued
efforts to address impunity.

We are very concerned about the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Somalia, where 3.7 million
people now depend upon food aid. The situation of
1.5 million internally displaced persons is exacerbated
by a worsening security situation, on the one hand, and
the drought in some parts of the country, on the other.
In addition, humanitarian workers are increasingly the
target of insurgents, making it more difficult for them
to deliver much-needed help.

The European Union (EU) is engaged in Somalia
through its institutions and its member States. The EU
is currently developing a comprehensive strategy on
how to step up that engagement. An exploratory
mission visited the region in early September and has
provided parameters for a coherent strategic framework
linking reconciliation, security and development.

With regard to piracy off the coast of Somalia,
Austria would like to underscore that the efforts of a
great number of international actors, including the EU
through its Operation Atalanta, to curb piracy off the
Horn of Africa cannot meet with lasting success
without addressing its root causes and establishing the
rule of law in Somalia.

