Ms. Honore: I would first like to express my
gratitude to the United States in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for the organization of this
meeting on Haiti.

(spoke in French)

I also take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to thank in particular all of the
countries that contribute troops and police to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and all States members of the Security Council for their
valuable support to peacebuilding and democracy in
Haiti.
(spoke in English)

When I last briefed the Security Council in March
2014 (see S/PV.7147), the political momentum created
by the inter-Haitian dialogue, resulting in the signing
of the El Rancho Accord, had generated the hope that
combined elections would be held by the end of 2014
for two thirds of the Senate, the entire Chamber of
Deputies, municipal administrations and local councils.
The Accord also foresaw other provisions, including a
vote on amendments to the electoral law promulgated
in December 2013.

Since then, continuing mistrust and disagreements
over the electoral process between the executive and
opposition members in the legislature have caused
repeated delays in the implementation of the Accord.
A group of Senators opposed to the El Rancho Accord
continued to condition their vote on the amended
electoral law, inter alia, upon the establishment of an
entirely new Electoral Council and have consistently
blocked the required quorum. To date, no agreement
has been reached on the required legal framework for
the elections.

After a period of deadlock, the parties have recently
shown renewed signs of willingness to remain engaged.
However, given the time needed for logistic preparations,
the window for holding the elections before the end of
the year is now rapidly closing. This is particularly
worrisome since, without elections, Parliament would
be rendered dysfunctional on 12 January 2015, thereby
creating an institutional vacuum until elections are held
and a new legislature is installed.

Against this backdrop, various options out of the
impasse are being discussed among Haiti's political
actors, including calling for elections on the basis of
the El Rancho Accord or invoking certain articles of
the Constitution and the 2013 electoral law. While
I welcome these various attempts at identifying a
consensual solution through dialogue as soon as
possible, I also wish to call on all actors concerned to
ensure that the solution is based on the Constitution and
within a solid legal framework that allows for credible,
inclusive and transparent elections in support of a
peaceful democratic transition in 2015.

Despite the political stalemate, the security
environment in Haiti has remained relatively stable.
Today's security situation is characterized by threats
to law and order, linked primarily to criminality, gang
violence and mobilized or spontaneous civil unrest
and demonstrations. Crime statistics continue to
confirm a downward trend with respect to kidnappings
in particular, while homicide numbers have seen
an increase recently. During the reporting period,
the number of politically motivated demonstrations
remained low.

The performance of the Haitian National Police
(HNP) continued to improve, and the security situation
in the five departments vacated by MINUSTAH's
military component, and where only individual police
officers remained, continues to be stable. The police
force has grown to 10,963 active officers, including 899
women. We have also seen improvements in other areas,
including in the overall professionalization of police
officers, recruitment and vetting, strategic planning
and community policing, among others. A case in point
in highlighting the increased capacities of the National
Police is that its specialized crowd control units are
now present at 50 per cent of the demonstrations, as
compared to 29 per cent during the same period in 2013.

A lot still remains to be done to achieve the targets
outlined in the national police development plan and
to overcome technical, structural and operational
challenges. For instance, the operational support
of MINUSTAH was still required in one-third of all
demonstrations due to insufficient personnel and
equipment of the National Police, which was unable to
provide efficient crowd control throughout the country.
The relatively high number of patrols carried out by the
Mission's military component is also a further reflection
of the continuous need for further improvements in the
police's operational capacity. Structural and technical
challenges - such as a weak administrative and
internal oversight capacity, limited regional coverage
and scarce institutional capacity in specialized fields,
including prison management - remain and require
a redoubling of efforts on the part of both the Haitian
Government and its international partners.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, the efforts
of the Haitian Government, supported by international
partners, have significantly reduced the toll of the
cholera epidemic. During the Secretary-General's
two-day visit to Haiti in July, he and Prime Minister
Lamothe launched a total sanitation campaign - a
joint Government-United Nations programme designed
to reach 3 million people over the next five years. The
Mission and the United Nations country team will
continue to support the Government in implementing its
national cholera elimination plan, including through the
High-level Committee for the Elimination of Cholera,
established in May of this year upon the initiative of the
Prime Minister and the Secretary-General.

Haiti continued to make progress on the relocation
of persons displaced by the 2010 earthquake. Durable
solutions still need to be identified for the approximately
103,560 remaining internally displaced persons. The
Government also continued to deploy efforts to attract
investors and to stimulate economic growth and job
creation. The Government's renewed emphasis on
public financial management is a commendable step
towards improving transparency and accountability,
and its implementation should be vigorously pursued.

Considering the significant achievements of the
past 10 years in the overall stabilization process in
Haiti and mindful of the remaining challenges, the
Secretary-General has recommended a deepening of
MINUSTAH's consolidation process, including the
drawdown of the military component to two battalions,
with enablers, by June 2015, while maintaining
MINUSTAH's police component at near to current
levels. The recommendation is based on a careful
analysis of the political and security situation, the
capabilities of the National Police and the Mission's
activities. A strategic assessment mission was
deployed, under the leadership of the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, in June for
consultations with the Government, elected officials,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
as well as with Haiti's international partners and the
United Nations country team. I am confident, based
on the realities on the ground, that the recommended
reconfiguration would ensure an adequate stabilization
presence to support Haitian institutions, particularly in
the context of the next electoral cycle and the continuing
development of the Haitian National Police.

In this regard, let me underscore that it is critical for
enduring stability that the Government, MINUSTAH
and Haiti's international partners redouble their efforts
and commitments in order to enable the National Police
to meet major benchmarks by 2016 and to assume full
responsibility for security and stability in Haiti. To
this end, maintaining both the Mission's individual
police officers and the formed police units at near to
current levels would allow us to continue advising
and mentoring Haitian counterparts through static
co-location in police commissariats in targeted areas,
as well as to support HNP operations, upon request, as
a second line of response.

Equally, I wish to stress that it is vital that we all
look at police development through the wider rule-of-
1aw lens and underscore the dire need for long-overdue,
comprehensive justice sector reforms. Without a well-
functioning justice system, including corrections,
even the best trained and equipped police force will be
unable to perform its duties to provide a safe and secure
environment. That would involve not only continuing
to support the adoption of a revised criminal code to
expedite the judicial process, but also addressing the
persistent problem of prolonged pretrial detention and
weaknesses in the corrections sector, as seen in the
Croix des Bouquets prison break in August.

With regard to electoral operations, the transfer of
the Mission's technical, logistic and security support
to the electoral process should be initiated while being
mindful of capacity-building and resource requirements,
so as to enable the relevant Haitian institutions to
assume full responsibility over the conduct of elections.

In conclusion, it is important for Haiti's gains in
peace, security and stability to be sustained through
the consolidation of the democratic process, the rule of
law and good governance. That requires not only that
State institutions and actors in public life live up to
their responsibilities and assume increasingly greater
leadership, it also demands that Haiti's international
friends and partners step up efforts and provide
additional funds for critical areas from which the
Mission is withdrawing and in which the Government
still requires continued support.

MINUSTAH stands ready to play its role in
continuing to use its good offices and the presence of
its uniformed personnel and civilian staff in support of
a peaceful and democratic political process and further
stabilization - all ofthat in the context ofthe Mission's
consolidation. We will work with the Government, the
United Nations country team and Haiti's international
partners to develop a comprehensive transition plan
that underpins the gradual reduction of the Mission's
footprint. In keeping with the Secretary-General's
recommendation, we count on the support of the Council
to determine the Mission's core mandated functions
and the appropriate level of resources necessary to
fulfil them over a predictable period.

