Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of May and express my
deep appreciation to you for convening today's debate.
I would also like to thank the Chairs of the Council's
three counter-terrorism committees for their respective
briefings.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy sets out the shared understanding among
Member States on how to address the common threat
of terrorism. In order to implement the Strategy, most
importantly, each Member State must strengthen its
national counter-terrorism capacity and promote
international cooperation as a matter of urgency. As the
Chair of the G8 this year, Japan places high priority on
building national capacities to combat terrorism and
organized crime, and we are making great efforts to
achieve that objective.

We highly value the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in identifying
specific needs for counter-terrorism technical
assistance through site visits and preliminary
implementation assessments. One of the major
challenges is how to match appropriate supporters with
the assistance needs identified by the CTED. For such
matchmaking, well-focused dialogue among CTED, the
CTC and Member States will be useful, as stated in
paragraph 5 of resolution 1805 (2008). Japan, as the
Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Action Group, is
making every effort to promote effective coordination
with the CTED. We are jointly striving to strengthen
information-sharing in New York and to coordinate the
best response to the counter-terrorism assistance
requirements of concerned countries.

Japan also welcomes the readiness of CTED to
participate actively in and support the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. We hope the
CTED will make a significant contribution to the
implementation of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy
through its active participation in the Task Force and
its working groups.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities is playing a crucial role in that field. It is
our view that its mandate should be extended beyond
June, and we welcome the efforts made in improving
the quality and procedures of its consolidated list. We
encourage the Committee to continue that effort. Japan
places great importance on de-radicalization as an
essential element of counter-terrorism. We therefore
appreciate the Committee's continuous engagement in
the working group on de-radicalization under the Task
Force.
Japan welcomes the recent decision of the
Security Council to extend and enhance the mandate of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Japan sees the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as a key
element in our global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Japan has
taken an active initiative to promote the
universalization of resolution 1540 (2004). As the
Chair of the G8, it is our intention to promote the
examination of how G8 countries can contribute
further to the work of the 1540 Committee.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review conference is slated for early
September 2008. The Strategy is a valuable instrument
for the Member States to work collectively in
combating terrorism. The United Nations and its
Member States must achieve greater cooperation to
further advance global efforts. We have high
expectations that the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council will do their utmost to implement the
Strategy. At the same time, it will be important for the
three Committees to coordinate and streamline their
activities and to avoid duplicating efforts in their visits
and assessments of the reports submitted by the
Member States. We would also appreciate it if the
Committees could provide regular informal briefings,
in addition to briefings such as this morning's, to
ensure accountability and guidance to Member States.

