Mr. Voronkov: On behalf ofthe Secretary-General,
I would like to start by expressing my solidarity with
the people and Governments in areas where there have
been recent terror attacks. The list is long and includes
Afghanistan, Cameroon, Iraq, Nigeria, the Philippines
and Somalia. Our prayers are with the victims and
survivors of those heinous attacks. I also call on all
Member States to redouble their efforts to strengthen
international cooperation in order to address terrorism
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism and to
bring those responsible for terrorist acts to justice.

Thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering that threat (8/2018/80). The report was
prepared with the input of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and in
close collaboration with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other United Nations entities
and international organizations.

The fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is entering a new phase. The Secretary-
General's sixth report shows that despite the significant
military setbacks that ISIL experienced in Iraq, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the southern Philippines
last year, the group and its affiliates continue to pose
a significant and evolving threat around the world.
The report states that ISIL is no longer focused on
conquering and holding territory. It has been forced
to adapt and focus primarily on smaller and more
motivated groups of individuals who remain committed
to inspiring, enabling and carrying out attacks. It is
now organized as a global network with a flat hierarchy
and less operational control over its affiliates.

Although it is difficult to assess with confidence
the number of foreign terrorist fighters who remain
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, the flow of
fighters to both countries has nearly come to a halt.
However, returning foreign terrorist fighters, and those
who relocate to other regions, continue to present a
considerable threat to international security. The report
indicates that the structure of ISIL's global propaganda
machinery, and the quantity and quality of its output,
continue to deteriorate. However, ISIL members
and sympathizers are still able to use social media,
including encryption technology and communication
tools within the dark web, to communicate, coordinate
and facilitate attacks.

ISIL's ability to generate revenue has been
considerably weakened, largely owing to its loss
of control over oil and gas fields in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Its revenues have fallen by more than
90 per cent since 2015. However, it is still able to
generate income through extortion and the control of
checkpoints. One of our key concerns is how to enable
much-needed reconstruction and stabilization funds to
flow into areas liberated from ISIL while preventing
them from ending up in ISIL's hands. ISIL continues
to fund its affiliates, who are increasingly looking for
ways to diversify their income and become financially
independent. Money services, including exchange
houses and money couriers, continue to be a preferred
method for ISIL and its supporters to move funds
across borders. With regard to ISIL's evolving threat
outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, its affiliates
in Egypt have shown considerable resilience and pose
a growing threat. ISIL remains determined to rebuild
its capabilities in Libya, and continues to carry out
sporadic attacks.

In West Africa, ISIL-related groups continue to
operate in Mali and its neighbours. In East Africa, ISIL
affiliates operating in Puntland and southern Somalia
complicate the threat posed by Al-Qaida's affiliate
Al-Shabaab. Despite having been further degraded
by Afghan and international military operations, ISIL
continues to mount aggressive attacks in Afghanistan,
especially in Kabul. ISIL affiliates have suffered
significant setbacks in South-East Asia, notably the
loss of the city of Marawi in the southern Philippines.

The rapidly evolving and transnational threat
posed by ISIL presents a difficult challenge for
Member States and the international community and
underlines the vital importance of sharing information
on the identity of returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. The ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions
list remains one of the key global instruments in
that regard. I welcome the Council's efforts in recent
months to adopt several resolutions to help counter
terrorist narratives, prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons, address the issue of accountability for crimes
committed by ISIL in Iraq, disrupt human trafficking
carried out by terrorist groups and address the issue of
foreign terrorist fighters through measures on border
security, information-sharing and criminal justice.
The focus should now be on implementing those new
global norms.

Member States, the United Nations and
international, regional and subregional organizations
continue to strengthen the existing tools while also
developing new ones to address the evolving threat
posed by ISIL. Innovative partnerships between
Government agencies and private-sector actors have
strengthened the sharing of sensitive information on
terrorism financing patterns and suspect individuals.
Many Member States are paying increasing attention
to prosecution strategies and rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes.

The United Nations capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters continues to evolve to
address the full life cycle of fighters - 35 of the 50
projects in the plan have either been completed or
are being implemented. However, this is no time for
complacency. We need to stay one step ahead of ISIL
as it continues to adapt and evolve. I would like to make
four concluding observations.

First, we already have a strong international
framework for countering the threat from ISIL
through the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, various General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, 19 international counter-terrorism
conventions and many regional instruments. The
international effort to combat ISIL would be greatly
enhanced by effective implementation of those existing
resolutions and legal counter-terrorism instruments,
conventions and protocols. The United Nations stands
ready to provide assistance to Member States in that
regard when needed.

Secondly, the international community should
address the deficit in counter-terrorism cooperation
at the global, regional and national levels. In June,
the Secretary-General will convene the first-ever
United Nations summit of heads of counter-terrorism
agencies of Member States, with the aim of enhancing
cooperation and the timely and secure exchange of
information, and developing new, innovative ways to
tackle terrorism.

Thirdly, addressing the threatposed by ISIL requires
addressing the underlying conditions that cause young
men and women to be lured by violent extremism. Most
new recruits to terrorist organizations are between 17
and 27 years old. Extremist groups exploit feelings of
disillusionment and alienation, offering a twisted sense
of purpose to disaffected young people. The summit
will therefore also discuss how to engage and empower
young people to help prevent violent extremism.

Fourthly, this is the first report of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by ISIL since the
establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Last week, the Secretary-General approved the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, which will help deliver one of the key
priorities, that is, strengthening the coordination
and coherence of the counter-terrorism efforts of the
United Nations system. We are committed to stepping
up our capacity-building support to all Member States
to enhance the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The fight against ISIL and its affiliates is far
from over. While there have been significant military
successes over the past eight months, this remains a
genuine global challenge that demands an urgent
and concerted multilateral response. The Secretary-
General welcomes the focus that the Security Council
has put on the matter, and urges it to continue its efforts
to further enhance multilateral cooperation to address
the threats and challenges set out in the report.

