Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate today. As we approach
the seventieth anniversary of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is timely to focus on the issues that lie at the
heart at the system of collective security, a system that
has allowed us to avoid global conflict since the Second
World War, but one that must continually evolve to
meet contemporary security challenges. Australia is
firmly committed to a rules-based international order
that respects international law and respects not only the
letter but also the spirit of the Charter.

The challenges facing the international system
continue to grow. Today there are more simultaneous
crises with a bigger impact on a larger number of
people that at any time since the Second World War.
Terrorist groups have descended to new depths of
brutality. Their use of social media exposes vulnerable
young men and women around the world to their hateful
propaganda. The brutality of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant and its claims to territory are an urgent
security challenge that we must all confront. The
United Nations must respond nimbly and effectively
to these crises with the full range of instruments at its
disposal, just as it must take concrete steps to prevent
new conflicts from emerging.

We are all familiar with the warning signs of
conflict, social unrest, displacement and significant
human rights violations. The Security Council must
use the full weight of its political authority and other
preventive tools to address these warning signs as they
emerge, including effective use of sanctions to disrupt
destabilizing actors and to stem the flow of funds,
weapons and fighters that fuel conflict. In responding
to conflict, the Security Council must ensure that the
United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions have sufficient authority, clarity and direction
to carry out well-targeted and achievable mandates,
including to improve rule of law and to protect civilians.

The current review of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a welcome opportunity to achieve
important reforms. On average, countries emerging
from conflict only have a seven-year window to build
lasting peace before they risk relapsing into conflict.
The United Nations has a central role in preventing this
relapse. Strengthening the rule of law is a critical pillar
of both conflict prevention and effective post-conflict
peacebuilding, and that makes it core business for the
Council and United Nations peace operations.

Respect for human rights is of course central to the
Charter. Our collective responsibility is the universal
promotion, protection and realization of those rights
for all, and the knowledge that living in peace and
security means we never turn a blind eye to gross and
widespread violations of human rights. Sovereignty
carries with its fundamental obligations, chief among
them the need to protect citizens.

Australia reaffirms its strong commitment to all the
principals of the responsibility to protect. We welcome
France's initiative on restraint in use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity, and we encourage further
progress on this important initiative. The credibility of
the United Nations system depends on its willingness
and capacity to protect civilians, particularly women
and children who suffer disproportionately in conflict.

It is our conviction that the investigation and
prosecution of serious international crimes is also
critical to establishing lasting peace. Tragically, Rome
Statute crimes are committed today in many locations
on an alarming scale. It is the duty of every State to
exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible
for international crimes. The International Criminal
Court (ICC), as a court of last resort, has a vital role
to play when States are unable or unwilling to act.
The ICC deserves the full support of the international
community.

As we reaffirm our commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations at its seventieth anniversary year
we should be able to say its fundamental norms are
universally applied, but sadly this is not the case. Key
elements of the Charter, including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and of the legal framework of
protection for civilians have been persistently defied
in recent times, with tragic consequences. The United
Nations, this Council and all Member States must
continue to be vigilant to ensure these fundamental
norms are protected. Only then will the international
community be working effectively and collectively to
ensure peace and security for all.

