Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month and thanking you for
holding this meeting on the very important subject of
the rule of law.

Our meeting is being held in the wake of another
heinous terrorist attack in Lebanon and on the heels
of a series of similar horrifying terrorist acts against
innocent civilians and targets in a few other Middle
Eastern countries. Those acts were aimed at sowing
discord among peoples and damaging the social fabric
of societies and countries in the region.

The most recent terrorist attack occurred in the
positive environment created by the birth of an all-
inclusive Government and the positive impact that
that had on the Lebanese people. In committing that
attack, the terrorists meant to send a message about the
insistence of the forces of evil on inflicting harm on
Lebanon and its people. The countries in the region and
the international community at large, led by the United
Nations, should respond to that new wave of terrorism
by closing ranks and taking concrete actions.

While my Government condemns the terrorist attack
in Lebanon and offers condolences to the victims and
their families, we call on the Lebanese people to remain
united in the face of such appalling and indiscriminate
terrorist acts and to build on the positive steps taken
in the recent past. We also reiterate the commitment of
the international community, especially the Council, to
supporting Lebanon in those efforts.

Peacekeeping has played an important part in the
United Nations achievements in managing conflicts,
maintaining peace and stability and helping to create
the conditions for building durable social and economic
development in countries emerging from conflict.
Those conditions have links with the strengthening of
rule-of-law institutions, supported by the entire United
Nations system, upon the request and with the full
participation of the countries concerned.

That comprehensive perspective was reflected
in the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted on 24 September 2012. Paragraph
19 of the Declaration stresses the importance of
supporting national civilian capacity development
and institution-building in the aftermath of conflict,
including through peacekeeping operations, with a
view to delivering more effective civilian capacities
and enhanced, international and regional cooperation,
including in the field of the rule of law.

My delegation emphasizes the critical importance
of strengthening the rule of law in countries emerging
from conflict in order to help stabilize the situation,
put an end to impunity, tackle the underlying causes
of conflict and build lasting peace. Peacekeeping
operations, within the scope of their respective
mandates, play their part in post-conflict situations
by helping national authorities develop strategies and
support the strengthening of justice and correctional
structures in conjunction with the development of police
services in order to build a coherent and comprehensive
justice system that supports the host country's ability to
provide critical services in those fields.

Currently, there are 19 United Nations field missions
with components related to rule-of-law activities in
different parts of the world. We firmly believe that
the establishment of mandates related to rule-of-law
activities in post-conflict societies should be in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law,
including full respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of States and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States. It is also important to
ensure the transparency of all decisions leading to the
establishment, renewal or modification of mandates
through meaningful, multi-stage consultations at an
early stage.

States emerging from conflicts need to take
ownership as they embark upon the difficult process
of rebuilding their countries and making effective
improvements to their socioeconomic well-being.
Furthermore, investing in national capacity-building
and strengthening national expertise in the area of the
rule of law are essential to realizing the objective of
national ownership, which must become a reality and
not remain just an abstract concept.

Meanwhile, the promotion of the rule of law should
at all times reflect respect for legal, political and
cultural diversity, and therefore encourage a culture of
dialogue, tolerance and understanding that is opposed
to the imposition of any legal, political, cultural or
economic model. The configuration of the political and
legal system is a matter for the domestic jurisdiction of
States, and there are no one-size-fits-all solutions.

Promoting the rule of law also requires adequate
measures for ensuring the accountability of United
Nations staff and experts on mission with respect
to criminal acts they may commit while deployed
in peacekeeping operations. There have been good
improvements to ending impunity for perpetrators of
such crimes, and we think that the strict measures in
effect will promote the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Rebuilding societies emerging from conflict is a
shared responsibility. It is only through a coordinated
and comprehensive approach that the international
community can yield lasting results. We hope that
today's deliberations will contribute to the achievement
of that noble goal.

Finally, although I did not intend to respond to the
noises coming from the mouth of the Ambassador of
Israel, I must do so.

Today, to the astonishment of many, the
representative of the Israeli regime accused the Iranian
Government and many other countries in the region of
violating human rights. It is astonishing that we have
heard such baseless accusations from somebody who
represents a regime that was founded, and continues
to exist, on the basis of gross violations of the rights
of the entire native population of the land concerned.
The host of policies adopted by the Israelis against the
Palestinians are so grotesque that nothing other than
the term "apartheid State" can describe it. They are
committing the crime of apartheid against the Arabs
living in the occupied territory and within Israel.

The Palestinians are subject to a system of control
that includes Jewish-only settlements, the identification
system, military checkpoints, separate roads for Israelis
and Palestinians and the separation wall - denying
Arabs access to their land and resources and delaying
their access to health care. For many years, the nearly
2 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip have lived under
one of the most harsh blockades ever, which has denied
them access to basic necessities. To a lesser extent, a
similar policy targeting the West Bank has been on the
agenda.

All ofthat stems from the denial ofthe Palestinians'
most basic right: their right to self-determination.

