Mr. Serry: Let me at the outset join the
Secretary-General and the Council in condemning in
the strongest possible terms the deadly terror attack on
18 July against a bus carrying Israeli tourists outside the
Burgas airport in Bulgaria. The explosion, reportedly
executed by a suicide bomber, killed six civilians, five
of them Israeli and one Bulgarian, and injured more than
30 people, several critically. We extend our condolences
to the families of the victims and wish a speedy
recovery to the injured. That heinous act provides a
reminder, as noted by the Quartet on the Middle East
in its statement on 19 July, of the need for the members
of the international community to stand side by side
in the effort to prevent terrorism wherever it may be
practiced. The Quartet also reaffirmed its commitment
to continuing efforts to reach a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement in the Middle East, where all people
may live in peace and security.

In that regard, the past month has been characterized
by a continuation of the effort to restart talks amid
continued worrying developments on the ground. Quiet,
direct exchanges between the parties are ongoing in an
attempt to reach agreement on a package of measures
that would create an environment conducive to talks
and pave the way for high-level contacts.

President Abbas has emphasized the importance
of a release of Palestinian prisoners arrested before the
Oslo accords were agreed. He has also underlined the
critical importance of Israel's allowing the delivery of
weapons and ammunition intended for the Palestinian
security forces that are held in Jordan. It is vital that
such steps be taken to enable a continuation of effective
security coordination. More generally, it is concerning
that we have not seen urgently needed enabling steps
or other measures that would bolster the Palestinian
Authority (PA).

Quartet envoys have remained in close contact with
each other and the parties, and a number of high-level
visits have taken place. On 25 and 26 June, Russian
President Vladimir Putin held meetings in Israel and
with President Abbas in Bethlehem. United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton also visited Israel
on 16 and 17 July, and on 6 July met with President
Abbas in Paris, where the Palestinian President also
met with French President Hollande, European Union
High Representative Ashton, and United Kingdom
Foreign Secretary Hague. The Arab League Follow-up
Committee held consultations in Doha on 22 July, in
which it supported a Palestinian approach to the United
Nations to seek further recognition without specifying
a timeline.

In sum, the effort to restart direct talks has not
reached a breaking point, but there has not been a
breakthrough either, and that is increasingly of concern.
While talks remain stalled, events on the ground
continue to move in the wrong direction.

To begin with, the Palestinian Authority faces an
acute challenge in maintaining its solvency. At the
start of the year, the Authority announced that it owed
$1.1 billion in bank loans and $400 million to the private
sector. In addition, it expects a $1-billion shortfall
in funding towards its $3.5-billion budget for 2012.
At the start of July, the Palestinian Finance Minister
announced that the Palestinian Authority could not
pay all June salaries to its 150,000 employees on time.
Last week, Saudi Arabia announced a contribution of
$100 million. This is positive news that has provided the
Palestinian Authority with a welcome respite, including
by allowing it to pay the June salaries, but it will be
brief.

We call on other donors, particularly other Gulf
countries, to consider making a timely donation during
this period of critical shortage. We have also repeatedly
pointed to the need for an improved mechanism for the
transfer of the VAT revenues Israel collects on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority to enhance transparency and
efficiency. Last week, Israeli authorities transferred
half of the monthly VAT collection to the PA two weeks
early in order to assist with the payment of salaries
ahead of the holy month of Ramadan.

On 17 July, Israel approved 5,000 permits for
Palestinian construction workers to work in Israel, in
addition to the 34,250 permits that have already been
issued for Palestinian workers to work there. This
initiative is welcome, but more needs to be done to ease
access and movement and enable economic growth
throughout the West Bank, including Area C, the Jordan
Valley and Gaza. In Gaza, next steps must include
enabling exports to Israel and other countries, as well
as transfers to and from the West Bank. This will in
turn enable economic growth and, in addition, provide
much needed additional revenue through taxation for
the Palestinian Authority.
Settlement announcements continued this month,
with the Israel Land Authority publishing tenders
for 171 new settlement units in East Jerusalem, 41 in
Pisgat Ze'ev, and 130 units in Har Homa. Additionally,
13 Palestinian structures, including three residences,
were demolished in the West Bank during the reporting
period, leading to the displacement of 20 Palestinians,
including seven children. We are also concerned about
recent reports that the Israeli Minister of Defence has
ordered the demolition of eight Palestinian villages
near Hebron so that the area can be used for military
training.

On 18 July, a Higher Education Committee
nominated by the Israeli military commander of the
West Bank approved an application by a college in the
settlement of Ariel, which is deep in the West Bank,
to upgrade its status to that of university. While still
pending approval, such an upgrade would considerably
increase Government funding, resulting in an increase
in enrolment, which now stands at 12,000 students.
This represents a further encroachment into the West
Bank and runs counter to Israel's road map obligations
to freeze settlement activity, including natural growth.

At the same time, a committee led by retired
Supreme Court Justice Edmond Levy and commissioned
by the Israeli Government to provide recommendations
on "the status of the construction" in the West Bank
submitted its report to the Prime Minister on 9 July.
The report claimed that the Israeli presence in the West
Bank was not a military occupation, recommended
post-facto approval of outposts which the Israeli legal
system deems illegal, and proposed changes to the
process of approving settlement construction. The
Israeli Government has not endorsed the report, but such
proposals are in direct contradiction to international
law. I reiterate that any settlement construction in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law and Israel's
commitments under the road map, and should stop.
As the Quartet has stated on numerous occasions, any
Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank cannot
prejudge the outcome of negotiations and will not be
recognized by the international community.

As in previous reporting periods, clashes between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians have continued. Settlers
attacked Palestinians near Hebron on 30 June, and
Nablus was the site of clashes during Israeli visits to
Joseph's Tomb on 21 June and 18 July. Settler attacks
on Palestinian property, including agricultural land and
orchards, also continued, resulting in over 1,000 trees
being damaged.

Palestinian attacks on Israelis in the West Bank,
mostly consisting of stone-throwing at Israeli vehicles,
also continued, resulting in one Israeli injury on 11 July.
On 27 June, a Palestinian was shot and injured by an
Israeli security guard at the entrance of the settlement
of Ma'ale Adumim after allegedly hitting an Israeli
police car with his vehicle. On 17 July, a Palestinian
was arrested for attacking an Israeli girl in Area C.

Citing security, Israeli security forces conducted
477 operations in the West Bank, which was an increase
from previous months, resulting in 185 Palestinians,
including eight children, being injured, while two
Israeli soldiers were also injured. A total of 246
Palestinians were arrested, including a member of the
Palestinian Legislative Council affiliated with Hamas,
on 15 July. On 9 July, a Jerusalem court sentenced two
former Israeli police officers to 30 months in prison for
the negligent death of a Palestinian in 2008.

Most Palestinians injuries and arrests during the
reporting period took place during demonstrations
against the barrier, which deviates from the Green
Line in contravention to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. A Palestinian
demonstration in Ramallah on 30 June against a planned
meeting between President Abbas and then Deputy
Prime Minister of Israel Shaul Mofaz resulted in clashes
with Palestinian security forces. Although the meeting
was canceled, demonstrations continued for two more
days to protest the use of force by Palestinian police.
I would like to again stress that the right of peaceful
protest must be upheld and that all protests should be
kept strictly non-violent.

Palestinian security forces continued to work
to maintain law and order in the West Bank. The
Palestinian security operation that started in Jenin in
May in the northern West Bank continues. More than 150
suspects have been apprehended, including members of
Palestinian security forces. On 30 June, a senior Fatah
member was shot and injured in Jenin. On 8 July, Prime
Minister Fayyad inaugurated the Palestine College for
Police Sciences in the presence of the President of the
European Commission.

On a positive note, as part of the 14 May agreement
to end the mass prisoner hunger strike, on 16 July 48
relatives from the Gaza strip were allowed to visit 25
detainees in Israeli prisons, and on 23 July 33 relatives
visited 27 detainees. There are more than 500 detainees
from Gaza in Israeli prisons. This was the first time
since 2007 that such family visits from Gaza had taken
place. Four detainees have continued their hunger
strikes. In the West Bank, on 19 July Israeli authorities
released the Speaker of the Palestinian Parliament,
Aziz Dweik, who had been held for six months under
administrative detention.

Internal political dynamics remain fluid. On
17 July, the Kadima party led by Shaul Mofaz left
Prime Minister Netanyahu's coalition after two months
in the Government. Kadima's decision to leave the
coalition emerged after disagreements on the renewal
of a law regarding the military service of the Jewish
Haredi community. The creation of the large coalition
in May had stirred expectations for renewed momentum
regarding the peace process.

On the Palestinian side, efforts to advance
reconciliation were again delayed when the de
facto authorities in Gaza decided to suspend the
voter registration process that the Central Elections
Commission had planned for 3 to 14 July. We have
voiced our clear disappointment with this decision
and continue to believe that the democratic renewal of
institutions in the occupied territories is long overdue.
On 10 July, the Palestinian Authority, pending further
developments on reconciliation, called for municipal
elections to be held throughout the occupied territories
on 20 October. This has been rejected by Hamas.
During my recent visit to Egypt on 25 and 26 June, just
days after Mohamed Morsy was announced as Egypt's
next President, I received firm assurances from the
Egyptian authorities of their continued efforts to reach
reconciliation. President Abbas met with President
Morsy on 18 July, and Hamas leader Khaled Meshal met
the Egyptian President the following day. We continue
to support such efforts through Egyptian auspices,
under the leadership of President Abbas and within
the framework of the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the positions of the Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

I visited Gaza from 2 to 5 July, and was again
struck by the fragility and unsustainability of the
present situation, which has lead to unacceptable
hardship for the local population. That is partially
explained by growing funding challenges for United
Nations operations. For example, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) currently requires an additional
$57 million to meet the shortfall in its core operating
budget, covering all of its operations, and an additional
$168 million to fully fund the emergency appeal,
including the provision of food aid to almost 700,000
vulnerable refugees in the West Bank and Gaza. Most
urgent is the funding of $7.5 million to meet food
procurement distribution needs in Gaza for 2012. That
funding shortfall has already resulted in the cancellation
of UNRWA's Summer Games for the children of Gaza
and, if not addressed, will result in cuts to essential
UNRWA programming across the occupied Palestinian
territory.

United Nations reconstruction work in Gaza,
which now totals $360 million, has had a positive
effect not only for those who receive services but also
on short-term employment. However, the economic
benefits of increased employment will end with the
conclusion of that work. Deeper and more fundamental
change is therefore required to enable a functioning
Gazan economy, beginning with authorizing exports
to Israel and other countries, as well as transfers to
and from the West Bank. Without that essential step,
Gaza's future will remain tenuous at best. In addition,
I urge donors to continue to fund United Nations
reconstruction work in Gaza through the Palestinian
Authority-United Nations Trust Fund. I also urge the
Government of Israel to continue to grant approvals for
outstanding United Nations reconstruction work in the
Gaza Strip, and emphasize once more that there should
be a broader opening for the entry of all construction
materials into Gaza.

The violence in Gaza, which resumed in early June,
has continued. A total of 183 projectiles fired from
Gaza landed in Israel, including 27 Grad rockets and
21 mortar shells. Several rockets were intercepted by
the Iron Dome system. Heavy machine gun shots were
also fired from Gaza at a commercial plaza in southern
Israel on 9 July, without casualties. The Israel Defense
Forces conducted six incursions and 31 airstrikes into
Gaza, resulting in nine Palestinians killed, including
six militants and three civilians, while 54 Palestinians
were injured, including 24 militants and 30 civilians.
We continue to condemn such indiscriminate rocket
attacks from Gaza into Israel and call for their complete
cessation. We also urge Israel to show maximum
restraint.

On 17 July, the de facto Ministry oflnterior in Gaza
executed by hanging three Palestinians convicted of
murder, in violation of the Palestinian legal framework
that requires prior ratification by the President. Six
death sentences have been implemented in Gaza since
the beginning of 2012, and 14 since 2007. That runs
counter to the worldwide moratorium on the death
penalty called for by the General Assembly.

On a separate issue that relates to United Nations
relations with Israel, I wish to report that, on 10 July,
the Permanent Representative of Israel sent a letter
to Under-Secretary-General Amos inquiring about
the status of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and its activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The United Nations
will work with the Government of Israel to address the
issues and explain the important work of OCHA in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

Now allow me to turn to regional events. The
Council heard extensive briefings on the escalating
violence in Syria last week, and will receive further
briefings next week. I will therefore limit my remarks
to emphasizing that the Secretary-General remains
extremely concerned by the violence in Syria and by
the rising death toll, as well as by the continuing human
rights abuses and growing humanitarian needs. Each
day brings to light new atrocities and new suffering.
Reports of the aerial bombardment of eastern parts of
the city of Aleppo yesterday add to our serious concerns
about the dangerous escalation currently in play.

We are aware of the reports related to the possible
relocation of alleged chemical weapon stockpiles in
Syria, and to concerns raised about the risk of their
possible use. The Secretary-General has emphasized
the fundamental responsibility of the Government
of Syria in ensuring the safety and security of those
stockpiles, which absolutely must not be used under
any circumstances. The Secretary-General has noted
with concern that Syria is not a party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

We condemn all violence in Syria, which has cost
thousands of lives. That situation cannot continue. The
Secretary-General urges all concerned to immediately
stop the fighting and take steps towards a Syrian-led
transition that will address the genuine aspirations
and needs of the Syrian people. Ending violence and
seeking a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Syria will
remain at the centre of our efforts.

The situation in Syria is increasingly also
impacting the region. Council members will recall that,
on 19 July, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
informally communicated information regarding the
entry and operations of armed Syrian security forces,
including soldiers, inside the area of separation of the
area of operation of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF), on 18 and 19 July. Since
then, security operations by Syrian armed forces
have continued, mostly in Jabbata and Trunje. The
numbers of armed forces involved in those operations
has varied from 47 up to 396. UNDOF reported heavy
gunfire and many explosions in Jabbata, Al-Baath and
Trunje. UNDOF has lodged its protest with the Syrian
authorities, as the entry of Syrian armed forces and
equipment in the area of separation is a violation of the
Agreement of Disengagement between the Israeli and
Syrian forces. In addition, UNDOF has reported seeing
a total of approximately 100 civilians aboard vehicles
and on foot with personal belongings heading east
through the Bravo line. UNDOF will continue to liaise
with Israeli and Syrian military authorities to prevent
an escalation of tension.

Nowhere else, perhaps, does the impact of the
Syrian crisis loom larger than in Lebanon. As recently
as last week, following a briefing by the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Mr. Derek Plumby, the
Council, in a press statement on 18 July, expressed
grave concern over repeated incidents of cross-border
fire, incursions, abductions and arms trafficking across
the Lebanese-Syrian border. The Council reiterated the
importance of full respect for Lebanon's sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity and the authority of the
Lebanese State. In that context, Council members
welcomed President Sleiman's initiative to reconvene
the national dialogue of Lebanon's political leaders
and the declarations following the first two meetings
last month, stating that they looked forward to the
continuation of his process.

Since then, a pattern of Syrian army violations of
the Lebanese-Syrian border has continued, including
intermittent shelling from Syria into Wadi Khaled.
In response, the Government has deployed additional
troops of the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) to its
northern border and authorized the LAF to fire back.
New cross-border incidents have been reported since,
including on 21 July in the area of Al-Qa'a, in the
north-east of the Beka'a Valley, involving machine-gun
and rocket-propelled grenade fire and a brief incursion
by Syrian soldiers. In addition to the almost 30,000
Syrian refugees registered with the Office ofthe United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
the surge in the number of Syrians crossing into
Lebanon last week was estimated at some 18,000 over
a two-day period, many of whom have travelled back
into Syria. UNHCR is updating its contingency plan
in the event of a mass or increased influx requiring a
comprehensive humanitarian response.

Lebanon has also continued to face significant
challenges to its security and stability domestically,
linked directly or indirectly to the crisis in Syria.
Incidents in different parts of the country reflect
confessional tensions exacerbated by the conflict
in Syria. On 18 July, following the bomb attack in
Damascus, fresh clashes erupted between groups
from Sunni and Alawite neighbourhoods in Tripoli.
That coincided with a speech by Hezbollah leader
Nasrallah reiterating support for the Syrian regime.
As for the national dialogue, the opposition March 14
coalition decided to boycott its third session, scheduled
for yesterday. President Sleiman has announced that
the process is postponed until 16 August. It is hoped
that the obstacles to continuing the national dialogue
will be overcome in order to allow the next session to
take place as planned. As stressed by the Council, the
commitment of the country's leaders to safeguarding
Lebanon from the impact of regional tensions at this
difficult time is particularly important.

Meanwhile, the situation in the UNIFIL area of
operation has remained cautiously calm and stable. As
the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed some troops out
of the south Litani sector to reinforce its efforts along
the north-eastern border, UNIFIL increased operational
activities in its area. The Lebanese Armed Forces
assured UNIFIL that this is a temporary measure and
that troops would be sent back to the south as soon as
the situation allowed. Israeli violations of Lebanese
airspace, meanwhile, have continued on an almost daily
basis.

In conclusion, I am addressing the Council today
only two months before the General Assembly's general
debate, in September, and almost a year since the
Council was presented with the Palestinian application
for membership in the United Nations. When I was
last before the Council, in May, I warned that we were
increasingly moving away from a two-State solution
towards a one-State reality that would also diminish the
prospects for regional peace in the spirit of the Arab
Peace Initiative.

The continuous negative trends, as reported today
and in previous briefings, just further manifest the
reality that consistently undermines our common goal
of a negotiated two-State solution that will end the
conflict and end the occupation that started in 1967.
The international community should understand that,
absent a credible political horizon for the establishment
of a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel, its own efforts in pursuit of that
goal will increasingly lack credibility. The parties must
now do their part to overcome admittedly difficult
obstacles and take the steps necessary to enable an
environment conducive to serious engagement. But I
fear that time is running out.

