Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome today's
presence of Her Excellency Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Minister
for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of the
Netherlands. Likewise, we express our gratitude for
the briefings by Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and by Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme,
to whom we would like to take this opportunity to
express our unwavering support for the important work
that they do.

Food insecurity and the risk of famine in the world
are undoubtedly a problem that must concern us all and
include the involvement and joint action of the entire
international community so that they may be prevented
and mitigated through cross-cutting and comprehensive
measures, especially now, as we are on the path to
fulfilling the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. However,
the predicament created by famine is more worrisome
when one of its causes and a main factor of its
persistence are the direct result of armed conflicts and
man-made violence. A tragic example of the latter are
the 74 million people at risk of acute food insecurity
who live in conflict areas, primarily in Africa and the
Middle East. Unfortunately, other victims who, upon
escaping violent situations, have abandoned their homes
and means of subsistence are dramatically adding to the
already alarming number of forcibly displaced persons
and account for more than 65 million people throughout
the world, according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

On the one hand, the constant flow of displaced
persons and refugees has undeniably resulted in the
stoppage of agricultural activities and the breakdown
of production cycles, as well as the loss of land and
livestock, thereby affecting the sustainable supply of
basic foodstuffs. While, on the other hand, it has had
a severe impact upon communities and States that
receive those refugees and displaced persons, as they
try the latters' ability ensure their subsistence and
provide them with sufficient food. In some instances,
that fragile situation is further worsened owing to
the fact that, in flagrant Violation of international
humanitarian law, actors involved in and parties to
conflicts impose arbitrary restrictions on access roads,
ports and airports by which imported food and basic
humanitarian assistance arrives to meet the needs of
the people, as well as target humanitarian assistance as
military objectives - a practice that we condemn in the
strongest ofterms. Armed conflicts are also responsible
for explosive remnants of war contaminating vast tracks
of land that could otherwise be used for agriculture.

It is important to consider that the high humanitarian

cost that conflicts entail goes hand-in-had with policies
aimed at waging war and the excessive military expenses
that they entail, and that they regrettably perpetuate a
cycle of poverty directly affecting the people. It is clear
that the presence of famine in conflict areas is not owing
to a lack of resources for obtaining food, but to the lack
of parties' political will to resolve their differences. In
that regard, my delegation calls on the Security Council
and the membership of the Organization, in general, to
maintain a united and firm stand in condemning acts
and campaigns of violence and belligerence that worsen
current conflicts and create harmful instability posing
a threat to the lives of millions of innocent people.

As Executive Director Beasley stated earlier,
Bolivia believes unequivocally that the best way to
avoid and stop the perpetuation of the vicious cycle of
war, conflict, famine and humanitarian catastrophes
lies essentially in prevention. The effective application
of mediation, negotiation, prevention and conciliation
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the
pre-eminent use of the provisions set forth in Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, are
indispensable to advance analysis and comprehensive
debate on conflicts, their root causes and their possible
consequences. Clearly, prevention must be considered
as an asset at the service of the people to strengthen,
and not to weaken or diminish, States. Accordingly, we
believe that the use of reports and briefings on food
insecurity and hunger that include status reports on
conflict areas, such as the GlobalReport on Food Crises,
published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programme, and
the European Commission report on the same subject
presented yesterday, are useful tools for prevention and
providing early warning of potential situations whereby
crises might worsen. It is also important that, within the
framework of their respective mandates, specific United
Nations bodies work in coordination with the various
agencies and programmes responsible for monitoring
levels of food supplies, particularly in conflict areas,
so that strengthening humanitarian assistance can be
planned for in a cross-cutting manner and efforts to
ensure post-conflict resilience are supported.

Lastly, we highlight the content of presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/14, of August 2017, which
reiterates that reports the Secretary General can provide
on humanitarian situations and responses, in particular
the risk of famine in areas affected by conflicts, are
extremely important in designing and implementing
prevention mechanisms.

