Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): It is indeed a great honour, Mr. Mbeki, to see
you personally assume the presidency of Security
Council today. It is my pleasure to convey to you the
greetings and support of your brother, Colonel
Al-Qaddafi.

We are also honoured to have with us heads of
State or Government, ministers and heads of
delegations. We welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Oumar Konare, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission. We
certainly appreciate all of their efforts.

I congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, as it paves the way for our meeting
tomorrow with the African Union Peace and Security
Council. We have set great expectations on that
meeting, as the topic falls squarely within the core
functions and objectives of our two Councils as stated
in their statutes. The topic is very important and not
enough time has been provided to expand on it.
Therefore I shall provide a written statement for
distribution and will merely stress some important
points here today.

My country fully agrees with the statement made
by the President of the United Republic of Tanzania
and Chairperson of the African Union, Mr. Jakaya
Kikwete.

This proceeds from the important concept paper
prepared by the presidency stressing the need for a
practical movement ensuring effective long-term
participation by both regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Charter, in Chapter VIII, specifically
recognizes such a role for those organizations. Many
international resolutions and declarations have stressed
the importance of the participation of regional and
subregional organizations - particularly with regard to
conflict prevention and finding effective joint measures
to deal with the root causes of threats to peace - as
being fundamental international commitments and
objectives provided for in the United Nations Charter.

My country, Libya, has been committed to the
prevention and settlement of African conflicts and, as
an African member of this Security Council, we have
come to understand the urgent need for a more
comprehensive international framework for such
efforts. There has certainly been recognition of Africa's
development and its role in a collective security
organization based primarily on the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention of
disputes.

However, let me also state that, frankly, we
continue to need to prove that practical measures must
take precedence over rhetoric and that long-term
conflict resolution remain the priority. The Secretariat
continues to lack the necessary resources for logistical
support of national and regional capacities, and
therefore insufficient efforts have been made to prevent
conflicts at their source. The price has been very high.
We now face humanitarian situations with spreading
tragedies and ramifications. We are also incurring
enormous expenditures related to conflict management,
as well as peacekeeping operations with no end in
sight.

No one, of course, would argue that there is one
simple prescription for prevention. Such an effort
would require a diagnosis of the causes of such
conflicts, which are complex and interrelated. The
prescription is necessarily complex: internal, regional
and, specifically, international.

Article 1 of the United Nations Charter includes,
among the purposes and principles of the Organization,
upholding principles of equal rights and self-
determination for all peoples and assisting them in
solving economic, social, cultural and humanitarian
problems.

There has been increasing appreciation for the
growing role of the African Union, under difficult
circumstances, particularly since the establishment of
its Peace and Security Council, as an entity entrusted
with decision-making, in partnership with the United
Nations. The Council has been active in many of the
cases that have been raised here this morning.

Africa does not seek a narrow continental interest
nor do we seek to be dealt with with modesty, as the
late leader Leopold Senghor said. Africa's security and
development are an essential component of the
collective global security system. Furthermore, the
mandate and procedures of the United Nations Security
Council cannot be separated from those of the African
Union Peace and Security Council.

Structural strategies aimed at conflict prevention
in Africa have evolved as a result of valuable reports
submitted regularly by the Secretary-General,
particularly since the end of the last century. Two
important reports have been submitted in the past few
months. It is now up to us to implement the
recommendations set out in those reports and to
capitalize on the exceptional momentum achieved thus
far. In Addis Ababa last year, the foundations were laid
for relations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. Annual
meetings have been scheduled. Sharing experiences
and information with regard to current conflicts and
seeking ways to cooperate in order to prevent such
conflicts have become established practices that are
welcomed by all.

Finally, I believe that we must now begin our
work to formalize a global-regional partnership, in
which all United Nations bodies should be encouraged
to participate. Such a partnership should guarantee, in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter, the
integration of resources, priorities, capacities and
mandates, assigning them according to comparative
advantages and areas of strength. Contrary to the
notion that the United Nations must not provide
funding unless it has control, it should provide support
to the African Union and its security structure both
logistically and financially. We hope that that will be
the outcome of today's deliberations. Only such a
partnership will enable us to face the real challenges
and, as stated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, to develop more planned, consistent
and reliable arrangements.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the
delegation of South Africa for the draft resolution
before us. We fully endorse it and look forward to its
adoption at the end of this meeting.

