Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to thank the
President of the Council for organizing today's debate,
particularly for proposing that non-members of the
Council speak first. If constructive criticism is healthy,
then the Council will surely emerge stronger from
today's discussions. The distinguished representative of
Pakistan is right when he points out that the Security
Council is not a debating club. But, I am sure that he
will agree that the kind of critical examination in which
we are engaged today is necessary if the Council is to
fulfil its mandate to the satisfaction of the broader
United Nations membership.

Let me say at the outset that Ireland supports the
remarks that the representative of Sweden, representing
his country's Presidency of the European Union, has
already made during this debate, especially in regard to
their focus on Africa 4 a high priority for my
country- the need to work towards full
implementation of the recommendations of the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809) and the importance of closer
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. This
last point was raised by a number of delegations earlier
today, and Ireland has worked hard on the Council and
will continue to do so in support of improved
involvement of the troop-contributing countries in the
preparation of Council decisions on peacekeeping
missions.

Security Council resolution 1318 (2000), adopted
by the Council last September, covered a wide range of
concerns. In contrast to many who have already
spoken, I will focus on just one of these concerns: the
root causes of conflict, especially their economic and
social dimensions. In doing so, I am echoing the
remarks of a number of delegations that have already
spoken. I will also be looking at an area that is beyond
the exclusive competence of the Security Council and
touches on its interface with the broader international
community.

The Security Council has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
This is a wide responsibility that must not be confined
to addressing crises that have already erupted. It must
also involve a proactive, preventive approach, pursued
as part of the collective effort of the wider
United Nations system, where our common purpose is
to act together to prevent and remove threats to peace
and solve collective economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems. These responsibilities and
purposes - those of the Security Council and the
bodies that make up the wider United Nations
Organization - are intertwined and interdependent.

As the distinguished representative of Croatia
said, the United Nations Security Council must use its
Visibility and its prestige to consult with and augment
the efforts of the United Nations bodies principally
charged with development. The distinguished
representative of Peru made a similar point.

Peace and development are also intertwined and
interdependent. This was recognized at the Millennium
Summit, where heads of State or Government resolved
to achieve a fully coordinated approach to the problems
of peace and development. For the United Nations this
requires the Council, as Norway has just said, to ensure
that the different parts of this Organization are
coherent, cooperate and mutually reinforce each other's
efforts.

I want to stress here, as did the distinguished
representative of Egypt this morning, that such
coordination must take place in full respect for the
competence of the organizations and institutions
concerned, although, as the United Kingdom
mentioned earlier, the dividing lines are not always
clear.

While we may sometimes disagree about the
specific event that sparked any particular conflict, we
can all agree that conflict causes increased poverty and
injustice and that sustainable development is not
possible without peace. It is a fact that of the 34
countries furthest from reaching the international
development targets, 22 are affected by current or
recent conflicts. As a result of conflict, the poorest
become even poorer.

We see the United Nations development arm,
with its global outreach, as an important instrument in
addressing poverty. And we take the view that we, the
international community, must reinforce our efforts to
support, by word and deed, a strengthened and coherent
United Nations effort to tackle some of the root causes
and results of conflict: poverty, disease, human rights
abuse, the lack of education or, just as importantly, its
misuse in fostering racial and ethnic hatreds.

For the United Nations, when acting in crisis
countries, this surely means that efforts in crisis
management should reinforce long-term development
objectives, rather than distort them and that the
United Nations must have clear lines and definitions of
authority and clear organizational structures. It means
that every effort must be made to ensure coherence and
coordination and to ensure that lessons are learned
from the past and best practice pursued. It means that
peace-building efforts require the closest cooperation
and coordination between all parts of the
United Nations system - in particular, the Department
of Political Affairs, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme. At the field level there is clearly a
significant role for the United Nations Development
Programme as a capacity-builder in the governance
area and in the context of the resident coordinator
system. Finally, and crucially, all parts of the
United Nations system should seek to mutually
reinforce each other.

I might also mention that there is considerable
work on the important issue of conflict prevention
being undertaken in a number of different forums at the
moment. The European Union has recently focused on
developing a comprehensive strategic approach to
conflict prevention, which will be on the agenda of the
Gothenburg European Council. In addition, the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development's Development Assistance Committee
high-level meeting in April will consider guidelines on
conflict prevention. It is important that the
United Nations and these different forums coordinate
with each other to ensure that the strategies and
policies being developed in this area are coherent and
reinforce one another. We need in the Security Council
and elsewhere to pursue a join up approach, both in the
United Nations and across the international community
as a whole. In this context, we very much welcome the
initiative just announced by the United Kingdom for its
forthcoming presidency.

To conclude, I have not and could not respond
today to all the points raised this morning, but we have
taken careful note of them and will take them into
account during the remainder of our tenure on the
Security Council. We are ready to support the
presidency in drafting a result-focused, forward-
looking and concise text by which the Council will
signal to the wider United Nations family and the
world at larger its determination to follow up on
today's important debate.

Of course, words on their own are not enough. As
the Secretary-General reminded us at the beginning of
our discussion, they must be backed by action. We
must, as Croatia said this morning, practice what we
preach.

