Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): At the outset, I should
like to join previous speakers in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq,
Mr. Qazi, for his briefing and for introducing the
current report, as well as for his valuable remarks and
observations. I wish to take this opportunity to
commend him in person as well as all United Nations
and United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) staff involved for the outstanding work they
are doing in and for Iraq under very difficult
circumstances. I wish also to thank Ambassador
Sanders for her report on behalf of the countries that
make up the Multinational Force, which include my
own country, Slovakia.

As we heard during the briefing, the situation in
Iraq remains extremely fragile and complex, requiring
our thorough attention and our unconditional support
and assistance. That is crucial, especially at this critical
time when conditions in Iraq have further deteriorated.
A huge task lies ahead of us in order to reverse this
process, a task in which the Government and
institutions of Iraq need to play a central role.

During the past three years, the people and the
leaders of Iraq have clearly demonstrated their
commitment and support to Iraq's political transition
and have made many sacrifices to achieve that goal.
Achievements made to date should not be forgotten or
overlooked. We consider the overall improvement of
security and the promotion of national reconciliation,
human rights and economic welfare to be the leading
priorities for the Government of Iraq. Those priorities
have to be implemented, mainly through a consensus-
based action plan that will address the basic needs,
concerns and aspirations of all of Iraq's communities
and constituencies.

In order to achieve progress and success, new and
revised approaches are needed. As the Secretary-
General suggests in his report, developing a fully
inclusive political process, establishing a monopoly
over the use of force and cultivating a regional
environment supportive of Iraq's transition represent a
viable strategy to reverse current political and security
trends in the country. In this vein, we remain convinced
that a constitutional review process and a review of the
de-Baathification process represent important
confidence-building measures that can help Iraq tackle
its many challenges.

In our view, the strong involvement of the United
Nations in Iraq's transition and stabilization process
remains instrumental. We, therefore, welcome and
support the International Compact with Iraq; the
United Nations is strongly engaged and is playing a
leading role in developing it. Such an arrangement can
provide a tangible long-term framework for the
reconstruction and development of Iraq. We also note
with satisfaction the recent positive experience with
respect to the Compact, in which actors at the national,
regional and international levels have been engaged.
This is proof of the existence of political will to
promote Iraq's transition and stabilization. This
political will should be further enhanced and
effectively mobilized in fostering dialogue and
understanding on all three levels - notably, the
regional one.

Contributing to and promoting durable peace and
stability in Iraq will benefit not only that country, but
also its immediate neighbours, as well as the wider
region. In this regard, we feel that Iraq's immediate
neighbours in particular could and should play a more
active role in promoting that country's peace and
stability. We regard their contribution to the success of
Iraq's stabilization as instrumental and decisive.
Hence, we hope that Iraq will receive the required
assistance and support from its neighbours.

Regrettably, the level of violence and insecurity
continues to rise in many areas of Iraq, and the
mounting civilian casualties remain a source of
constant concern. Similarly, we remain deeply
concerned about the human rights situation in Iraq. The
effects of the ongoing insurgency, sectarian violence,
revenge attacks and militia activities are alarming. We

feel that firm measures are needed to reinforce the
justice and security systems and to develop a robust
human rights agenda in order not only to protect the
lives of innocent civilians but also to hold those
responsible for violent acts fully accountable.

We urge the Government of Iraq to take concrete
measures to end the environment of lawlessness,
impunity and insecurity and to prevent the possibility
of a humanitarian and human rights catastrophe in that
country. We welcome the decision of the Ministry of
Interior to intensify the screening of police and thus to
help combat the impunity of the Iraqi security forces
and increase public confidence in them. We also
welcome the draft law on the establishment of a
national human rights commission and stress the urgent
need to pass this law in the Council of Representatives.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Slovakia
remains committed to the political and economic
transition of Iraq. We are one of the troop-contributing
countries to the Multinational Force. Slovakia has also
participated in a NATO training mission and has
organized training for Iraqi military police staff on its
soil. We stand ready to assist Iraq through financial and
material ways and means as well.

