Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation welcomes with great pleasure
and satisfaction His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-
Cuadra, the recently appointed Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Peru, to whom we reiterate our sincere
congratulations on having earned this mark of high
trust from his Government as a Minister of Peru. This
is a major and delicate responsibility in which we wish
him the greatest success. We are certain that the same
values with which he led his country's delegation to
the United Nations in New York will continue to guide
him in his work, now and always, for the benefit of his
country, Latin America and the world in general. We
ask the all-powerful Lord to light his way and protect
him as he undertakes these complex and delicate tasks.
We also thank the team represented by Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, who provided this morning, as always, a
clear and detailed briefing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea deems this
important debate to be very relevant, as it coincides
with a turning point for the Republic of Haiti, which
has been marked by a protracted political crisis,
increased insecurity and severe economic difficulties.
This situation threatens, on an ongoing basis, the well-
being and stability of the Haitian population in general.

Given this delicate context and bearing in mind
that we are at the end of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), we believe
that this brotherly Caribbean country is about to enter a
crucial period for its political elite, which is called upon
to redouble its efforts and give thought to the future
that it wishes for Haiti, bearing in mind the dynamic
that will characterize its new cooperation with the
United Nations.

The political situation in Haiti this year has not
been promising, but we have seen an increasingly tense
atmosphere between the Government and the various
opposition factions. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes that political instability can be addressed
only through an inclusive inter-Haitian dialogue that
allows the parties to address their differences and reach
agreement on the political challenges that fuel hatred
and confrontation between the parties.

Democratic governance implies constructive
dialogue with the opposition and civil society,
including genuine accountability. The Government
must promptly form completely in order to prevent
any blockage of development programmes, and we
therefore call on all parties to set aside their differences
and private interests and work together to overcome the
increasingly worrisome situation in the country. It is
only then that our sister Republic of Haiti will be able
to ensure peace and stability and relaunch its progress
towards the implementation and achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals in the framework of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

The renewed legislative power is a decisive stage in
the consolidation of democracy. We note with concern
the indefinite postponement of elections in Haiti, and
we reiterate the importance of adopting an electoral law
without delay and updating electoral lists in order to
pave the way for credible, inclusive and timely elections.

Another worrying aspect of this new phase of
State-building is the fragility of the security situation
in Haiti, which is a due not only to the absence of
institutional capacity to support the security apparatus,
but also to social conditions, which do not allow for
a dynamic leading to a virtuous circle of development
and hope. We should also note that the economic
situation is becoming increasingly complicated, which
could deepen the crisis and intensify social instability
and violence if adequate measures are not taken, as the
various statements made this morning have pointed out.

It is clear that the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti will begin its mission in a difficult context,
and, unfortunately, we are concerned that this unstable
situation could deteriorate in the coming months. This
will have to be taken into account in the efforts of the
new Office. The goals set by the Secretary-General for
this new special political mission are vital in order to
carry out the necessary work in Haiti.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the work of Ms. La Lime,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
wish her every success in meeting this new challenge,
and we also pay warm and well-deserved tribute to all
the women and men who have served in MINUJUSTH,
which comes to a close today.

We also express our support to the people and the
Government of Haiti and hope that they will soon be
able to assume full national ownership of their country's
destiny, stability and development.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes that the Security Council and the international
community must continue to work to ensure a genuine
normalization of the situation in Haiti and to strengthen
its institutions and its sovereignty, so that it can restore
calm and social harmony and achieve lasting and
sustainable peace.

