Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all, Sir, to welcome you most warmly to the
presidency of the Security Council. Your presence here
for today's special debate on the protection of United
Nations and other personnel indicates Argentina's
commitment to protecting those who keep the peace and
who bring humanitarian assistance to conflict zones. Your
delegation and mine work together in close cooperation,
and we shall pursue that cooperation to attain our
common goals.

Let me express my delegation's sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for having called for this debate.
The protection of United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel, including locally
engaged staff, is a priority concern for Canada. Since the
Council last discussed this matter as a cross-cutting issue,
incidences of injury, harassment, rape or murder directed
at field staff have continued to escalate. In the last few
weeks alone, the Council has been advised of numerous
incidents where our people have found themselves under
threat in Angola, Colombia, Somalia, Sudan and Kosovo.
These actions are quite simply unacceptable.

It is perhaps not surprising, however, that as
civilians increasingly become targets in contemporary
conflicts, those providing protection and assistance to
them are also likely to find themselves under attack. Their
activities, often undertaken in extremely dangerous
environments, are often seen by combatants as biased or
as an obstacle to a given military goal, or are even
exploited as the means to an end. The problem is
exacerbated by the increasing prevalence of splinter
groups and irregular forces lacking clear chains of
command and having limited knowledge of international
law and principles. In such conditions, working under a
United Nations flag or a Red Cross or Red Crescent
symbol is no longer a guarantee of protection.

(spoke in English)

That staff of the United Nations and other
intergovemmental and non-governmental organizations
continue to operate in such insecure environments is a
testament to their dedication to affected populations. We
pay tribute today to their courage and sacrifices, knowing
how much more vulnerable populations would suffer
without their commitment. But our solidarity with these
staff members, whether expatriate or locally engaged
staff, must extend beyond words, as noted yet again -
and again so eloquently - this morning by the Deputy
Secretary-General.

 

The international community must find ways to
ensure respect for and implementation of applicable
international law by all parties concerned. In this regard, we
would note the vital role of the Security Council, in
particular, in seeking to put an end to impunity. We must
also find creative ways to ensure respect and freedom of
movement for such staff in the field, including by
encouraging the negotiation of ground rules and codes of
conduct with and among combatants and host Governments.
Finally, we must ensure that the work of United Nations
and humanitarian personnel is not used as a substitute by
Member States for addressing the root causes of conflicts.

The responsibility for the safety of United Nations
and associated personnel and of humanitarian workers lies
first and foremost with the parties to a conflict and with
host Governments. They should be called on to guarantee
the security of these individuals, including through the
negotiation of special arrangements, and to ensure that
civilian populations have unimpeded access to humanitarian
assistance in accordance with the principles of neutrality
and impartiality. Where no such guarantees are offered,
international censure should be swift. The inclusion of
attacks on United Nations and relief personnel as a war
crime in the Statute of the International Criminal Court is
an important contribution to the body of international legal
protection, as is the entry into force of the 1994 United
Nations Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel.
It is essential that Governments adopt the appropriate
domestic legislative, judicial and administrative measures to
ensure that those who commit such crimes are brought to
justice. It is indeed astounding, as Ms. Frechette and Ms.
Bertini have stressed this morning, how few perpetrators of
acts against United Nations personnel have been
apprehended and prosecuted. Such impunity must not be
allowed to persist, as it only further undermines field staff
security.

The Security Council has increasingly recognized its
own role and responsibility in strengthening the safety and
security of those we send into harm's way. In resolutions
and in presidential statements, we have increasingly called
for ever more precise measures, and have included specific
provisions in peacekeeping mandates. This proactive trend
can and should be reinforced and made more systematic.
We believe that the Council should be prepared to use all
measures at its disposal to reinforce its concerns in this
regard, including the adoption of targeted sanctions in
instances where parties to a conflict have failed to render
the proper guarantees. Indeed, the international community
must raise the political and economic costs of attacks
against such personnel. My delegation is anxious to
translate into action the recommendations of the
Secretary-General's report on the protection of civilians,
and we look forward to cooperating with other Council
members to achieve that goal.

As the civilian component of peacekeeping and
peace support missions gains greater currency, and as
civilians are sent into immediate post-conflict situations,
safety will be an ever more pressing issue. The Council
has now recognized this problem and has responded by
regularly giving complex missions a robust mandate to
protect people. We are left, of course, with the challenge
of ensuring that missions are given adequate resources to
acquit such mandates. Ultimately, Council members must
show genuine will in giving peacekeeping missions the
tools and the resources they require to do the job, and the
capacity and the mandate which will allow them to work
in relative security.

Troop contributors have a role to play as well, in
ensuring that their personnel are sufficiently trained to
understand the complexities of the area of operations and
its people so as to avoid needless misapprehension and
hostility. In particular, we need to ensure adequate
training for non-traditional civilian peacekeepers, such as
municipal administrators, who currently receive little or
none.

Relief workers can also take measures to reduce
their own vulnerability, and Canada recognizes that
humanitarian organizations are currently enhancing pre-
mission training and reviewing security procedures in
order to tackle this problem, although increased funding
in this area, too, is very much required. Country-specific
briefings should be made available for field staff and
attention should be paid to negotiation skills. Neutrality
and impartiality in the delivery of assistance must be
maintained, and coordination and collaboration among
different agencies entrenched.

The particular vulnerability of locally engaged staff
bears special mention. In this regard, when the General
Assembly adopted the human rights defenders Declaration
in 1998, we renewed our commitment to protecting those
who work in their own countries to protect and promote
human rights and humanitarian principles. In extremely
dangerous circumstances, when expatriates are evacuated,
locally engaged staff are often left to maintain operations.

 

Canada also welcomes the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in including
provisions for security within the Inter-Agency
Consolidated Appeals for 2000. We look forward to the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly, which, we understand, will include a detailed
analysis and recommendations addressing the scope of legal
protection under the 1994 Convention. We hope that it will
also identify practical measures that can be adopted to
reduce the vulnerability of personnel.

