Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I should
like to thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing and Palestinian Foreign Minister Mr. Malki
and the Permanent Representative of Israel for their
contributions to today's debate.

The events of the final two months of 2012
highlight the urgency with which we must all approach
the Middle East peace process. Negotiations towards a
two-State solution are the only way to ensure that the
Israeli people have the security they are entitled to and
that the Palestinian people have the State they deserve.
The year 2013 is a critical year. The window is rapidly
closing on the two-State solution. Without a concerted,
urgent effort towards negotiations in 2013, we could
find ourselves in a situation where there is no longer
a two-State solution to speak of. There is a real risk
that facts on the ground, in particular Israeli settlement
activity, will mean that a viable Palestinian State is no
longer possible. Without this, there will be no security
for Israel. Furthermore, resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict remains critical to the longer-term stability of
the Middle East region.

The parties themselves are, of course, central to
achieving a credible return to negotiations. We call
upon both President Abbas and the next Israeli Prime
Minister to demonstrate the bold, decisive leadership
required to push the process forward. But the history
and politics of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict show
that serious external leadership is also required to
reinvigorate a return to negotiations. We look in
particular to the United States to show that leadership
and to drive the peace process forward.

The United Kingdom, with our European partners,
stands ready to offer significant political and practical
support. Together the international community has to
make greater efforts in 2013 than anything seen since
the Oslo peace accords 20 years ago.

The countries of the region have a vital role to
play by setting out the positives that will flow from
the resolution of the conflict, including greater long-
term security for the Middle East region. We encourage
the countries in the region to think about how they can
make a positive contribution to help create a conducive
environment for a return to negotiations.

If there is to be genuine progress in 2013, both
sides must avoid steps that would risk setting the
peace process back. For the Palestinian Authority, that
means returning to negotiations without preconditions
and avoiding steps that deepen the lack of trust. For
the Government of Israel, that means being prepared
to enter serious negotiations and ceasing settlement
activity, which is illegal under international law.

On 17 December, following the announcement
of more than 4,000 new settlement units, the United
Kingdom, France, Germany and Portugal delivered a
statement in which we expressed our strong opposition
to the plans by Israel to expand settlement construction
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, and in
particular plans to develop the E-l area. Since then, we
have seen yet more settlement activity, including the
decision on 7 January to approve zoning boundaries
which effectively designate the illegal outpost of Nofei
Nehemia, in the north of the West Bank, as a settlement
under Israeli law.

Tenders have been published for 198 settlement
units in the Hebron area which, if built, would further
jeopardize the territorial contiguity of any future
Palestinian State. The United Kingdom condemns such
actions, which are profoundly provocative and run
contrary to the Geneva Conventions. Such steps are
damaging to Israel's international reputation as well as
to the peace process.

It is also vital that the Government of Israel
reinstate the transfer of tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in line with its obligations under the Paris
Protocol. We understand that $120 million per month
is being withheld, which would normally account for
44 per cent of total Palestinian Authority spending.

The dire financial situation of the Palestinian
Authority should be of concern to us all. It is in all of
our interests to ensure that the Palestinian Authority is
sustained. The United Kingdom is a principal supporter
of the Palestinian Authority and will continue its
strong support for its State-building work. We urge
our international partners to do all they can in support,
and we welcome the decision by the European Union
to front-load its budget support to the Palestinian
Authority by advancing €20 million this month.

The United Kingdom welcomes the work of
those involved in the Gaza ceasefire negotiations and
remains ready to support the parties in implementation.
It is important now to work towards the easing of
restrictions on Gaza, the end of arms smuggling and
Palestinian reconciliation so as to increase the chances
of achieving long-term peace.

We continue to follow developments linked
to Palestinian reconciliation closely. A reconciled
Palestinian polity is ultimately necessary for peace.
We have made it consistently clear that we will engage
with any Palestinian Government that shows, through
both its words and its actions, that it is committed to
the principles set out by President Abbas in Cairo in
May 2011.

In Syria, the Violence continues at a horrific rate,
with the regime bearing the brunt of the responsibility
through its use of air strikes, ballistic missiles and
heavy weapons. Despite regime attempts to blame the
opposition, it is now evident that the recent explosions
at Aleppo University, which killed more than 80 people,
were caused by missiles fired from regime jets. Terrible
acts have been committed across Syria, and that is why
we are supporting the call for the situation in Syria to
be referred to the International Criminal Court.

The Syrian opposition is increasingly credible and
organized. It draws on the powerful yearning of the
Syrian people for the freedom they have been denied
for decades. The opposition has not only withstood
the most brutal levels of repression imaginable, it has
strengthened and consolidated its position as the Syrian
people turn away from a discredited and disgraced
regime.

The regime needs to understand that the Syrian
people will not be slaughtered into submission. It
cannot crush the opposition by force. The regime must
recognize the need to take the political route, which
starts with meeting its obligations to bring about
a sustained cessation of hostilities, as the Council
has repeatedly demanded. We strongly support the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in his efforts to achieve that goal.

We want to see a peaceful political transition backed
by the international community and the Council. But we
must be realistic. No opposition movement that wants
to play a role in Syria's future is going to be prepared
to work with Al-Assad. One can make a strong moral
argument for Al-Assad's departure, but there is an
equally strong practical reality. Any transition that
involves him is simply not sustainable. There needs to
be a clear break from the leader who has unleashed this
carnage on his own people.

We want the Council to play the role that it was
established to fulfil. Its failure to do so, so far is a stain
on its reputation. We are ready to work with Mr. Brahimi
and to resume efforts in the Council to come together
behind the steps that are necessary to secure a peaceful
political transition.

But we need to be clear that the transition is already
under way, whether we are influencing it or not. While
the Council remains blocked, we and our partners will
continue to work outside the Council to help the Syrian
people prepare for the transition that they want and
deserve.

In the meantime, the people of Syria continue to
pay a terrible price under Al-Assad's brutal regime.
The Kuwait donors conference to be held at the end
of this month is an opportunity for the international
community to step up its support for the multilateral
effort to help those in dire need.

The United Kingdom has already contributed
$110 million to support the people ofSyria and the region.
But to date the overall contributions by the international
community have been woefully inadequate. We must
all be ready to increase our financial support to help
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.

